



THE
PHILOSOPHIE,
commonlie called, 
THE
MORALS
WRITTEN BY
the learned Philosopher
PLUTARCH
of Chæronea.
Translated out of Greeke into English, and conferred
with the Latine translations and the French,
by PHILEMON HOLLAND of
Coventrie, Doctor in
Physicke.

Whereunto are annexed the Summaries necessary to be
read before every Treatise.

AT LONDON
Printed by Arnold Hatfield.
1603





AN EXPLANATION OF
SUNDRY TEARMES SOMEWHAT
obscure, in this translation of Plutarch, in favour
of the unlearned Reader; after the order
of the Alphabet.

A

A, Ulses, A forename a­
mong the Romans.

Abyrtace, A deintie 
kinde of meat, with 
the Medes & other 
Barbarous nations, 
sharpe & quicke of 
taste to provoke and please the appetite, 
composed of Leeks, Garlike, Cresses, Sen­
vie, Pomgranate kirnels, and such like.

Academie, A shadowy place full of groves, 
a mile distant from Athens, where Plato the 
Philosopher was borne, and wherein hee 
taught.  Of it, the Academicke Philoso­
phers tooke their name; whose maner was 
to discourse and dispute of all questions, 
but to determine and resolve of nothing.  
And for the great frequence and concourse 
of scholars to that place, our Universities 
and great schooles of learning, be named 
Academies.

Aediles, Certeine magistrates or officers in 
Rome: who were of two sorts; Plebeij and 
Curules.  Plebeij, of the Commons onely, 
two in number, more ancient than the o­
ther; chosen by the people alone, to second 
and assist the Tribunes of the Commons, 
as their right hands.  This name they tooke 
of the charge which they had to mainteine 
temples and chapels:  albeit they registred 
the Sanctions and Acts of the people, cal­
led Plebiscita, and kept the same in their 
owne custodie; were Clerks of the Market, 
and looked to weights and measures, &c. 
yea, and exhibited the games and playes 
named Plebeij.  Curules were likewise twain, 
elected out of the order and degree of the 
Patritij; so called of the Yvorie chaire 
wherein they were allowed to sit, as officers 
of greater state; and by vertue whereof, in 
some cases, and at certein times they might 
exercise civill jurisdiction.  It belonged un­
to these to set forth the solemnities, called 
Ludi Magni or Romani:  overseers they 
were likewise of the buildings thorowout 
the city, aswell publike as private, in maner 
of the Astynomi in Athens:  they had regard 
unto the publike vaults, sinks, conveiances, 
and conduits of the waters that served the 
city, as also to the Arcenall, &c.  Moreover, 
they had power to attach the bodies of 
great persons:  and were charged to see un­
to the provision of corne and victuals.  At 
the first, none but of noble families or Pa­
tricians were advanced to this place:  but in 
processe of time, Commoners also attei­
ned thereto.  More of them; & how in Iulius 
Cæsars time there were elected six Aediles, 
whereof two were named Cereals; See Ale­
xander at Alexander, lib.4.cap.4. Genial. 
dieth.

Aegineticke, Mna or Mina, Seemeth to be the 
ancient coine or money of Greece; for they 
were the first that coined money:  and of 
them came [Greek]. Cælius Rhodig.

Aeolius Modus, In Musicke a certeine simple, 
plaine and mild tune, apt to procure sleepe 
and bring folke to bed.

Aequinox, That time of the yeere, when the 
daies and nights be of equall length; which 
hapneth twice in the yeere, to wit, in March 
and September.

Aestivall, that is to say, Of the Summer:  as 
the Aestivall Solstice or Tropicke of the 
Sunne, when he is come neerest unto us, 
and returneth Southward from us.

Aloïde or Aloïade,   were Othus and Ephialtes, 
two giants, so named of Aloëus the giant 
their supposed father:  for of his wife Iphi­
media, Neptune begat them.  It is said, that 
every moneth they grew nine fingers.

Alphabet, The order or rew of Greeke letters 
as they stand; so called of Alpha and Beta, 
the two formost letters:  and it answereth to 
our A.B.C.



Alternative, By course or turnes, one after an­
other; going and comming, &c.

Amphictyones, Were a certein solemne coun­
sell of State in Greece, who held twice in the 
yeere a meeting, in the Spring and Au­
tumne, at Thermopyle; being assembled 
from the 12 flourishing cities of Greece: 
there to consult of most important affaires.

Amphitheatre,  A spacious shew-place; in 
forme round, and made as it were of two 
Theaters.  See Theater.

Amphora, A measure in Rome of liquors only.  
It seemeth to take that name of the two 
eares it had, of either side one:  it conteined 
eight Congios, which are somewhat under as 
many of our wine gallons.

Amnets, Preservatives hung about the necke, 
or otherwise worne, against witchcraft, poi­
son, eiebiting, sicknesse, or any other evils.

Anarchie, The state of a city or countrey with­
out government.

Anaria, A societie of men, meeting together 
in some publicke hall for to eat and drinke:  
Instituted first among the Thebans, like to 
the Phiditia in Lacedæmon.

Annales, Histories, Records, or Chronicles, 
conteining things done from yere to yeere.

Anniversarie, Comming once euery yeere, at 
a certeine time:  as the Nativity of Christ, 
and Sturbridge faire, &c.

Antarcticke, That is to say, Opposit unto the 
Arcticke.  See Arcticke.

Antidote, A medicine, properly taken inwardly 
against a poison or some pestilent and ve­
nimous disease.  A counterpoison or pre­
servative.

Antipathie, A repugnance in nature, by reason 
of contrarie affections; whereby some can 
not abide the smell of roses, others may not 
endure the sight of a Cat, &c.

Antiparistasis, A cohibition or restraint on 
every side; whereby either colde or heat is 
made stronger in it selfe by the restraining 
of the contrary:  as the naturall heat of our 
bodies in Winter, through the coldnesse 
of the aire compassing it about:  likewise, 
the coldnesse of the middle region of the 
aire in Summer, by occasion of the heat on 
both sides causing thunder and haile, &c.

Antiphonie, A noise of contrarie sounds.

Antipodes, Those people who inhabit under 
and beneath our Hemisphære, and go with 
their feet full against ours.

Apathie, Impassibilitie, or voidnesse of all af­
fections and passions.

Apaturia, A feast solemnized for the space of 
foure daies at Athens in the honour of Bac­
chus.  So called of Apate, that is to say, De­
ceit:  because Xanthius the Bœotian was in 
single fight slaine deceitfully by Thimocles 
the Athenian.  For the tale goeth, that 
whiles they were in combat, Bacchus appea­
red behind Xanthius, clad in a goats skinne:  
and when Thimocles charged his concur­
rent for comming into the field with an as­
sistant; as he looked backe, he was killed by 
Thimocles abovenamed.

Apologie, A plea for the defence or excuse of 
any person.

Apothegme, A short sententious speech.

Apoplexie, A disease comming suddenly in 
maner of a stroke, with an universall asto­
nishment and deprivation of sense and 
motion, which either causeth death quicke­
ly; or else endeth in a dead palsey.

Archontes, Were chiefe magistrates at A­
thens, at first every tenth yeere; and after­
wards yeerely chosen by lot, unto whom 
the role of the common-welth in their po­
pular state was committed:  of whom the 
first was named [Greek], that is to say, King:  
the second, Archon, that is to say, Ruler: 
the third, Polemarchus: and the other six, 
Thesmothelæ.

Arctick, that is to say, Northerly; so called 
of Arctos in Greeke, which signifieth the 
Beare, that is to say, those conspicuous sea­
ven starres in the North, named Charle­
mains waine; neere unto which is that 
pole or point of the imaginarie axell-tree, 
about which the heavens turne, which 
thereupon is named, The pole Arctick:  and 
over against it, underneath our Hemi­
sphære, is the other pole, called Antarctick, 
in the South part of the world.

Aristocratie, A forme of Government, or a 
State wherein the nobles and best men be 
Rulers.

To Aromatize, that is to say, To season or 
make pleasant, by putting thereto some 
sweete and odoriferous spices.

Astragalote Mastis, A scourge or whip, the 
strings whereof are set and wrought with 
ankle-bones, called Astragali,  thereby to 
give a more grievous lash.

Atomi, Indivisible bodies like to motes in 
the Sunne beames; of which Democritus 
and Epicurus imagined all things to be 
made.

Atticke pure, that is to say, The most fine and 
eloquent:  for in Athens they spake the pu­
rest Greeke; insomuch as Thucydides cal­



led it [Greek], that is to say, Greece of 
Greece, as one would say, the very quin­
tenssence of Greece.

Averrunct or Averruncani, Were gods a­
mong the Romans, supposed to put by and 
chace away evils and calamities:  such as 
Hercules and Apollo among the Greekes, 
called thereupon Apotropæi,

Auspices, Plutarch seemeth to take for Augu­
res, that is to say, Certeine priests or sooth­
saiers, who by the inspection and observa­
tion of birds did foretell future things.

Axiomes, Were principal propositions in Lo­
gicke, of as great authoritie and force as 
Maximes in law:  and it should seeme that 
those Maximes be derived corruptly from 
Axiomes.


B

BAcchanalia, named also Dionysia, Certein 
licentious festivall solemnities in the 
honor of Bacchus, performed at the first 
by day light, and afterward in the night 
season, with all maner of filthy wanton­
nesse:  instituted first in Athens, and other 
cities of Greece euery three yeeres:  in Ae­
gypt also:  at last they were taken up in Italy 
and at Rome.

Bacchiadæ, A noble familie in Corinth, who for 
the space almost of 200. yeeres there ruled.

Bachyllion, A song of daunce, which seemeth 
to take the name of a famous Tragœdian 
poet named Bachyllus, who devised and 
practised it; like as Pyladion, or Pylades, as 
notable as a Comœdian.

Barbarisme, A rude and corrupt maner of 
speech, full of barbarous and absonant 
words.

Basis, The flat, piedstall or foote of a Co­
lumne, pillar, statue, or such like, whereup­
on it standeth.

Bœotarches or Bœotarchæ, The soueraigne ma­
gistrate or Ruler of the Bœotians.

Bœotius, a kinde of Mesure of Note in Musick 
used in Bœotia.


C

CAius, A common forename to many 
families in Rome, and Caia to the wo­
man kinde:  as usuall as John and Jone with 
us, as appeereth by this forme of speech or­
dinary in mariage; Where thou are Caius, I 
will be Caia.

Calends, See Kalends.

Callasitres, Hardnesse in maner of brawn, as in 
the skinne of hands or feet, occasioned by 
much labour and travell.

Cancerous, that is to say, Resembling a certeine 
hard tumor or swelling, occasioned by me­
lancholicke bloud, named a Cancer, for 
the likenesse it hath to a crab-fish, (named 
in Latine Cancer) partly, for the swelling 
veines appearing about it, like unto the feet 
or cleis of the said fish:  and in part, for that 
is not easily remooved, no more than the 
crab if it once settle to a place:  & lastly, be­
cause the colour is not much unlike.  This 
swelling if it breake out into an ulcer, hard­
ly or unneth admitteth any cure, and by 
some is called a Wolfe.

Candyli, A kind of dainty meat made with ho­
ny and milke.

Candys, an ornament of Persians, Medians, 
and other East nations; much like to a 
Diademe.

Catamite, A boy abused against kinde:  a bag­
gage.

Cataplasme, A pultesse or grosse maner of pla­
ster.

To Cauterize, To burne or seare with a red hot 
iron or other mettall.

Cenotaph, An emptie Tombe or Sepulcher, 
wherein no corps is interred.

Censours, Magistrates of State in Rome, whose 
charge was to valew and estimate mens 
goods, and enroll them accordingly in 
their seuerall ranges:  Also to demise unto 
certaine farmers, called Publicanes, the 
publicke profits of the city for a rent, and 
to put foorth the city works unto them, to 
be undertaken at a price.  Likewise their of­
fice it was to oversee mens maners, where­
by oftentimes they woulde deprive Sena­
tours of their dignitie:  take from Gentle­
men their horses of service and rings:  dis­
place commanders out of their owne tribe:  
disable them for giving voices; and make 
them Ærarij.

Centre, The middle pricke of a circle or globe, 
equally distant from the circumference 
thereof.

Centumviri, A certeine Court of Judges in 
Rome, chosen three out of every tribe.  And 
albeit there were 35. tribes, and the whole 
number by that account amounted to an 
hundred and five; yet in round reckoning, 
and by custome, they went under the name 
of an hundred, and therefore were called 
Centumviri.

Cercopes, Certaine ridiculous people inhabi­
ting the Iland Pitherusa, having tailes like 
monkeys, good for nought but to make 
sport.



Chalons, A small piece of brasse money; the 
eighth part or (as some say) the sixth, of the 
Atticke Obolus:  somewhat better than 
halfe a farthing or a cue.

Chromaticke Musicke, Was soft, delicate and 
effeminate, ful of descant, fained voices and 
quavering, as some are of opinion.

Cidaris, An ornament of the head, which in 
Persia, Media, and Armenia, the Kings and 
High priests wore, with a blew band or rib­
band about it, beset with white spots.

Cinaradæ, A familie descended from Cinaras.  
Some read Cinyradæ, and Cinyras.

Circumgyration, A turning or winding round.

Cn., A forename to some houses in Rome.

Colian earth, So called of Colias a promontory 
or hill in the territorie of Attica.

Colleague, A fellow or companion in office.

Colonies, Were townes wherein the Romanes 
placed citizens of their owne to inhabit, ei­
ther as Free-holders, or tenants & underta­
kers; endowed with franchises and liberties 
diversly:  Erected first by Romulus.

Comœdia vetus, Licentiously abused all maner 
of persons, not forbearing to name and tra­
duce upon the Stage even the best men, 
such as noble Pericles, wise Solon, and just 
Aristides:  nay it spared not the very State it 
selfe and bodie of the Common-weale; 
whereupon at length it was condemned 
and put downe.

Concions, Orations or speeches made openly 
before the body of the people, such pro­
perly as the Tribunes of the Commons u­
sed unto them.

Congiarium, a dole or liberall gift of some 
Prince or Noble person bestowed upon the 
people.  It tooke the name of that measure 
Congius, much about our gallon, which was 
given in oile or wine, by the poll:  but after­
wards, any other such gift or distribution, 
whether it were in other victuals, or in mo­
ney, went under that name.

Consuls, two in number, Soveraigne Magi­
strates in Rome, succeeding in the place of 
Kings, with the same authoritie and roiall 
ensignes:  onely they were chosen yeerely.

Contignate, Close set together, so as they touch 
one another, as houses adjoining.

Contusions, Bruises, dry-beatings, or crushes.

Convulsions, Plucking or shooting paines:  
Cramps.

Cordax, A lascivious and unseemly kinde of 
daunce, used in Comœdies at the first, but 
misliked afterwards and rejected.

Criticks, Grammarians, who tooke upon them 
to censure and judge Poemes and other 
works of authors; such as Aristarchus was.

Criticall daies, In Physicke be observed accor­
ding to the motion of the humour and the 
Moone; in which the disease sheweth some 
notable alteration, to life or death, as if the 
patient had then his dome.  In which re­
gard we say, that the seventh day is a king; 
by the sixth, a tyrant.

Cube, A square figure:  as in Geometrie, the 
Die; have sixe faces foure square and 
even:  in Arithmeticke, a number multipli­
ed in it selfe; as nine arising of thrice three, 
and sixteene of foure times foure.

Curvature, that is to say, Bending round, as in 
the felly of a wheele.

Corollarie, An overdeale, or overmeasure, gi­
ven more than is due or was promised.

Curule chaire, A seat of estate among the Ro­
mans made of Ivorie; whereupon certaine 
Magistrates were called Curules, who were 
allowed to sit thereon:  as also Triumphes 
were named Curules, when those that tri­
umphed were gloriously beseene in such a 
chaire, drawen with a chariot, for distincti­
on of Oration, wherein Captaines rode on 
horsebacke onely.

Cyath, A small measure of liquid things:  the 
twelfth part of Sextarius, which was much 
about our wine quart.  So that a Cyath may 
go for three good spoonefuls, and answe­
reth in weight to an ounce and halfe, with 
the better.

Cynicke Philosophers, Such as Antisthenes, Di­
ogenes and their followers were:  so named 
of Cynosarges, a grove or schoole without 
Athens, where they taught:  or rather of 
their dogged and currish maner of biting; 
barking at men, in noting their lives over 
rudely.


D

D. Decius, A forename.  For Decius, al­
though it were the Gentile name of 
an house in Rome, yet grew afterwards to be 
a forename, as Paulus:  and likewise fore­
names at the first, in processe of time, came 
to name Families.

D. Decimus, A forename to certeine Romans, 
as namely to Brutus surnamed Albinus, one 
of the conspiratours that killed Iul. Cæsar.

Decade, That which conteineth tenne:  as the 
Decades of Livie, which consist every one 
of tenne books.

Democratie, A free State, or popular gouern­
ment; wherein every citizen is capable of 
soveraigne Magistracy.



Desiccative, that is to say, Drying, or having 
the power to drie.

Diatessaron, A consonance or concord in Mu­
sick, called a Fourth, whereof there be foure 
in the Scale which compriseth fifteene 
strings:  it answereth to the proportion, 
Epitritos; for it consisteth of three and one 
third part.

Diapente, A consonance or concord in Mu­
sicke, called a Five, it answereth to the pro­
portion Hemiolios, or Sesquialtera:  for 
three conteineth two and halfe; three and 
two make five.

Diapason, a perfect consonance conteining 
two fourths; or made of Diatesseron and 
Diapente, As if it consisted of all:  an Eight.  
It answereth to duple proportion, or Di­
plasion.

Disdia pason, A duple Eight; or quadruple 
Fourth; which was counted in old time the 
greatest Systema in the Musicke scale.

Diastema, The intervall in the scale of Musick.  
Also the rest or Time, of which and of 
sounds or notes consisteth Diatonicke 
Musicke.

Diazeugmenon, Of disjuncts in Musicke.

Diaphoretical or Diphoretical, So is called in 
Physicke Excessive sweat, whereby the spi­
rits be spent, and the body much weakened 
and made faint, as in the disease Cardiaca.

Diatonique Musicke, Keepeth a meane tempe­
rature betweene Chromaticke, and En­
harmoniacke:  and may go for plaine song, 
or our Musicke.

Diatonos, A note in Musicke.  Diatonos Hypa­
ton, D, SOL RE.  Diatonos Meson.

Dictatour, A soveraigne Magistrate above all 
others in Rome, from whom no appeale was 
granted, meere absolute and king-like; but 
that his time of rule was limited within sixe 
moneths ordinarily:  so named, because he 
onely said the word and it was done; or for 
that he was Dictus, that is to say, nomina­
ted by one of the Consuls, usually in some 
time of great danger of the state, and not 
otherwise elected.

Diesis, The quarter of a note in Musicke; or 
the least time or accent, G, SOL, RE, UT.

Dionysius in Corinth, An usuall proverbe in 
Greece, against such as are upon their pros­
perous estate, so proud and insolent, as 
they forget themselves and oppresse their 
inferiors; putting them in minde that they 
may have a fall as well as Dionysius, who ha­
ving beene a mighty and absolutely Mo­
narch of Sicily, was driven at last to teach 
a Grammar and Musicke schoole in Co­
rinth.

Dithyrambs, Were songs or hymnes in the 
honour of Bacchus, who was surnamed Di­
thyrambus, either because hee was borne 
twice, and came into this world at two 
dores; once out of his mother Senerleus 
wombe, and a second time out of his father 
Jupiters thigh:  or else of Lythirambus, ac­
cording as Pindarus writeth.  For when Ju­
piter had sowed him within his thigh, at 
what time as he should come forth againe, 
he cried foorth, [Greek], that is, 
Undoe the seame, Undoe the seame.  The 
Poets who composed such Hymnes were 
called Dithyrambicques, whose verses and 
words were darke and intricate.

Divination, Soothsaying, or foretelling of 
future things.

Dolichus, A long carriere or race, containing 
twelve, or (as some say) 24. Stadia.

Dorian, or Doricke Musick, Was grave and so­
ber:  so called, for that the Dorians first de­
vised and most used it.

Drachme or Dram The eight part of an 
ounce.  Also a peece of money valued at se­
ven pence halfe-penie in silver, and in gold 
much about a french crowne.  The Romane 
denarius was æquivalent unto it.


E

ECho, A resonance, or resounding of the 
last part of the voice or words delivered.

Echo-pan, A song, of Echo supposed to be a 
Nymph not visible, but woonderfully be­
loved of Pan, the Heardmens god.

Eclipticke, making or occasioning an eclipse.

Elegi, Lamentable and dolefull ditties, com­
posed of unequall verses, as the Hexame­
ter and Pentameter; and such be called E­
ligiake.

Elenchs, subtile arguments devised to reproove 
or confute.

Elotæ, The common slaves that the Lacedæ­
monians used, and emploied in base mini­
steries, as publicke executions, &c.

Elucidaries, Expositions or Declarations of 
things that be obscure and darke.

Embrochalion, a devise that Physicians have to 
foment the head or any other part, with 
some liquor falling from aloft upon it, in 
maner of raine, whereupon it tooke the 
name.

Emphaticall, that is to say, Expresse and verie 
significative.

Empiricke Physicians, Who without regard ei­



ther of the cause in a disease, or the consti­
tution and nature of the patient, goe bold­
ly to worke with those meanes and medi­
cines whereof they had experience in 
others, fall it out as it would.

Empusa, A certeine vaine and fantasticall illu­
sion, sent by the divell, or as the Painims 
say, by Hecate, for to fright infortunate 
folke.  Appeare it doth in divers formes, 
and seemeth to go with one legge (where­
upon it took the name, quasi [Greek]) for 
one foote or legge it hath of brasse, the o­
ther of an asse; and therefore it is named al­
so [Greek] or [Greek].

Encomiastical, Perteining to the praise of a 
thing or person.

Endrome, A kinde of bickering or conflict.

Endymatia, A kinde of daunce or Musicall 
Note.

Enharmonion, one of the three generall sorts of 
Musicke:  song of many parts, or a curious 
concent of sundry tunes.

Enthymemes, Unperfect syllogismes, or short 
reasonings, when one of the premisses is 
not expressed, yet so understoode, as the 
conclusion neverthelesse is inferred.

Epact, The day put to, or set in, to make the 
leape yeere.

Ephori, Certeine Magistrates or Superinten­
dents for the people in Sparta, in oppositi­
on to the kings, and to take downe their re­
gall power:  such as were the Tribunes of 
the Commons at Rome, ordeined for to 
abridge the Consuls absolute authoritie.

Epiali, Be fevers of the Quotidian kind, that is 
continuall:  that have an unequall distem­
perature, both of colde and heat at once:  
but the heat seemeth to be milde and gen­
tle at first:  whereupon they tooke that 
name.  These fevers also, for the same reason 
be called [Greek].

Epidemial diseases, Such as are occasioned by 
some common cause, and therefore spred, 
and take hold of all persons indifferently in 
a tract or city:  as the pestilence.

To Epitomize, To relate or pen a thing brief­
ly and by way of an abbreviarie.

Epitritos, The proportion sesquitertion, 
whereby eight exceedeth sixe, namely by 
a third part.

Etymologie, the knowledge of the originall of 
words, and from whence they be derived.

Eviration, Gelding, or disabling for the act of 
generation.

Exharmonians, Discords or dissonances in 
Musicke.

Exstasie or Ecstasie, A traunce or transportati­
on of the minde, occasioned by rage, ad­
miration, feare, &c. 


F

FLatulent, Windy, or engendring winde:  
as pease and beanes, be flatulent meat.

Fomentations, in Physicke, be properly devises, 
for to be applied unto any greeved part:  ei­
ther to comfort and cherish it; or to allay 
the paine; or else to open the pores of the 
skinne, and to make way for plasters and 
ointments to worke their effects the better.  
Laid to they are by the meanes of bladders, 
spunges, wollen clothes, or quilts and such 
like.

Fungosity, A light and holow substance, such 
as wee may perceive, in spunges, mush­
romes, fusse bals, elder pith, &c. 


G

GAlli, The furious priests of dame Cybele, 
the great mother of the gods, honored 
in Phrygia:  It is supposed that they tooke 
the name of Gallus the river; the water 
whereof if they dranke liberally, they fell 
into a furious rage, and cut off their owne 
genetours.

Græcostasis, A withdrawing gallerie or place 
in Rome, neere unto the Senate house Cu­
ria Hostilia:  where Greeks and other for­
reine Embassadors staide and gave atten­
dance.

Gymnastical, Belonging the publicke places of 
exercise, where youth was trained up to 
wrestling and other feates of activitie:  the 
which places were called Gymnasia.

Gymnick games or plaies, performed or practi­
sed by those who were naked.

Gymnopodia or Gymnopædia, a certaine daunce, 
that the Lacedæmonian children were trai­
ned in, barefoot; untill they proceeded to 
another more warlike, called Pyrrhica.

Gymnosophists, Philosophers of India, who 
went naked, and led beside a most austere 
and precise life.


H

HAbite, In our bodies, is either the sub­
stantiall constitution thereof; whereby 
we terme the evill habite (in Greeke) [Greek], 
whenas the bodie misliketh and thri­
veth not; and the good habite [Greek] (in 
Greeke) when it prospereth:  or els the out­
ward parts; and so we say sweats, pocks, me­



zels, and scabs, are driven foorth to the ha­
bite of the body by strength of nature.

Harmonicall Musicke, See Enharmonia.

Hemiolios, Proportion sesquialterall:  contei­
ning the whole & halfe; as twelve to eight.

Hemisphære, that is to say, The halfe sphære 
or globe, used commonly for that part of 
the heaven which is in our sight.

Hexameter, A verse consisting of six mesures, 
called feete.

Hexatonos, Having six tones or six strings.

Hieroglyphicks, The Aegyptians sacred Phi­
losophie, delivered not in characters and 
letters, but under the forme of living crea­
tures and other things engraven.

Holocaust, A whole burnt sacrifice:  whereas 
ordinarily they burnt upon the altar, onely 
the inwards of the beast.

Homonymie, the double or manifold significa­
tion of a word or sentence, which is the oc­
casion of ambiguity and doubts.

Horizon, That circle that determineth our 
sight, and divideth the one halfe of the 
sphære of heaven above, from that which 
is under, out of our sight.

Horoscope, the obseruation of the houre and 
time of ones nativitie, together with the fi­
gure of the heavens at that very instant; and 
that forsooth in the East.

Hypate, hypaton, Principall of principals.  A 
base string in a Musicall instrument:  or a 
note in the skale of Musicke, B, MI.

Hypate Meson, A meane string or note in Mu­
sicke:  principall of meanes, E, LA, MI.

Hypate, The base string in a lute or other strin­
ged instrument; so called, because it is sea­
ted highest & is principall.  And yet it may 
seeme in vocall Musicke, as Lambinas ta­
keth it in Horace, to be the small treble, by 
that which he writeth of Tigellus, who song 
Iö Bacche, modö summa Voce, modö hæc, re­
sonat chordis quæ quatuor ima:  where by sum­
ma he meaneth the treble, and ima the base.  
Also Boetius (as Erasmus upon the proverb 
Dis Diapason, observeth) writeth the con­
trary, namely, that Hypate is the lowest or 
base, and Nete the highest or treble.  Nei­
ther doth Plutarch seeme to agree alwaies 
with himselfe in these termes.

Hyperbolyæum, A terme in Musick, belonging 
to their skale, & appropriate to the trebles, 
that is to say, it signifieth Excellent or ex­
ceeding.

Hyporchema, An hymne and dance unto A­
pollo, performed by children with a noise of 
pipes before them, in the time of pesti­
lence, and thereupon it was also called 
Pæan.

Hypotheticall propositions, such as are pronoun­
ced with a supposition.


I

IAmbus,  A measure or foote in verse, consist­
ing of two sillables, the former short, the 
other long: it is put also for the verse made 
thereof.

Iambicke verses,  be they which stand upon 
such feete. If of foure, they be called Qua­
ternarij: if of six, Senarij: if of eight, Octona­
rij. Now for that this kinde of foote run­
neth very quicke, two of them together be 
reckoned but for one measure: and there­
fore the said verses, be termed also Dime­
tri, Trimetri, and Tetrametri, as if they had 
but two, three, & foure feete or measures.

Icosaedron,  A Geometricall solid body, repre­
senting twenty sides or faces, distinguished 
by their severall lines and angles.

Idaeae,  The formes of things setled in the divine 
intelligence or heavenly minde, according 
to which as paternes, by Platoes doctrine 
all things were made.

Idæi Dactyli,  were certaine servitours unto 
Cybele, bretheren all, called otherwise Cory­
bantes and Curetes. But whether they 
were Dæmons, fanaticall men, or couse­
ning impostors, it is not agreed upon a­
mong writers: neither how many they 
were, or why so called. See Natalis Comes 
Mytholog.

* But heere I must not forget to note, that in 
the Page 257 line 50, instead of [Greek]
[Greek]: some read [Greek], that is to 
say, of their owne fingers. Cælius Rhodig. 
Lect. Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 12.

Identity,  that is to say, The samenesse, or being 
the very same.

Idus or Ides,  Eight daies in every moneth, de­
rived of an old word Iduo to divide, for that 
they commonly fall about the midst of 
the moneth, namely upon the thirteene or 
fifteene daies, according to Horace: Idus 
tibi sunt agendæ Qui dies mensem veneris 
marinæ, findit Aprilem.

To Incarnate,  that is to say, to make flesh, or 
helpe that the flesh may grow: and so cer­
taine salves or medicines be called incar­
natives.

To Incrassate,  that is to say, to make thicke and 
grose.

Intercular daies,  that is to say, set or put be­
tweene, as the odde daie in the leape yeare.



Interstice,  that is to say, The space or distance 
betweene.

Inumbration,  that is to say, Shadowing.

Ionicke Musicke,  Gallant and galliardlike: plea­
sant or delectable.

Isonomie,  An æquability of government under 
the same lawes, indifferently ministred to al 
persons: As also an æquality of right which 
all men doe enjoy in one state: And an æ­
quall distribution unto all persons, not ac­
cording to Arithmeticall, but Geometri­
call proportion.

Isthmus,  A narrow banke of lande lying be­
tweene two seas, as namely, that of Corinth 
and Peloponnesus: and by analogie thereto, 
all such are so called. By a metaphor also, 
other things that serve as partitions, be so 
termed.

Isthmick games,  Were those which were per­
formed neere Corinth upon the saide Isth­
mus: instituted as some thinke, by Theseus, 
to the honour of Melicerta, otherwise na­
med Palæmon and Portamnus.


K

KAlends,  Was among the Romans the 
first day of the Moneth, or the very day 
of the new Moone, which commonly did 
concurre and fall out together: Neomenia 
in Greeke. But so called [Greek], that 
is to say, a Calando, because the Priest used
then to call the people unto the court Ca­
labra, and there to pronounce unto them 
how many daies there were to the Nones, 
&c.


L

L. LUcius,  A forename to divers families 
in Rome.

To Laconize,  that is to say, To imitate the La­
cedæmonians, either in short and pithy 
speech, or in hard life.

Lassitude,  that is to say, Wearinesse.

Laterall motions,  that is to say, Moovings to a 
side; for distinction of those that be circu­
lar, mounting upright or descending 
downward.

Libations, or Libaments,  Assaies of sacrifices, 
or offrings to the gods; especially of liquid 
things, as wine.

Lichanos,  A string of an instrument or note in 
Musicke: Index: In an instrument: the fore­
finger string or third: in the GAM-UT, or 
skale, D, SOL, RE, and C, SOL, RE, UT, 
according to the addition of Hypatón or 
Mesón.

Liturgia,  Any publicke function: but more 
particularly for the ministerie in the 
church, about divine service and worship 
of God.

Lydius Modus,  Lydian Musicke, dolefull and 
lamentable.

Lyceum, or Lycium,  A famous place neere to 
Athens, wherein Aristotle taught Philo­
sophie. His followers, because they confer­
red and disputed walking in this Lyceum, 
were called Peripatetici.

Lyrical poets,  Such as composed ditties and 
songs to be sung unto the Lute or such like 
stringed instruments.


M

M'. MArcus, M'. Manius, with the note  
of apostrophus,  Forenames of 
sundry houses in Rome.

Medimnus,  A measure conteining sixe Modij 
Romane; and may goe with us for a bushel 
and three pecks of London measure, or 
thereabout.

Megarian questions,  that is to say, Such as 
were propounded and debated among the 
Philosophers Megarenses: for there was a 
sect of them, taking name of the place; like 
as the Cyrenaiks: for Euclides and Stilpo 
were Megarians.

Mercenarie,  that is to say, Hirelings, or such 
as take wages.

Mese,  The middle string or meane: it endeth 
on Eight, and beginneth the other in the 
skale of Musicke. In the GAM- UT, A, LA, 
MI, RE.

Metamorphosed,  that is to say, Transmuted 
and changed.

Metaphysicks,  that is to say, Supernaturall. 
The first and principall part of Philosophy 
in the intention, although it be last attei­
ned unto, as unto which all other know­
ledge serveth, and is to be referred. The 
Philosophers Theologie or Divinity, trea­
ting of intelligible and visible things.

Meteors,  Be impressions gathered in the aire 
above; as thunder, lightning, blasing stars, 
and such like.

Mimi,  Were actours upon the stage, repre­
senting ridiculously the speech and gesture 
of others; jesters and vices in a play: Also 
certeine Poemes or plaies, more lascivious 
than Comœdies, and fuller of obscœne 
wantonnesse. The authors of such were cal­
led Minographi, as Laberius.

Mina, or Mna,  A weight, answering to Libra, 
that is to say, a pound. Also coine valued 
at so much.



Minervall,  The stipend or wages paid unto a 
Schoole-master for the institution and 
teaching of scholars; derived of Minerva, 
the president of learning and good arts.

Mixolidian tune,  that is to say, Lamentable 
and pitifull: meet for Tragœdies.

Monarchie,  The absolute governement of a 
state, by one prince. Roialty.

Mordicative,  that is to say, Biting and sting­
ing: as mustard seed, Pelletary of Spaine.

Muscles,  The brawny or fleshy parts of the 
bodie.

Mythologie,  A fabulous Narration: or the 
delivery of matters by way of fables and 
tales.


N

NEmeia,  Certaine solemne games institu­
ted in the honour of Hercules for kil­
ling a lion in the forest Nemea; or as some 
thinke, in the remembrance of Arche­
morus a yong babe killed by a serpent.

Nete,  The lowest or last string in an instru­
ment, answering to the treble, and oppo­
site to Hypate. Some take it cleane con­
trary, for the base. See Hypate: and Erasmus 
upon the Adage, Dis diapason.

Nete Diezeugmenon,  A treble string or note 
of musicke, last of disjuncts. E, LA, MI.

Nete Hyperbolæan,  the last of trebles: A, LA 
Mi, RE.

Nete Synnemmenon or Syzeugmenon,  The last 
of the conjuncts: a string or note in mu­
sicke, D, La, SOL.

Niglary,  Are thought to be notes or tunes in 
musicke, powerfull to encourage. See Scho­
liast in Aristoph.

Nones,  Were certaine daies in the moneth: so 
called, because they began evermore the 
ninth day before the Ides, honored by 
the Romans both for the birth day of king 
Servius, and also for the chasing out of the 
kings: for otherwise it was not festivall; 
according as Ovid writeth, Nonarum tute­
la deo caret.

Novenary number,  that is to say, Nine.


O

OBolus,  A certeine weight: halfe a scriptul 
or scrupul, the sixt part of a drachme 
or somewhat better in Greece: also a small 
coine, currant for eight chalci, which in 
silver is a peny and farthing.

Octaedra,  A Geometricall body of eight ba­
ses, sides or faces, distinct by their angles.

Oeconomie,  House-governement: or the Ad­
ministration and dispose of houshold af­
faires.

Oligarchi,  A state of governement, wherein a 
few, and those properly of the welthier 
sort, rule the common wealth.

Olympiades,  were the space of those foure 
yeeres, according to which the Grecians 
reckoned the time: as the Romans did by 
their lustra; and Christians, by the yeere of 
our lord.

Olympicke or Olympian games,  were instituted 
first by Hercules in the honour of Jupiter 
Olympius; or of Pelops, as some thinke: and 
celebrated with a solemne affluence and 
concourse from all parts of Greece every 
foure yeeres complet once, betweene Pi­
sa and Elis, in a plaine called Olympia: where
also stood the temple of Jupiter Olympius.

Oracle,  An answere or sentence given by the 
devil, or the supposed gods of the heathen: 
also the place where such answeres were 
delivered.

Organe,  An Instrument. And our body is 
said to be Organicall, because the soule 
performeth her operations by the parts 
thereof as instruments.

Orthios Nomos,  In musicke a tune or song ex­
ceeding high and incentive; which when 
Timotheus sung before king Alexander, he 
was so moved and incited, that presently 
he leapt foorth and tooke armes.

Orthographi,  That part of Grammar which 
teacheth the feat of writing truely: also, 
true writing it selfe.

Ostracisme,  In Athens A condemnation and 
confining for ten yeeres space of that per­
son, who was thought to grow greater in 
wealth, reputation and opinion of ver­
tue or otherwise, than the democratie 
or free popular estate would well beare, 
ordained first by Clisthenes: who for his 
labour was himselfe first condemned. It 
tooke the name of Ostratos, a shell or 
little potsherd, wherein his name was writ­
ten, whom any of the people was in that 
behalfe offended with; and meant to expell 
the city. And if the major part of the peo­
ple noted one in this maner, he was sent a­
way. It differed from banishment, because 
no person lost by Ostracisme goods or 
lands: againe the time was limited, and the 
certaine place set downe, where he should 
abide. In this sort Aristides the just, vali­
ant Themistocles and other good men were 
driven out.



Oxyrynchos,  A fish, so called, of a long sharpe 
beake or snout that it hath.


P

PAean  The name of Apollo. An hymne 
also to Apollo and Diana for to avert 
plague, warre, or any calamity: [Greek], 
which signifieth to strike or to heale, or 
of [Greek], to stay or make to cease.

Pæderastî,  The loving of yong boies: com­
monly taken in the ill part, as signifying 
the abuse of them against kinde.

Pægnia,  Pleasant poems or merry ditties for 
delight.

Pæon, or Pæon,  The name of Apollo; and of a 
metricall foot in verse, of which Pæans are 
composed: and it is duple, to wit of foure 
sillables, either the first long, and the other 
three short; or the first short and the other 
three long: it is named also Pæan: also an 
epithet of Apollo.

To Palliat,  that is to say, To cover or hide: and 
so such cures be called Palliative, which 
search not to the roote or cause of the dis­
ease, but give a shew onely of a perfect 
cure; as when a sore is healed up aloft, 
and festereth underneath. And thus sweet 
pomanders doe palliat a stinking breath, 
occasioned by a corrupt stomacke or dis­
eased lungs and such like.

P. Publius,  A forename to some Romane fa­
milies.

Panathenæa,  A solemnity held at Athens: 
wherein the whole city men, women and 
children were assembled. And such games, 
dances and plaies as were then exhibited; 
or what orations were then and there 
made, they called Panathenaik. Of two 
sorts these solemnities were: once every 
yeere; and once every fifth yeere, which 
were called the greater.

Pancratium,  Plutarch taketh for an exercise of 
activity or mixt game of fist-fight and 
wrestling. Howbeit other writers will have 
it to be an exercise of wrestling, wherein 
one indevoureth with hand and foot, and 
by all parts of his body to foile his adver­
sary: as also the practise of all the five feats 
of activity, which is called Pentathlon and 
Quinquertium: to wit, * buffetting, wrest­
ling, running leaping and coiting,

* Or launcing 
the dart.


Pancratiast,  One that is skilfull and professed 
in the said Pancration.

Paramese,  Next the meane or middle string. 
A note in musicke: B, FA, E, MI, in space.

Paranete Hyperbolæan,  A treble string or note 
in musicke: the last save one of trebles: G, 
SOL, RE, UT.

Panegyricke,  Feasts, games, faires, marts, 
pompes, shewes, or any such solemnities, 
performed or exhibited, before the gene­
rall assembly of a whole nation: such as 
were the Olympicke, Pythicke, Isthmicke, and 
Nemian games in Greece. Orations likewise 
to the praise of any person at such an as­
sembly, be called Panegyricall.

Paradox,  A strange or admirable opinion 
held against the common conceit of men: 
such as the Stoicks mainteined.

Periode,  A cercuit or compasse certeinly kept: 
as we may observe in the course of Sunne 
and Moone, and in the revolution of times 
and seasons: in some agues also and other 
sicknesses, that keepe a just time of their 
returne, called therefore Periodicall. Also 
the traine of a full sentence to the end, and 
the very end it selfe, is named a Periode.

Paranete Diezeugnumenón,  A treble string or 
note in Musicke: the last save one of dis­
juncts: D, LA, SOL, RE.

Paranete Synemmenon or Syzeugmenon:  C, 
SOL, FA.

Parhypate hypatón,  that is to say, Subprinci­
pall of principals. A string or note in Mu­
sicke: C, FA, UT.

Parhypate Mesón,  that is to say, Subprincipall 
of meanes: a string or note in Musicke: F, 
FA, UT.

Peripateticks,  A sect of Philosophers, the fol­
lowers of Aristotle: See Liceum.

Phiditia,  Were publicke hals in Lacedæmon, 
where all sorts of citizens, rich and poore, 
one with another met to eat and drinke to­
gether, at the publicke charges and had æ­
quall parts allowed.

Philippicks,  Were invective orations made 
by Demosthenes the Oratour, against Philip 
king of Macedony, for the liberty of Greece. 
And heereupon all invectives may be cal­
led Philippicke, as those were of M. Tullius 
Cicero against Antonie.

Phrygius Modus,  Phrygian tune or musicke, 
otherwise called Barbarian; mooving to 
devotion, used in sacrifices and religious 
worship of the gods: for so some interpret 
Entheon in Lucianus: others take it for in­
censing and stirring to furie.

To Pinguifie,  that is to say, To make fat.

Plethoricall plight,  that is to say, That state of 
the body, which being full of bloud and o­
ther humours, needeth evacuation: whe­
ther the said fulnesse be, ad vasa, as the 



Physicians say, when the said bloud and 
humours be otherwise commendable, but 
offending onely in quality: or, ad vires, 
when the same be distempered and offen­
sive to nature, and therefore would be ridde 
away; which state is also called Cacochy­
mie.

Polemarchus,  One of the nine Archontes or 
head magistrates in the popular state of 
Athens, chosen as the rest yeerely. Who 
notwithstanding that he reteined the name 
of Polemarchus, that is to say, a Captaine 
generall in the field, such as in the Sove­
raigne government of the kings, were em­
ploied in warres and martiall service under 
them: yet it appeareth that they had civill 
jurisdiction, and ministred justice, between 
citizens & aliens, of whó there were many 
in Athens; like as the Archon for the time 
being, was judge for the citizens onely. 
Assistants he had twaine, named Paredri, 
who sat in commission with him.

Poliorceles,  A surname of Demetrius, a valiant 
king of Macedonie, and sonne of king An­
tigonus: which addition was given unto 
him for beseeging of so many cities.

Polypragmon,  A curious busie body, who lo­
veth to meddle in many matters.

Pores,  The little holes of the skinne, through 
which sweat passeth, and fumes breath 
foorth.

Positions,  Such sentences or opinions as are 
held in disputation.

Prætour,  One of the superiour Magistrates 
of Rome. In the citie he ruled as L. chiefe 
Justice, and exercised civill jurisdiction: 
Abroad in the province, he commanded as 
L. Governour, Deputie, or Lieutenant 
Generall: In the field, he was L. General, 
as well as the Consull. At first, the name of 
Consul, Prætor, and Judge was all one.

Primices,  First fruits.

Problemes,  that is to say, Questions propoun­
ded for to be discussed.

Procatarcticke causes of sicknesse,  Be such as are 
evident and comming from without, which 
yeeld occasion of disease, but do not main­
teine the same: as the heat of the Sunne, 
causing headach or the ague.

Prognosticke,  that is to say, Foreknowing and 
foreshewing: as the signes in a disease 
which foresignifie death or recovery.

Proscription,  an outlawing of persons in Rome, 
with confiscation of their goods, and sel­
ling the same in portsale: and depriving 
them of publicke protection.

Prostambomene,  A, RE, a terme in Musicke, 
signifying (a String or Note) taken in 
or to: for otherwise of two Heptachords, 
there would not arise 15. to admit a place 
in the middle for Mese, that is to say, the 
Meane, to take part of two Eights, or two 
Diapasons.

Prosodia,  A certeine hymne or tune thereto, 
in maner of supplication to the gods, and 
namely to Apollo and Diana, at what time 
as a sacrifice was to be brought and presen­
ted before the altar.

Proteleia,  The sacrifice before mariage: as also 
the gifts that ceremoniously went before.

Prytaneum,  A stately place within the castell 
of Athens, wherein was a court held for 
judgement in certeine causes: where also 
they who had done the Common-wealth 
singular service, were allowed their diet at 
the cities charges, which was accounted 
the greatest honour that could be.

Parhypate Hypaton,  A base string or note in 
musicke, Subprincipall of principals: C, 
FA, UT,

Parhypate Meson,  Subprincipall of meanes, 
a meane string or note, F, FA, UT,

Pyladion,  In musicke a kinde of note bearing 
the name of Pylades, a Poet comicall and 
skilfull master in musicke.

Pyramidal,  Formed like unto the Pyramis, 
which is a geometricall body, solid, broad 
beneath, and rising up one all sides which 
be flat and plaine, unto a sharpe point like 
a steeple. It taketh the name of [Greek], that is 
to say, Fire, which naturally hath that fi­
gure.

Pythia, or Phœbas,  The priestresse or prophe­
tisse, who pronounced the answeres at the 
oracle of Apollo Pythius at Delphos: who 
tooke that name of Python there slaine by 
him and lying putrified: or of [Greek], 
that is to say, To aske and demand; for the 
resort of people thither to be resolved by 
him of their doubts.

Pythick, or Pythian games,  were celebrated to 
the honour of Apollo Pythius, neere the 
city Delphos, with greate solemnity: in­
stituted first by Diomedes and yeerely re­
newed.


Q

Q. QUintus,  A fore name to divers Ro­
manes. 

Quaternary,  the number of Foure: called like­
wise [GREEK] and [GREEK], so highly celebrated



by the Pythagoreans, comprising in it the 
proportion Epitritos, whereof ariseth the 
musicall harmonie * Diatessaron; for it con­
taineth three and the third part of three: 
also Diplasion, because it comprehendeth 
two duple, whence ariseth the musicke dia­
pason: and Disdiapason, being dubled, 
which is an Eight & the perfect harmony, 
according to the proverbe [Greek] also 
in that, it containeth all numbers within it; 
for, one, two, three and foure arise to Ten, 
beyond which we cannot ascend but by re­
petition of former numbers.

* Calius Rho­
dig.



Quæstors,  inferior officers in Rome in maner of 
Treasurers: whose charge was to receive 
and lay out the cities mony and revenewes 
of state: of which sort, there were Urbani, 
for the city it selfe: Provinciales, for the 
provinces: and Castrenses, for the campe 
and their warres.

Quinquertium, named in Greeke, Pentathlon.  
Five exercises or feats of activity among 
the greeks practised at their solemne 
games: namely * launcing the dart, throw­
ing the coit, running a race, wrestling 
and leaping. See Pancratium.

* Some put in
stead hereof
Fist-fight.




R

RAdicall moisture:  Is the substantiall hu­
midity in living bodies; which is so u­
nited with naturall heat, that the one main­
taineth the other, and both preserve life.

To Rarifie,  that is to say, To make more sub­
tile, light and thin.

Recidivation,  Is a relapse or falling backe into 
a sicknesse, which was in the way of recove­
ry, and commonly is more dangerous than 
the former: Recidiva pejor radice.

Regents,  Professours in the liberall sciences 
and in Philosophi: a tearme usuall in the 
Universities.

Reverberation,  that is to say, A smiting or dri­
ving backe.

Rhapsodie,  A sowing together or conjoining 
of those Poems and verses especially hero­
icke or hexametre, which before were loose 
and scattered: such as were those of Homer, 
when they were reduced into one entier 
body of Ilias and Odyssea. Those Poets also, 
who recite or pronounce such verses, were 
tearmed Rhapsodi.

Rivals and Corrivals,  Counter-suiters: or 
those who make love together, unto one 
and the same woman.

To Ruminate,  that is to say, To ponder and 
consider, or revolve a thing in the minde: 
a borrowed speech from beasts that chew 
the cudde.


S

SAtyri,  Woodwoses, or monstrous crea­
tures with tailes, yet resembling in some 
sort, partly men & women, & in part goats; 
given much to venery and lasciviousnesse, 
whereupon they had that name: also to 
scurrill, frumping and jibing, for which 
they were also called Sileni, especially 
when they grew aged; supposed by the ru­
rall heardmen to be the fairies or gods (I 
would not else) of the woods.

Satyræ or Satyrs  were certaine Poems recei­
ved in place of Comœdia vetus, detesting 
and reprooving the misdemeanours of 
people and their vices: at first by way of 
myrth and jest, not sharpely and after a bi­
ting maner, to the shame, disgrace or hurt 
of any person; such were they that Horace 
composed; howbeit they grew afterward to 
more diracity and licentiousnesse, noting 
in broad tearmes without respect all leaud­
nesse, and sparing no degree; as those were 
of Juvenales and Persius penning. Latine 
poets onely, handled this argument, both 
in the one sort and the other.

Scammonie,  A medicinable plant, and the juice 
thereof issuing out of the roote when it is 
wounded or cut: it purgeth yellow choler 
strongly. The same juice or liquor being 
concrete or thickned and withall corrected 
is called Dacrydium; as one would say, the 
teares destilling from the roote: and is the 
same which the unlearned Apothecaries 
call Diagridium; as if forsooth it were some 
compound like their Diaphænicon.

Scelet,  The dead body of a man artificially dri­
ed or tanned, for to be kept and seene a 
long time. It is taken also for a dead car­
casse of man or woman, represented with 
the bones onely, and ligaments.

Scepticke philosophers,  Who descended from 
Pyrrho; so called, for that they would con­
sider of all matters in question, but deter­
mine of none: and in this respect they were 
more precise than the Academicks.

Scolia,  Were certeine songs and carols sung 
at feasts.

Scrutinie,  A search, and properly a perusing of 
suffrages or voices, at elections or judiciall 
courts, for the triall or passing of any cause.

Secundine,  The skinne that enwrappeth the 
childe or yoong thing in the wombe: in 



women the after-birth or later-birth; in 
beasts the heame.

Senarie,  The number of sixe, also a kinde of 
verse. See Iambus.

Septimane,  A weeke or seven-night. Also what 
soever falleth out upon the seventh daie, 
moneth, yeere, &c. as Septimanae fœturæ, in 
Arnobius, for children borne at the seventh 
moneth after conception; and Septimanæ 
febres, Agues returning with their fits every 
seventh day. 

Serg. Sergius
Serv. Servius
Sex. Sextus.
Forenames to certeine fa­
milies in Rome. 

Sesquialteral, A proportion, by which is ment 
that which conteineth the whole and halfe 
againe, as 6. to 4. 12. to 8. It is also named 
Hemiolios.

Sesqui-tertian, A proportion, whereby is un­
derstood as much as comprehendeth the 
whole, and one third part, as 12. to 9. and 
the same is called Epitritos.

Sesqui-octave, That which compriseth the 
whole and one 8 part; as 9 to 8, 18 to 16: 
in Greeke Eptogdoos, or Epogdoos.

Solœcisme,  Incongruity of speech, or defect in 
the purity thereof. It arose of those who 
being Athenians borne, and dwelling in 
Soli, a city in Cilicia, spake not pure Attick, 
but mixt with the Solians language.

Solstice,  The Sunne-steed, which is twice in 
the yeere, in Iune & December, when the 
Sunne seemeth to stand for a while, at the 
very point of the Tropicks, either going 
from us, or comming toward us; as if hee 
returned from the end of his race, North 
and South.

Sp. Spurius,  A forename to some Romanes.

Spasmes,  that is to say, Crampes, or painfull 
pluckings of the muskles and sinewes. See 
Convulsions And Spasmaticke, full of such 
or given thereto.

Sphæres,  The circles or globs, of the seven pla­
nets: as also the compasse of the heaven a­
bove all.

Spissitude,  Thicknesse or dimnesse.

Spondæus,  An hymne sung at sacrifices and li­
bations. Also a metricall foot in verse, con­
sisting of two long syllables: whereof prin­
cipally such hymnes or songs were com­
posed.

Stadium,  A race or space of ground, contei­
ning 625. foote, whereof eight make a 
mile, consisting of a thousand paces, which 
are five thousand foot, reckoning five foot 
for a pace; for so much commonly a man 
taketh at once in his pace, that is to say, in 
his stepping forward, and remooving one 
foot before another.

Stoicks,  Certeine Philosophers, whose first 
master was Zeno, who taught in a certeine 
spatious gallery at Athens, called Pœcile, 
for the varietie of pictures wherewith Po­
lignotus the excellent painter beautified it:
And for that a gallery in Greeke is called 
Stoa, therefore those Philosophers who 
taught and disputed therein, tooke that 
name of Stoicks.

Strophes,  that is to say, Conversions or tur­
nings. In Comœdies and tragœdies, when 
the Chorus first speaketh unto the actours; 
and then turneth to the spectators, and 
pronounceth certeine Jambicks. In the re­
hearsing of Lyricall verses, when the Poet 
one while turneth to the right hand, and 
another while to the left, and so reciteth 
certeine verses: which thereupon be called 
Strophæ, and Antistrophæ.

Stypticke,  being such things, as by a certeine 
harsh taste, doe shew that they be astrin­
gent: as the fruit called Medlars, and A­
lum especially, which thereupon is called
Stypteria. And Stypticitie is such a qua­
litie.

Subitarie,  that is to say, Of a sudden, without 
premeditation.

Subterranean,  that is to say, Under the earth.

Superficies,  The upper face or outside of any 
thing. In Geometrie it is that, which is 
made of lines set together, like as a line of 
prickes united.

Superfœtation,  Conception upon concep­
tion.

Suppuration,  A gathering to matter or attir: 
as in biles, impostumes, inflammations 
and such like.

Sycophants,  Tale-bearers, false promoters, or 
slanderous informers, and such as upon 
small occasions brought men into trouble. 
The name arose upon this occasion, that 
whereas in Athens there was an act, That 
none should transport figges out of the 
territory Attica; such as gave informati­
on of those that contrarie to this law con­
veied figges into other parts, were tearmed 
Sycophants: for that Sycon in Greeke, is 
a figge.

Syllogismes,  Be certeine formes of arguing: 
when upon two propositions graunted, 
which are called Premisses, there is infer­
red a third, namely a Conclusion.

To Symbolize,  that is, By certeine outward 



signes, to signifie some hidden things: 
Thus an eie symbolizeth vigilancy.

Sympathie,  that is to say, A fellow feeling, as is 
betweene the head and stomacke in our 
bodies: also the agreement and naturall a­
mitie in divers senslesse things, as between 
iron and the load-stone.

Symphonie,  Concent and harmony, properly 
in vocall Musicke.

Symposiarch,  The master of a feast. The Ro­
manes called him Rex, that is to saie, a 
king.

Symptomes,  Be accidents accompanying sick­
nesse; as headach, the ague: stitch, short­
nesse of winde, spitting blood, cough and 
ague; the plurisie.

Synemmenon, or Synezeugmenon,  A tearme of 
art in musicke, signifying strings or notes 
conjunct.

Syntaxis,  The construction and coherence of 
words and parts of speech by concord and 
regiment.


T

T. TItus,  A forename to many houses of  
the Romans.

Talent Atticke  (as well ponderall which 
was weighed, as numerall or nummarie, 
counted in mony) was of two sortes: The 
lesse, of sixty pound Attick, and every one 
of them consisted of one hundred Drach­
mæ. If mina then, be three pound two shil­
lings six pence starling in silver; this talent 
amounteth to one hundred eighty seven 
pound ten shillings of our english mony. 
The greater, or simply the great talent, is 
eighty minæ and hath the proportion Epi­
tritos, or sesquitertian to the lesse: so that 
it commeth to two hundred and fifty 
pound starling.

Tautologies,  Vaine repetitions of the same 
things oftentimes.

Ternarie,  The number of three.

Terpandrios,  A severall tune in musicke, or a 
song that Terpander devised.

Tetrachord,  An instrument in old time of 
foure strings: but now, it is taken for every 
fourth in the scale of Musicke or GAM, 
UT. whereof there be foure in fifteene 
strings: reckoning Mese, to end one octave 
and begin another.

Tetrarch,  A potentate or ruler over the fourth 
part of a country.

Theatre,  A shew place built with seates in 
maner of an halfe circle, for to behold 
games, plaies and pastimes; which if both 
ends meet round, is called an Amphitheatre.

Theorems,  Principles or rules in any science.

Theriacal Trochisks, Trosches made of vipers 
flesh, to enter into the composition Theri­
aca, that is to say, Triacle.

Thesmothelæ,  Were six of the nine Archontes 
or chiefe rulers in Athens during their free 
popular estate. They had civill jurisdiction 
and sat as judges in certeine causes.

Thesmothesium,  seemeth to be the court or 
commission of the said Thesmothelæ.

Topicks,  That part of logicke which treateth of 
the invention of arguments, which are cal­
led Topi, as if they were places, out of which 
a man might redily have sufficient reasons 
to argue and dispute with Pro & contra.

Tribunes of the Commons,  Certeine officers 
or magistrates at Rome, as provosts and 
protectours of the cominaltie to restraine 
and keepe downe the excessive power of 
the consuls and nobility. Chosen they 
were and confirmed by the generall oth 
of the people, whereby they were Sacrosan­
cti, that is to say, Inviolable, & no violence 
might be done to their persons. A nega­
tive voice they had and power of inhibiti­
on called Intercessio; whereby they might 
crosse and stop all proceedings of the Se­
nate or any superiour magistrate (save on­
ly the Dictator) even of the very consuls, 
whom in some case they might command. 
They resembled much the Ephory in 
Sparta.

Trite Diezeugmenon,  The third of disjuncts a 
string or note in the scale of musicke C, 
SOL, FA, UT.

Trite Hyperbolæan,  A treble string; the third of 
Exceeding or treble; F, FA, UT.

Trite Synnemmenon, or Syzeugmenon,  The 
third of the Disjuncts, a string or note in 
musicke, B, FA, B, MI in rule.

Triviall,  Common and ordinary as is the 
high way, stale and of no account.

Trochæans,  A metricall foot in verse, consist­
ing of two sillables; the former long, and 
the other short.

Tropæes or Trophaees,  Were monuments in 
memoriall of victory, erected in marble, 
brasse, or in default thereof with heaps of 
stone or piles of wood, in the very place 
where any Generall had vanquished his e­
nimies and put them to flight; whereupon 
they tooke that name: for that [Greek] in 
greeke signifieth, Turning back and flight.

Tropes,  In speech the using of wordes other­
wise than in their primitive and naturall 



signification; which many times giveth 
a grace to the sentence.

Tutelar,  Protectours and defenders. So were 
the gods or goddesses among the Painims 
called, whom they beleeved to have a spe­
ciall charge of any city or country.

A Type,  that is to say, A figure under which is 
signified some other thing.


V

VEstall virgins,  were certeine Nunnes or 
Votaries, instituted first by Numa Pom­
pilius king of Rome, in the honour of Vesta 
the goddesse: whose charge was to keepe 
the sacred fire that it went not foorth. 
Chosen they were betweene the yeeres of 
six and tenne of their age: and were enjoi­
ned virginitie for thirtie yeeres: after 
which time it was lawfull for them to be 
married: But if in the meane while they 
committed fornication, buried they were 
quicke.

Vnction, that is to say, Anointing.





