



THE HISTORY
OF THE WARRES
BETWEENE THE
TVRKES AND THE 
PERSIANS.

Written in Italian by Iohn-Thomas MInadoi, and translated into
English by ABRAHAM HARTWELL.

Containing the description of all such matters, as pertaine to the Religion, to the Forces
to the Gouernement, and to the Countries of the kingdome of the Persians.

Together with the Argument of euery Booke, & a new Geographicall Mappe
of all those Territories.

A Table contayning a declaration aswell of diuerse new and Barbarous Names and
Termes vsed in this History, as also how they were called in auncient times.

And last of all, a Letter of the Authors, wherein is discoursed, what Cittie
it was in the old time, which is now called Tauris, and is so often men­
tioned in this History.

Imprinted at London by Iohn Wolfe 1595.






A Table, conteyning the decla­
ration of the Names and wordes, vsed
in this Historie, as well Auncient, as Barbarous.
Wherein the letter A. signifieth the Auncient:
Barbarous. the Barbarous: P. the Persian: and
T. the Turkish name or word.


A.
ACca and Acri, Barbarous a Sea-coast Citie in So­
ria. Ptolomaida. Auncient. according to Orte­
lius and Anania.

Adena and Adana, Barbarous. a Citie in the
confines of Cilicia, Adana, and it may
be, Nicopolis, Auncient. 

Aga, Barbarous. a Capitayne, or Chiefe of his
companie.
 
Aggia-Chala, Barbarous. the Castell Peregrine, or the Castell of
Strangers.

Aggiami, Look for Cheselbas, and the Persians.

Aleppo, Barbarous. and Halep, Barbarous. look for Halip.

Alger, Barbarous.  by Iouius is thought to be Iulia Cesarea, Auncient. and
by Castaldo and others, to be the Citie of Cirtha in
Africa.

Altun-Chala, Turkish. the golden Castell, or Castell of gold:
A place in the confines of great Armenia, and Georgia.

Amadan, Barbarous. a Citie of the Persians in Parthia.

Aman, Barbarous. a Citie in Soria, watred with the riuer Oron­
tes. Apamea, Auncient. 

Amasia, Barbarous. Castaldo thinketh it to be Cappadocia, Auncient. and
others take it to be in auncient times called Amasia, Auncient. 

Andera, or Andara, a Towne in Drusia, where most ex­
quisite Silkes are made.



Andrinopoli, Barbarous. a principall Citie in Thracia, Adriano­
polis, Auncient. 

Angori, Barbarous. a Citie in Cappadocia, which is a Region in
Asia the lesser, and by Bellonius thought to be Encyra,
and Ancyra, Auncient. in the peregrination of Sainct Paul.

Antachie, Barbarous. a Citie in Soria, now decayed, but yet
worth the sight, both in respect of the situation and
walles thereof, as also for the Riuer that runneth by it.
Antiochia, Auncient. 

Arasse, Barbarous. a Riuer that watreth the South part of great
Armenia, & almost diuideth it from Georgia. Araxis, Auncient. 
Achlar, and Ares, Turkish. 

Arbella, Barbarous. a Citie in Assyria, according to Strabo, and Q.
Curtius, and by the error of some thought to be Taruis.

Arcipelago, Barbarous. but in old time called Mare Egæum, Auncient. a
part of the Sea Mediterraneum, that seperateth Europe
from Asia.

Ardachan, Barbarous. a Citie of the Turkes in great Armenia.

Ardouil, Persian. a Citie in Media, the first Seat of the Persian
Sect, wherein Giunet, Sederdin, and other their succes­
sors, that were authors of the Persian superstition, did
reside and reigne.

Arz, Turkish. a Supplication, a Request, or an Information.

At-Maidan, Barbarous. the high Street, or chiefe Market place in
Constantinople.


B.
BAgdat, Barbarous. Laonicus calleth it Bogdatis, and the Italians
call it Baldacco, in old time Babylon, Auncient. 

Balbech, Barbarous. a Citie in Palæstina, which Bellonius taketh to
be Cesarea Philippi, 



peregrination of Sainct Paul.

Balsara, and as Frederico writeth it, Bassora, Barbarous. a Citie in
the channell of Euphrates, called by Castaldo, and o­
thers, Teredon, Auncient.

Bassa, Turkish.  a Capitaine, a Gouernour, a chiefe Lord.

Beglerbey, Turkish. a great Lord.

Bestan, Persian. a Citie in Hircania.

Bey, or Beg, or Bech, Turkish. a chiefe man, or a Lord.

Bir, which some call Birta, Barbarous. a Citie vpon Euphrates, in
the confines of Soria.

Bruz, Barbarous. a Hill in Armenia; the creast of the Periardj
Mountaines.

Brusia and Bursa, Barbarous. in old time the chiefe Palace of Bithy­
nia, and called in the old time Prusia, Auncient. But Ortelius
vnaduisedly thinketh, that Bursa and Brusia is not a Ci­
tie, but a whole Region. And herein also is Castaldo
deceiued, if our owne sense haue not shewed vnto vs
one Citie in steed of another, or if we be not deceiued
in deed in the verie names of them.


C.
CAddi, Turkish. a Iudge.

Cafe, Barbarous. a place within two dayes iourney of Babylon,
where Aly and his children are buried.

Caffa, Barbarous. Anania vseth no other name: although in deed
Caffa now was in old time called Theodosia, A.

Cahaca, Barbarous. a Towne so called, situate beweene Casbin
and Tauris.

Cairo, Barbarous. a huge Citie in %AElig;gypt, neere whereunto are the 
famous Pyramides: whereby a man may easily iudge,
that there was the most renowmed citie of Memphis.



Ortelius thinketh that it is Babylon: but Ortelius himself
setteth downe another Babylon in another table of his,
and placeth it in Assiria So that he maketh two Cities
of one name. Whereof notwithstanding it is no time
now to dispute.

Caissar, Barbarous. a place in Cilicia, of no great reckoning, and
without any note of antiquitie.

Calaus, Turkish. a Guide.

Caldaran, Barbarous. the name of certain famous Champeynes.
Perhaps they may be the same Champeynes which
Strabo called the Champeynes of Araxis.

Calife, Persian. a Priest, or Prelate.

Canac, Barbarous. a Riuer that diuideth a part of Atropatia from
Armenia.

Candahar, Persian. a certaine Kingdome. In old time Peripa­
niso, Auncient. 

Capigi, Turkish. a gentleman Vsher.

Capigi-Bassi, Turkish. the chiefe gentleman Vsher.

Capigi-Larchecaiasi, Turkish. the Lieutenant or chiefe Lord of
the gentlemen Vshers.

Caracach, Persian. a Territorie of the Persians in Media.

Carachala, Turkish. the black Castell, it is in Armenia, but it be­
longeth to the Georgians.

Caraemit, Turkish. the black Citie. It is now the Metropoli­
ticall Citie of the Mesopotamians. Iouius and others
call it Amida, Auncient. 

Caramania and Caraman, Barbarous. the black Region: It is com­
monly deemed to be Cilicia, Auncient. 

Casbin and Casuin, Persian. we may well interpret it: The place
of punishment. And it is the Citie, whether the palace
of the Persian Empire was translated by Tamas, and
called Casbin, because those that for their punishment



had deserued banishment, were at the first banished
thither. It is yet in Media the great, a little more South
then Tauris: So that a man may verie well think it to
be Arsacia, Auncient. in Strabo.

Casenda, Turkish. the common Treasure. Look Hasna.

Cassachi, Turkish. Robbers by the high way.

Cassan, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia, verie famous and rich. Orte­
lius and the rest make no mention of it.

Cassangic, Barbarous. a place belonging to Maxut-Chan in Ar­
menia.

Cecchino, or Zecchino,  a Venetian Duckate.

Chala, and Chalasi, Barbarous. a Towne or a Castell.

Chan, Persian. and also vsed in Tartaria, and is the same that the
Turkes call a Bassa.

Chars, Barbarous. peraduenture it is that which Ptolomie calleth
Corsa, Auncient.

Checaia, Turkish. a Deputie or Agent.
 
Cheiserie, Barbarous. we think it to be Cæsarea in Palestina, Auncient. a litle
from Ioppa. Ptolomie saieth it is Cæsarea, wherof Strabo
maketh mention. It hath many notes of antiquitie.

Cheselbas, Barbarous. a Red-Capp. It is a title giuen to the Persi­
ans: who are also called the Soffians, the Cheselbas, the
Persians, and the Aggiami. Look Persians.

Chianichie, Barbarous. a place neere to Ragusa, verie famous, be­
cause it was the natiue Countrie of Ebrain Bassa, sonne
in law to Amurath.

Chiaus, Turkish. a Nuntio, or an Embassadour.

Chielder-Giol, Barbarous. the Lake of Chielder: for Giol signifieth a 
lake: and it may be thought without any error to be 
the Poole of Euphrates, Auncient. 

Chielder Monte, Barbarous. the hilles of Periardo.

Chielebi, Barbarous. a Gentleman.



Chiulsal, Barbarous a Towne in Armenia, yet inhabited at this day 
by the Georgians.

Chiuri-Chala, Barbarous. a new Territorie in Georgia, that is to
say, inhabited of old by the Georgians, but yet com­
prehended vnder Armenia.

Clisia, a Territorie in Armenia, and in old time possessed
by the Georgians, though now in the handes of the
Turkes.

Codabanda, Persian. Blind or weak of sight. Hodabanda signi­
fieth the selfe same thing, but other writers erroniously
pronounce it Hodabende.

Coran, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.

Corsu, a late word: a famous Island, called in old time
Corcyra, Auncient. and according to Ortelius, Corsinio, Auncient. 

Coy, Barbarous. a Citie in the borders of Armenia, and Media,
betweene Van and Tauris.

Culbat, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.

Cur, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.

Curchi-Bassi, Persian. Captain of the Curchi, who are the soul­
diers, that are appointed for the guard of the Persian
Kings Court.

Curdi, Barbarous. a people which many think to be the Parthi­
ans, Auncient. But we cannot possiblie thinke them to be so.
wherein we agree with Castaldo. 

Curzolari, Barbarous. in old time called the Echinades, Auncient. which 
are certain Rockes, verie famous by reason of the vic­
torie by Sea obtayned by the most happie and for­
tunate League of the Chatholikes, against the Tur­
kish fleet.

Cusestan, Barbarous. a part of Assyria.




D.
DAgmat, Barbarous. a Citie in the confines of Parthia, and of
Media the great.

Damasco, Auncient. a Citie in Soria. Look Sciam.

Deftardar, Turkish. a Treasourer or Chamberlein.

Demir-Capi, Turkish. the Iron-Gates. Demir-Capi is also called
Derbent. It is a Citie sometimes called Alessandria, Auncient. 
neere to the Hircanian Sea. It is called Derbent, be­
cause it is in figure narrow and long: and Demir-Capi,
because there were the Iron-gates, that were some­
times the entrance into Scythia.

Demotica, Barbarous. a Citie in Thracia, famous in regard of the 
banishment of Sinan-Bassa into that place, wherof men­
tion is made in the Historie, Lib. 5. 

Derbent, Barbarous. a Citie called Demir-Capi. Derbent signifieth
streit or narrow.

Diarbech, Barbarous. the Countrie of Mesopotamia.

Diuano, Barbarous. a place of audience, or a Counsaile-house. It
is sometimes taken for the audience it selfe, and some­
times for the Counsaile it selfe.

Don, Barbarous. the Riuer sometimes called Tanais, Auncient. in Sar­
matia.

Dreuis and Deruis, Barbarous. a Religious person, an Heremite.


E.
EDel, Barbarous. sometimes called Volga, Auncient. a famous Riuer in
Sarmatia within Europe.

Emir, Barbarous. a common name among the Arabians, and the
Drusians, vsed for a Prince, a Duke, a chief Noble man.

Eres, Barbarous. a Citie in Atropatia.
 
Erzirum, Barbarous. we think it to be Simbra in Ptolomie.



Essahul, Persian. a troupe of Souldiers belonging to the Guard
of the Persian King.


F.
FAlchi, Barbarous. a Master of Ceremonies, a Master of Religion.

Famagosta, Barbarous. a new word corrupted from the vulgar
Greeke, which calleth it Famausta, in old time it was
Salamina in Cyprus, Auncient. 

Farssi, Persian. the Region of Persia.


G.
GAngiara, Barbarous. a sharpe crooked dagger.

"Gangiara" antedates the earliest OED citation of "khanjar."



Gaza, Auncient. a Citie in the confines of Iudea, and in the
way that leadeth towards Pelusium, Auncient. 

Genge, Barbarous. a Citie of the Persians in Armenia the greater.

Gheilan, Barbarous. a Citie in the Region of Gilan, which Castaldo
calleth Geli.

Giamen, Barbarous. a Prouince in Asia, where Arabia Felice is
situated.

Gianizaro, Barbarous. a degree of Turkish Souldiers so called.

Giauat, Barbarous. a Citie of Atropatia, in the confines of Media
the greater.

Gien, Barbarous. a Citie of the Parthians.

Giol, Turkish: a lake or a poole.

"Giol" may be a spelling of OED "gool," n.



Giurgi-Chala, Turkish. the Georgian-Castell, now possessed by
the Turkes. It is in the confines of Georgia and Ar­
menia.

Godz, Barbarous. the Citie of Ierusalem.

Gogna, and Conia, Barbarous. a Citie so called, and in the old time Ico­
nium, Auncient. the chiefe Citie of the Lycaonians.

Goletta, Barbarous. a famous Island.



Gori, and Gorides, Barbarous. a Territorie in Georgia.

Grin, Barbarous. a Territorie inhabited by the Georgians, situa­
ted on the hither side of Araxis.

Gurgistan and Georgia, Barbarous. the Region that contayneth
all the auncient Iberia, and part also of Armenia the
great. The inhabitants of the Countrey do call all
that Territorie Gurgistan, which is inhabited by the
Georgians. In which point, Negro, Anania, and Pius
secundus are not well aduised, because they think that
Georgia is onely Iberia.

Guuergi-Chalsi, Barbarous. a Castell situate in the middest of a 
little lake towards Tauris.


H.
HAlip, an Arabian word, and signifieth Milke. It is a 
verie famous Citie in Soria, which Iouius calleth
Alapia, Bellonius calleth it Hierapolis, and Qillanoua
being in a notorious error for this point, calleth it An­
tiochia. For Antiochia is two dayes iourney distant
from Aleppo, more toward the Sea, as we our selues
have seen with our eyes.

Hasna, Turkish. It signifieth Treasure, Store, Money collected
aswell for publike, as for priuate vses, although pro­
perly it is onely taken for the publike Treasure, or for 
the Kinges monyes.

Hassan-Chalasi, Turkish. The Castell of Hassan. It is also called
by the Turkes, Passin. It is a new erected thing be­
tweene Erzirum and Chars, situate vpon the bankes
of the riuer Euphrates.

Heri, Barbarous. a Citie in Aria.

Hispahan, Barbarous. a Citie sometimes in Parthia.




I.
IEsselbas, Barbarous. a greene-Cap. A certain people betweene
the Bactrians and the Sogdians, so called, because they
did weare Greene-Capps on their heads.

Imammadulasis, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.

Imbrahur-Bassi, Turkish. Master of the Kings horse.

Isnic, Barbarous. a Citie in old times called Nicea, Auncient. in Bithynia,
neere to the Moore Ascania, Auncient

Istigelu and Sagialu, Barbarous. a Renowmed familie, both at 
Casbin, and also ouer all the kingdome of Persia.


L.
LAke-Actamar, in old time called the Moore or marish
Martiana, or Margiana, or Mantiana, Auncient. and accor­
ding to Strabo, it is in Armenia the greater.

Lake of Esseecchia, in old time called the Marish Lychnitis,
 Auncient. in Georgia.

Lake of Isnic, in old time the Marish Ascania, Auncient. in Bi­
thynia.

Lake Tospite, or Toeti, it is in great Armenia.

Lizza, Barbarous. a Citie by the Sea-coast in Soria, called in old
time Laodicea, Auncient.

Lori, Barbarous. a Fortresse in Armenia, sometimes belonging to
the Georgians, but now possessed by the Turkes.


M.
MAcadems, Barbarous. a word vsed among the Drusiani for a 
Deputie, an Agent, or a chief Factor. For an Emir
or Lord in Drusia. Look the 7. Booke.

Macuco, Barbarous. a Measure in Soria, wherewith they measure



Corne. It is a little bigger then the bushell of Padua,
that is fower bushels and a halfe, Venetian measure.

Malan, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.

Mar delle Zabacche, Barbarous. in old time called Palus Mœo­
tica, Auncient. the Fennes of Mœotis.

Mar di Bachu, Barbarous. in tymes passed Mare Caspium, and
Mare Hircanum, Auncient. It is also at this day called the Sea
of Corazum.

Mar Maggiore, the great Sea. And Mar Nero, the black
Sea, sometimes called Pontus Euxinus, Auncient. 

Mar Morto, the dead Sea, sometimes called the Lake
Asphaltitis, Auncient. 

Marant, Barbarous. a Citie neere to Armenia in the confines of
the Medians, or rather within Media.

Maras, Barbarous. a Citie in Cilicia, called by Bellonius and Orte­
lius, Maronia, Auncient. 

Marmara, Barbarous. a Citie vpon the Sea-coast of Thracia.

Masandran, Barbarous. a Citie in Hircania.

Massiat, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.

Masul, Turkish. a man cassiered, or depriued of his Office: in
English, Iack out of office.

Mecca, Barbarous. a Citie in Arabia Fœlix, where some think
Mahamet was borne, and where he is also buried.

Mengrellia, Barbarous. sometimes the Region of Colchos, Auncient. fa­
mous for the golden Fleece.

Meschita, Barbarous. the place where the Barbarians do meete
together, to say their prophane prayers: in English a 
Temple, or a Church.

Miana, Barbarous. a Citie situate in the borders of Media the 
greater, of Persia, and of Parthia. It is peraduenture
so called, by the Riuer that is neer vnto it, whose name
is Miana.



Miriza, and Mirize, Persian. the title of a Prince in Persia. The
Kings chiefe Lieutenant.

Moldauia, A Region in Dacia.

Mordar, Persian. a Chaunceller. The Turks call him Tescheregi.

Mucaren: the first moneth of the Turkish yeare: much
agreeing with our Ianuary.

Mufti, Turkish. the chiefe Priest.

Mustaed-Dini, Persian. the same which the Turkes call Mufti.
The chiefe Priest.


N.
NAplos, Barbarous. in old time called Napoli, Auncient. in Samaria:
peraduenture it was in time past Nephthalim, Auncient.

Nassiuan, Barbarous. a Citie in Media the greater, or els in the con­
fines of Media, and Armenia. Some think it to be 
Nasuana, and others take it to be Artaxata, Auncient.

Natolia, in the opinion of Bellonius, comprehendeth all
the Regions of Phrygia, Galatia, Bithynia, Pontus, Lydia,
Caria, Paphlagonia, Lycia, Magnesia, Cappadocia, and
Comagena.

Neneruan, Barbarous. a place in Armenia bordering vpon Georgia.

Nisabul, Barbarous. a Citie in Aria.

Nisaur, Barbarous. a Citie in the confines of Parthia and Hircania.

Nosul, Turkish. a Taxe or collection of Corne.


O.
OLti, Turkish. a place belonging to the Turkes, betwene Erzi­
rum and Ardachan.


P.
PAngiazar, Barbarous. a Citie bordering vpon Hircania and 
Media the greater.



Passin. Look Hassan-Chalasi.

Persiani, The Persians. They are also called Aggiami,
Cheselbas, & Sofiani. Persiani, of the Prouince of Persia:
Aggiami, of the Region Azemia, or Aggiamia: Che­
selbas, of the Redd-marke which these people weare
in their Turbantes: and Soffians, of the Sofi, who is
their chiefe Gouernour.

Peruana-Giol, Turkish. the lake of Sclaues. It is in Armenia.

Phasis, Auncient. a Citie in Colchis, called yet at this day Phasis
and Fas.

Porta, a Gate: but principally in this Historie it is taken
for the Court of the Turkish Sultan: because all his
Counsailors, and chiefe Gouernours of his kingdome
do vse to sit in the Gate of the Emperours Court, to 
heare and dispatch causes aswell priuate as publike.

Portugall, in old time called Lusitania, Auncient. 


R.
RAfadi, Barbarous. a man of a false Religion, of a false faith.

Rama, a Towne in Palæstina, which Castaldo calleth
Lidda. Peraduenture it was that Rama, Auncient. which mour­
ned and wept for the great slaughter of the holie Inno­
cents, Math. 2.

Ramadan, Turkish. one of the solemne feastes of the Turkes.
It is also the proper name of a man, and the name of a 
Moone. For as we haue twelue Monethes, with their
seuerall proper names: so have the Turkes their xij.
Moones with their seuerall proper names also.

Reiuan, Barbarous. a Citie in Armenia. It may be, it is Terua in
Ptolomie. But I do not altogether agree with him in
that point.




S.
SAffetto, Barbarous. a Citie in Galilie, inhabited by the Iewes.

Saitan-Chalasi, Barbarous. the Castell of Satan, or the Deuils Ca­
stell, in the confines of Armenia and Georgia.

Salmas, Barbarous. a Citie betwixt Tauris and Van, but South­
ward to them both.

Sancazan, Barbarous. a place neer to Tauris, famous in this Histo­
rie, aswell in respect of some battells there foughten,
as also of the death of Generall Osman, who died there.

Sangiacco, Barbarous. a Lord, or a kind of Captaine.

Sardar, Turkish. Captaine of the Iannizzaries, Captaine of the
Armie, and properly the Generall.

Saru, Barbarous. a Citie in Media the greater.

Sasuar, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.

Sciam, Barbarous. the Citie of Damasco. Look Damasco.

Scutar, and Scutari, Barbarous. sometimes called Chalcedon, Auncient. a
Citie in Asia, right ouer against Constantinople. Some
do erroniously call it Chrysopolis, Auncient.

Sechi, Barbarous. a Citie in Atropatia bordering vpon Georgia.

Seida, and Seit, Barbarous. in old time called Sidonia, Auncient. a Citie on
the Sea-cost in Drusia.

Sembran, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.

Semitarra, Barbarous. a Scimitarre, a long crooked Sword. A
Faulchon.

Ser, Barbarous. a Riuer sometimes called Cirus, Auncient. that watreth
the South part of Georgia.

Sessa. Look Tocca and Turbante.

Siec, Barbarous. an old, wise, Religious, learned, and prudent man.
A man of good, and holie life.

Siliurea, a Citie in Thracia called Selymbria: Which the 
Persian calleth Selimbria, and Nicolo Nicolio, Seliurie.

Sinibra, or Simbra in Ptolomie Auncient. It is now called Erzi­
rum, fower daies iourney distant from Trabisonda.

Siras, Barbarous. some call it Persepolis, Auncient. and some Ciropolis. Auncient.
It is the chiefe palace of the Region of Persia.

Siuan, and Siruania, Barbarous. sometimes called Media Atro­
patia. The Hebrewes called it Madian, Auncient. 

Siuas, Barbarous. in old time Sebastapolis, Auncient. a Citie in Natolia.

Soffi, and Sofito, Persian. an auncient word signifying a wise
man, learned and skilfull in Magike Naturall. It is
growen to be the common name of the Emperour of
Persia.

Soffian, Barbarous. a place neer vnto Tauris. It may be perhaps
the auncient Soffia.

Soldin, Barbarous. a Citie vpon the Sea-coast of Soria, destroyed 
long ago. It was called in old time Seleucia Pieria, Auncient. 
within fiue miles whereof the Riuer Orontes dischar­
geth it self into the Sea: But Castaldo in his description
of Asia, doeth not describe it in deed, as it standeth.

Soria, Barbarous. in times past the Region of Syria, Auncient. 

Spahini, Turkish. a companie of Turkish Souldiers so called.

Spaoglani, Barbarous. a companie of foote-men, inferiour in de­
gree to the Iannizzaries.

Stanbul, by the Turkes and Arabians so called, in steed
of Constantinople.

Subassi, Barbarous. The Lieutenant or Captaine of a Garrison or
Guard.

Sultania, a Citie in great Media.

Sultano, or Sultan, Barbarous. a Captain. A great Lord. It is verie
often vsed for the Emperour of Turkie: as Sultan Amu­
rath, the great Turk Amurath.

Sumachi, and Sumachia, Barbarous. the chiefe Palace of Atro­
patia.



Sunni, Barbarous. a man of sound faith, and sincere opinion in
matter of Religion.

Sur, Barbarous. a Citie vpon the Sea-coast of Soria, in old time
called Tyrus, Auncient. 


T.
TArtari, and Tatar, Barbarous. the Tartarians, inhabiting Scy­
thia and Sarmatia.

Tatar-Chan, Barbarous. the chiefe Lord or Gouernour of the Tar­
tarians. He is called the great Chan of Tartaria.

Tauris, and Taruis, Read the Letter to S. Mario Corrado
in the end of this booke.

Techisnandan, Barbarous. Certain Mountaines in Caramania De­
serta.

Teflis and Tiflis, a Citie in Armenia, but belonging to
the Georgians.

Testis, Turkish. a Processe or Bill of complaint, put vp by the 
Plaintife.

Teracan, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia. 

Tocca, Barbarous. the round Roll, which the Barbarians vse to
weare on their heades. It is also called Sessa and Tur­
bante.

"sessa" not found in OED in this sense.



Tomanis, a Citie in Armenia, but belonging to the Ge­
orgians, verie famous for the notorious & treacherous
straites that are neer it.

Trabisondo, Barbarous. a Sea coast Citie vpon Pontus Euxinus,
called in old time Trapezantium, Auncient. 

Triala, Barbarous. a place in Armenia, renowmed for a number of
Churches there, which held of the Romish Religion.

Tripoli, Barbarous. a Sea-coast Citie in Asia and Africa.

Turbanie, Barbarous. a white Roll, which the Barbarians weare



vpon their heades. Look Tocca.

Turbat, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.

Turcoman, a Citie betwixt Tauris and Casbin.

Turcomanni, a people mingled among the Turkes and
Persians.

Turcomania the greater, of old called Great Armenia, Auncient. 

Tursis, Barbarous. a Citie in Parthia.


V.
VAn, Barbarous. a Citie in the Martian Marish.

Visier, Barbarous. a chiefe Counsailour, or Gouernour gene­
rall of the State of Turkie.

Vlac, and Volacchi, Turkish. Postes, or Currors to run of a mes­
sage in hast.

Vlu-Bassi, Barbarous. the Captain of a certain number of Souldi­
ers, but not so high in degree as an Aga is.


Z.
ZAffo, and Giaffa, Barbarous. a Citie by the Sea-side, in old times
called Ioppa, Auncient. 

Zagatai, Barbarous. certain Tartarians, comprehended vnder the
name of the Sogdiani.

"Sogdiani" appears to antedates the earliest OED citation for "Sogdian" (1700).



Zaghen, Barbarous. a City in Armenia, inhabited by the Georgians.

Zaini, Turkish. a noble companie of valiant Souldiers.

Zanga, Barbarous. a Citie in great Armenia.

Zante, Barbarous. an Island in the Ionian Sea, called in old time
Zacynthus, Auncient. 

Zine, Barbarous, certain festiual signes and shewes of publike ioy.

Zuiria, Barbarous. a Region lying at the rootes of Mount Cauca­
sus, towards the Hircanian Sea, and was called in old
time, Albania, Auncient. 



FINIS








