
 


1577

THE
Historie of Irelande
from the first inhabitation
thereof, vnto the yeare 1509.
Collected by Raphaell Holinshed,
and continued till the yeare 1547.
by Richard Stanyhurst.


AT LONDON,
¶ Imprinted for Iohn
Hunne.

God saue the Queene.





¶ A Treatise contayning a playne and perfect Description 
of Irelande, with an Introduction, to the better vnderstanding of 
the Hystories, appartayning to that Islande: compyled by 
Richard Stanyhurst, and written to the Ryght Honorable, Syr Henry Sydney 
Knight, Lorde Deputie of Irelande, Lorde president of Wales, 
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and 
one of hir Maiesties priuie Counsell with­
in hir realme of England.



There was of late dayes one of the Peeres 
of England sent to Weiseford as Commissi­
oner, to decide the controuersies of that cou~­
trey, and earing in affable wise the rude com­
plaintes of the countrey clownes, he concey­
ued here and there, sometyme a worde, other 
whyles a sentence. The noble man beyng ve­
ry glad that vpon hys first commyng to Ire­
land, he vnderstood so many wordes, told one 
of hys familiar frends, that he stoode in very 
great hope, to become shortly a well spoken 
man in the Irishe, supposing that the blunte
people had pratled Irishe, all the while they 
iangled Englishe. Howbeit to this day, the 
dregs of the olde auncient Chaucer English, 
are kept as well there as in Fingall. As they 
terme 

a spider, an attercop, 
a wispe, a wad, 
a lumpe of bread, a pocket or a pucket,

"pocket" and "pucket" not found in OED in this sense.

 
a Sil­
libuck, a copprouse,

"copprousse" not found in OED in this sense.

 
a faggot, a blease, or a 
blaze, for the short burning of it, as I iudge, 
a Phisition, a leache, 
a gappe, a sharde,

"gappe" not found in OED in this sense.

 
a 
base court or quadrangle  
a bawen, or rather, 
as I suppose, a barton: 
the household or folkes, 
 meany: 
Sharppe, keene, 
estraunge, vncouth, 
easie, eeth or eefe,
a dunghill, a mizen, 
as for 
the worde bater, that in English purporteth 
a lane, bearing to an high way, I take it for a 
meere Irishe worde, that crepte vnawares
into the English, thorough the daily enter­
course of the English and Irish inhabitants. 

And where as commonly in all countreys, 
the women speake most neately and pertely, 
whiche Tully in hys thirde booke de Oratore, 
speakyng in the person of Grassus, seemed to 
haue obserued, yet notwithstandyng in Ire­
land it falleth out contrary. For the women 
haue in theyr English tongue an harrish and 
broade kynd of pronunciation, with vtteryng 
their wordes so peeuishly & faintly, as though 
they were halfe sicke, and ready to call for a 
possette. And most commonly in wordes of 
two sillables, they giue the last the accent. As 
they say, Markeate, Baskeate, Gossoupe, 
Pussoate, Robart, Niclase, &c. which doubt­
lesse doth disbeautifie their Englishe aboue 
measure. And if they could be weaned from 
that corrupt custom, there is none that could 
dislyke of their English.





  