


l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a
T h e  N e w  F o u n d  W o r l d,  o r  A n t a r c t i c 
s t c  2 3 9 5 0
v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 2 1 )





The New
Found Worlde, or
Antarctike, wherin is contai­
ned wonderful and strange
things, as well as humaine crea­
tures, as Beastes, Fishes, Foules, and Ser­
pents, Trees, Plants, Mines of
Golde and Siluer: garnished with
many learned aucthorities,
traualled and written in the French
tong, by that excellent learned
man, master ANDREVVE
THEVET.
And now newly translated into Englishe,
wherein is reformed the errours of 
the auncient Cosmo­
graphers.

London: Henry Bynneman, for Thomas Hacket, 1568.







There are also 
certaine Trees, that at certaine times of the yeare, ca­
steth good Gumme, the which they call Dragons bloude,  
and for to get it out, they pearse the tree foote, opening it 
wide and deepe. This tree beareth a yellow fruit, as great 
as a Cherrie, the which is very good to refreshe one, whe­
ther he haue the Ague or otherwise.



This kinde of gumme is not vnlike to Cynaber of which 
writeth Dioscoridus, saying, as for Cynaber sayth he, is 
brought from Africa, and is solde deare, so that there is 
not ynough to satisfie paynters: it is redde, and therefore 
some iudge it to be Dragons bloude, and so hath Plinie 
thought it in his booke the .33. of his naturall Historie the 
seuenth Chapter, of the which as well Cynaber as Dra­
gons bloude is not at this day founde among vs so natu­
rall, as the elders haue described, but the one & the other 
is artificiall: therefore knowing what the elders haue 
iudged it, and that which I haue knowen of this gumme, 
I woulde esteme it to be altogether like to Cynaber and 
Dragons bloude, hauing a softe, and a cold vertue.




THE elders haue called or named a Promentarie,  
a 
point of a lande that Iceth out long in the sea, the 
which may be seene a farre of, and that this day it is 
called with vs a Cappe, as a thing eminent aboue others,
as the heade is aboue the rest of the body? also some will 
write Promontorium à Prominendo the which to my 
iudgement is best. 




Nowe there resteth to speake
of an herbe that they name in their languge Orselio: this 
herbe groweth on the tops of high and accessible rockes without any earthe, of the which there is great 
aboun­
daunce, and for to gather it, they fasten ropes on these 
Mountaines or rockes, then they climb vpwarde by the
lower ende of this corde or rope, and scraping the rocke
with certaine instruments that they haue, make it to fall
as a chimney sweeper doeth, the which they reserue, and 
let it down by a rope, in baskets or other vessels. The vse
of this herbe, is for to make coloures, as here before we
haue shewed. 

The evidently Portuguese word "Orselio" is not found in OED.





This line Equinoctiall, or 
Circle Equinoctiall, or else Equator is a trace imagined,
of the Sunne by the midst of the world, the which deui­
deth in two equall partes, two times the yeare, that is to
wit, the Fourth of September, and theleuenth of March,
and then the Sunne passeth directly by the Zenithe of the 
earth, & others that may be iudged betwene the two
Poles, the Sunne going from the East to the West: it is
true that the sunne goeth al the yeare by the Ecliptike to
the Zodiake, sauing on the dayes aboue named, & standeth
directly ouer them that inhabit there. Furthermore they
haue right course, without the one of the Poles be more ere­
cted than the other: the day & the night are to them equall, &



therefore they were named Equinoctiall, and according
as the Sunne doth depart from the one to the other Pole,
there is vnequalities of dayes and nights, and elevation
of the Pole. Then the Sunne declining by litle and litle
from this point Equinoctial, goeth by his Zodiake almost
to the Tropike of Capricorn, and passing no Farther, cau­
seth the Soltice of winter: then returning, passeth by the 
sayd Equinoctiall, till that he come to the signe of Cancer,
whereas is the Solstice of Sommer: therefore he maketh 
vj. signes parting from the Equinoctiall to eche one of
these Tropikes.




The Marsouins or sea Hogs,  after that they
had perceiued our ship from farre, dyd swimme a mayne
against vs, the which gaue to the Mariners a certayne
signe and forshewing of that parte from whence the
winde ought to come, for these Sea beastes (say
they) will swimme against one, and in a greate com­
pany as foure or fiue hundreth together. This fish is na­
med Marsouin, of Marissies, in Latine, which is as much 
to say as a sea Hog, because that he is like almoste to
Hogs on the earth, for he hath the lyke grunt or noyse,
and hath the snoute lyke the ende of a Canne, and on



the heade a certayne cundite or opening, by the which 
he yaunneth or purgeth, euer as the Whale. 





