


 A TABLE,
Explaining the most difficult words, and
Terms of Art, used in this Book:
Alphabetically selected, for the help of
The plain English Souldier.

A
ANgle,  Is a Geometricall terms for a Corner, included
by two lines, of which there are three sorts; to wit,
A Right, An Acute, and An Obtuse Angel.
1. A Right angle, Is when the two lines meeting doe
frame a just square Angle of 90. Degrees.
2. An Acute, Is when the two lines doe enclose lesse then a
Square, thereby becoming more sharpe, and therefore
Acute, from the Latine word Acutus, sharpe.
3. An Obtuse Angle, Is when the two lines doe include
more then the Square, making it thereby the more blunt
and dull, and is therefore called Obtuse, from Obtusus,
which is Latine for blunt, or dull.

Astragall, Is a term of Architecture, and is (according to
Vitruvius, an ancient and famous Author thereof) a
ring to deck or adorn the neck of a Columne; and is there­
fore transferred to Cannon, agreeing somewhat in
shape with the Columne, or Pillar.

Avenue, Comes of the French, and is the space that is left
for passage to and fro, in and out a Camp, Garrison, or
Quarter: when the place is either fortified with a line of
Communication, or Barrocada's.




C
CApriccio, Is an Italian word for the rough draught,
or first invention of any thing: and is to be pronounced,
as if it were written Capritchio.

This use of "Capriccio" antedates the earliest OED quotation in this sense (3; 1678).



Center, Is an individuall point in the middle of any thing;
As the Center of the Polygon is the middle of the Po­
lygon: a terme in Geometry.

Counterscarfe or Counterscarpe, Is that side of the
moate, which is opposite to the Fortresse.

Cylinder, Is that part of the bore of a peece which re­
mains empty when the peece is laden, and takes its appel­
lation from the latine word Cylindrus, the roller by 
which the bore was formed.


D
DEcagon, Is a Greek compound, and it signifieth a fi­
gure of tenne Angles.

Dodecagon, Is likewise a Greek word, signifying a fi­
gure of twelve Angles.

"Dodecagon" antedates the earliest OED quotation (1658).



Degrees, A degree according to the Mathematicks is 
the 360. part of the circumference of the world. And
consequently of any Circle; for Euclide affirms all Cir­
cles to be equall. So that the Circle so divided, (to wit,
into 360. parts) being cut at right Angles in the Center,
each Quadrant thereof shall be of 90. Degrees.
Note,
That all Calculations for the Degrees of Angles have re­
ference to a Circle so divided.

Demi, Is the halfe, as a Demi-Cannon, (that is) halfe
a Cannon.

Diagram, A word used by the Mathematicks for any thing
that is demonstrated by lines; a Greeke compound.



Diameter, Is a Geometricall terme, derived from the
Greeke for the extent of a Circle, and is a straight or
measuring line, that crosseth from border to border, or
from side to side of any Figure.


E
ENchiridion, Signifies a handfull of any thing; also a
manuell, or portable volume or booke: it is originally
compounded of Greeke words, which doe include so much.

Enneagon, Is also compounded of the Greeke, signifying a
Figure or superficies consisting of nine sides, and Angles,
but it chiefly takes its denomination from its Angles.

"Enneagon" antedates the earliest OED quotation (1660).



Exteriour, Is the outward part, or side of any thing.


G
GEometry, As Adrianus Metius defines it, is the
Art of measuring well.
Now to give you somewhat more satisfaction herein, I
will a little enlarge this definition, being assured that it can­
not be lost labour for any who desires to peruse this Booke.
1. To measure well, is to interpret, and exercise the measu­
rable nature, power, propriety, state, and use of any thing.
2. The subject of Geometry is Magnitude, and Mag­
nitude is a continued quantity, whose parts agree to a common
terme, but a terme is the extreame of magnitude.
3. Magnitude, is either a line, or a lined figure.
A line, is onely magnitude in length.
A lined figure is made out of lines composed; or as Ramus
defines it,
A lined Figure, is more then Magnitude in length, and is
either a Superficies, or a Body.
A Superficies, Is onely the surface of a lined figure of length
and breadth.



A Body, Is a Figure consisting of length, breadth, and
depth.
The first part therefore of measure, is to be understood of
lines.
The second of Superficies.
But the third, of Bodies.
  So much shall suffice to explaine what Geometry is,
but to shew amply its extent and power, requires a
greater writer and volume.


H
HExagon, Is a Greeke compound, signifying a Figure
of sixe Angles.

Heptagon, Is in the like manner compounded, and derived
of the Greeke, and doth signifie a Figure consisting of
seaven Angles.


I
ISoceles, Looke for Triangle.

Ichnographie, Is a description of any work, according
to its tract or tracery on the ground, as it were the foote-­
steppings of the worke.  It is a Greeke word.

Interiour, Is the inward part or side of any thing.

Irregular, Is a disagreeing of the one side, (or more) to the
rest of the Figure, which causeth also an incoherence a­
mongst the Angles: wherefore any Figure whose An­
gles and sides doth disagree in dimension, is called an
irregular Figure.


O
OBlong, Is a Geometricall terme for a Quadrangular
Figure, whose length exceeds its breadth, of which
the most proper (distinguished by their severall termes)



are these sixe following.
1. Sesquialter, Which is when halfe the height is added to
its length.
2. Sesquitertia, Which is when a third part is added to
its length.
3. Sesquiquarta, That is when a fourth part is added.
4. Diagonea, Which is when the Oblong is increased to
the length of the diagonall of the single square.
The Diagonall, Is a line drawn from corner to corner.
5. Superbitiens tertias, so called (quasi super bis tertias)
because the length thereof is encreased by two thirds.
6. And lastly, Dupla, which is a double square.
The which seaven proportions of squares: to wit, Quadra­
tus, or perfect square: Sesquialter, Sesquitertia, Ses­
quiquarta, Diagonea, Superbitiens tertias, and the
Dupla, or double square, are held to be more pleasing to
the sight then any mediocrity between either of the said
proportions.


"Diagenea" not found in the OED (but cf. "diagony," n., from 1690); "Superbitiens tertias" not found in OED.



Octogon, From the Greeke signifies a Figure which con­
sisteth of eight Angles.

Orthographie, Also a Greek compound, signifies in this
place chiefly the upright erection of any work. as it doth
present it selfe to the view being finished. As also it is
some times taken for true, and exact writing.


P
PArapet, Is a breast worke, taken from the Italian, signi­
fying equall to the brest, or brest high.

Parallelogram. Is any Figure which hath his lines every
where a like distant, each side running parallel one unto
the other.
Those lines are said by Euclide to be parallel, which being
drawn forth to an infinite extent, shall run equi-distant,



and neither crosse, nor touch one the other.

Pentagon, Is a Figure of five Angles, Greek.

Peroration, The conclusion, or last part of a discourse.

Polygon, Is any Figure composed of many Angles, and may
be applied either to the Regular, or Irregular.

Profile, An Italian word for that designe that showes the
side with the rising and falling of any work, as a face
drawn side-wayes, is called the Profile.


R
REgular, That is uniforme, or alike in all parts, both
in forme and dimension.


S
SAp, or trenches of Approach.
 
Scala, or a Scale, Is a measure proportionable to the
draught: as the just measure must be to the work it self,
whether it be of Feet, Yards, Perches, or Rods. And
is the onely compendious, and exact demonstration of the
proportions of any work, which is to be expressed by de­
signe.

Scenographie, Is the modell or draught of any work present­
ed with its shadowes, according as the worke it self showes,
with its dimensions according to the Rules of Pro­
spective.

Semi, that is to say, the halfe; As a semidiameter, halfe
the diameter.


T
TRiangle, A Figure of three Angles, of which there
are sixe sorts.
1. Equilaterall, Which is when the three sides thereof are
of an equall length, and the Angles all equall among them
selves.



2. An Isoceles triangle, Is that which hath two equall
sides, and two equall Angles opposite to those sides.
3. All irregular triangles, Having three unequall sides
and Angles,  are knowne in Geometry, under the term of
Scalenum.
4. An Oxugoneum, Is a triangle having three acute
Angles.
5. An Amblugoneum, Is a triangle having two acute
Angles, and one obtuse.
6. And lastly, an Orthogoneum, Is a triangle which
hath one right Angle.
These distinct Terms are properly to be given to each kind
in a demonstration, where many triangles come in compe­
tition for distinction sake, otherwise it is not requisite to
be too nice therein.

"Oxygoneum," "Amblugoneum," and "Orthogoneum" are not found in the OED.




There are many other words (perhaps in the very explana­
tion it self) which to some may chance need explaining.
But I conceive such are not worthy the taking notice of.













