



&leaf; A briefe Catalogue of the words of Art, with the
explanation thereof.

A


ABort, or abortive fruit, is an untimely
birth.



Abstersive, i. scouring, cleansing, or wi­
ping away, such as the Greeks call Smecti­
ca, and they enter into sope and washing 
balls.



Accesse, i. a fit, whether it be of an ague, falling
sicknesse, or any such diseases as returne at 
times.



Acetabulum, or Acetable, a measure among the
Romans of liquor especially, but yet of drie 
things also: the same that Oxybaphon in 
Greeke: and for that (as both words do im­
port) they used to dip their meats in vine­
gre out of such, it may well goe for a saucer 
with us: for it containeth (as some thinke) 
fifteen drams, which grow near to two oun­
ces, of which capacitie our small saucers
are: but as others suppose, it receiveth two 
ounces and an halfe, the measure of ordina­
rie saucers.



Acrimonie, i. Sharpnesse.



Actually, i. sensibly and presently, as fire is actu­
ally hot.



Aditiales, or Adijciales epulæ, were great and
sumptuous feasts or suppers, held by the
Pontifices or high priests, in testimonie of 
publicke joy.



Almonds. See Amygdals.



Amphoræ, a measure in Rome of liquors only:
It seemeth to have taken that name of the
two ears which it had, of either side one: it
contained eight Congios, which are much 
about eight wine gallons, or rather between
seven and eight: so as in round reckoning it
may go for a ferkin, halfe kilderkin, or halfe 
sesterne with us.



Amygdals, be kernils at the root of the tongue,
subject to inflammations and swellings, oc­
casioned by deflux or falling downe of hu­
mours from the head: they be called Antia­
des, Paristhmia, and Tonsillæ: the foresaid
infirmities also incident unto them, do like­
wise carie the same denominations.



Antidotes, i. countrepoisons properly, defen­
satives, or preservatives against poisons, pe­
stilence, or any maladie whatsoever.



Antipathie, i. contrarietie, enmitie, and repug­
nancie in nature, as between fire and water,
the vine and the Colewort, &c.



S. Anthonies fireis a rising in the skin, occasio­
ned by hote bloud mixt with abundance of 
choller, and such be the shingles and other
wildfires called in Greeke Erysipelas.



Aquosities, be waterish humours, apt to engen­
der the dropsies called Ascites and Leuco­
phlegmatia.



Aromatized, i. Spiced.



Arthriticall griefs, such as possesse the joynts,
as all the sorts of gout.



Astrictive or Astringent, be such things as 
bind the bodie or any part thereof.



Attractive, i. drawing; as the loadstone draw­
eth yron, amber straws or bents, Dictamnus
arrow-heads or spills out of the bodie, and
cupping-glasses (or ventoses) humours and
wind.



Austere,  harsh or hard, as in fruits unripe, and
hard wines of hedge grapes.



Axinomantie, a kind of magicke divination by 
an axe head red hot.



B


BAsis in a compound medecine is, that drug
or simple which is predominant and carieth
the greatest force in it, as the ground therof,
whereupon the whole taketh the name; as
Poppie in Diacodion, Quinces in Diacy­
donium, &c.



Bole, is the forme of a medecine when it may
be given in grosse manner at a knives point
to the quantitie of a nutmeg at a time, un­
till the whole receit be taken.



Browning, a tearme usuall in the mouths of ma­
riners and winnowers of corne, when they 
are calmed and doe call for wind.



Bulbs, although Plinie seemed to give that 
name unto some one speciall hearbe, yet it



signifieth generally all those as have round
roots, as Onions, Squilla, Wakerobin, and 
such like; whereupon these & other of that
kind are said to have bulbous roots.



C


Cacochymie, is that indisposition of the bodie
wherein there is abundance of ill humours.



Calcining, i. the burning of a minerall, or any
thing, for to correct the malignitie of it, or
reduce it into powder, &c.



Callositie, thicknesse and hardnesse of skin in
manner senslesse, as in fistulaes, and under
our heels.



To Carminate, is to make more fine and thin
the grosse humors, by such medicins as by
their heat are apt to cut and dissolve them;
wherupon they likewise be called Carmina­
tive: a tearme received by Apothecaries,
and borrowed from those that card wooll.



Cancer, is a swelling or sore comming of me­
lancholie bloud, about which the veins ap­
peare of a blacke or swert colour, spread in
manner of a Creifish clees; whereupon it
tooke that name in Latine, like as in Greeke
Carcinoma. And such ulcers as in that sort
be maintained and fed with that humor, are
called Cancerous, & be untoward to heale,
worse commonly for the handling.



Carnositie, i. fleshly substance.



Cataplasm, a pultesse or grosse maner of plastre.



Cartilage, in man and beast, is a gristle; in roots
and fruits, that substance which we observe
in the Radish root, and the outward part of
the Cucumber, as Plinie seemeth to take it;
which therupon be called Cartilagineous.



Cataract, is a dimnesse of sight caused by an
humor gathered and hardened between the
tunicle of the eye called Cornea, and the
Crystalline humour; it is next cousin to 
blindnesse.



Causticke, i. burning, blistering, or scalding.



To Cauterize, is to seare or burn by a Cauterie.



Cauterie actuall, is fire it selfe, or scalding liquor:
and so a searing yron, gold or other mettall
made red hot, is called an Actuall cauterie,
which without the help of our naturall heat
doth worke presently.



Cauterie potentiall, is that which will raise bli­
sters and burn in time after it is once set on
worke by the heat of our bodie, as Cantha­
rides, Sperewort, &c.



Ceres, the first inventresse of corne, the sowing 
and use thereof.



Cerote, is of a middle nature, between an oint­
ment and a plastre, not so hard as the one
nor so soft as the other.



Cicatrices in eyes, bee whitish spots, otherwise 
called Pearls: they be the skarrs also remai­
ning after a sore is healed up: and so a place 
is said to bee cicatrized, when it is newly
skinned up and healed.



Circulation, is the devise of subliming or ex­
tracting water or oile, by a stillatorie, a lem­
bicke, or such, because the vapour before it
be resolved into water or oile seemeth to go 
round circlewise.



Clysterized, i. conveighed up by a clyster into
the guts.



Cœliaci, i. be those that through weaknesse of sto­
macke are troubled with a continuall flux of
the bellie.



Colature, a thin liquor that hath passed tho­
row a strainer or colander.



Colliquation, is a falling away, & consumption
of the radicall humour, or solid substance of
the bodie.



Collyries, are properly medicins applied to the
eies in liquid forme; whereas the drie kind
be rather called Sief & Alcohol, especially
in powder: howbeit Plinie attributeth this
tearme to all eyesalves whatsoever. Also it
seemeth that he meaneth thereby, tents to 
be put in a fistulous ulcer, as in the pa.509b.
510k.



Collution, a liquor properly to wash the mouth,
teeth, and gumbs withall.



Concocted, i. altered to that substance by natu­
rall heat, as either in health may serve to­
nourish, or in sicknesse is apt to be expelled.



Consolidat, to knit, unite, & make sound againe
that which was broken or burst.



Concrete, i. hardened and growne thicke.



Condite, i. preserved in some convenient li­
quor.



To Concorporat, i. to mix and unite togither
into one masse.



Consistence, i. substance or thicknesse.



Constipate, i. to harden and make more fast and
compact.



Contraction in sinews, a shrinking or drawing
of them in too short.



Contusions, i. Bruises.



Convulsions, painfull cramps.



Criticall daies be such, as in short diseases and
those of quicke motion, doe give light un­
to the Physician of life or death. Plinie ob­
serveth the odd daies to be most significant,
and those usually determine of health; and 
the even daies contrariwise: so that the se­
venth is Rex, i. a gracious prince; the sixth
Tyrannus, i. a cruell tyrant.





Cruditie. See Indigestion.



Cyath, a small measure, both of liquid and drie
things; the twelft part of a Sextarius, which
was twentie ounces: whereby it appeareth,
that a cyath was one ounce, one half ounce,
one dram, and one scruple: it may goe with
us for foure ordinarie spoonefuls.



Cubit, a measure, from the elbow to the middle
finger stretched forth at length, which went
ordinarily for 24 fingers breadth or 18 in­
ches, which is one foot and an halfe: yet Pli­
nie in one place maketh mention of a shor­
ter cubit, namely from the elbow to the end
of the fist or knuckles, when the fingers bee 
drawne in close to the hand.



Cutanean eruptions, bee such wheales, pushes,
or scabs, as doe breake out of the skin, and
disfigure it.



D


Debilitie, i. weakenesse or feeblenesse.



Decoction, a liquour wherein things have
beene sodden.



Defensative, in medicines taken inwardly, are
those which resist venome or pestilent hu­
mor: in outward applications, such as de­
fend the sore or place affected from the flux
or fall of humours thither.



Denarius, a coine of silver in Rome, and in o­
ther countries of gold, the same that Drach­
ma Attica, i. a dram in weigt, which is vij.d.
ob. of our money; and the peece in gold an­
swereth neare to a full French crowne. In
poise it goeth for a dram.



Dentifrices, are meanes in Physicke to pre­
serve the teeth, and make them white and 
faire.



Depilatorie, are those medicines which either
fetch off the haire, or hinder it from com­
ming up againe at all, or at leastwise from
growing thicke. They were called in Greeke
and Latine both, Psilothra.



Desiccative, i. drying.



Digestives, be those medicines, which taken in­
wardly, helpe concoction of meat or hu­
mors; or applied without unto a sore, doe 
comfort the place, and make way for speedy
healing.



Dislocations, when the bones bee either out of 
joint, or else displaced.



To Disopilate, i. to open.



To Dissipate, i. to scatter and dispatch.



Distortion, crookednesse or turning awrie un­
naturally.



Diureticall, such things as provoke urine.



Dose, i. that weight or quantitie of any medi­
cine that may be given either conveniently
or without daunger to the patient.



Dram, the eight part of an ounce, which is the
weight of a Romane denier or Denarius.



Dysenterie, is properly the exulceration or sore
in the guts, whereupon ensueth besides the
painefull wrings of the bellie, a flux also of 
bloud at the seege, and therefore it is usually
taken for the bloudie flix.



E


EClogues. See Eidyls.



Electuaries, bee medicinable compositions
or confections to be taken inwardly, made of
choise drougs, either to purge the humors,
to strengthen the principall parts, or to 
withstand any infirmitie for which they are
made. The substance is betweene a syrrup
and a conserve, but more enclining to the
consistence of conserves.



Eidylls, or Eidyllia, bee small Poëmes or Pam­
phlets written by Poëts, such as Theocritus 
in Greeke compiled, and much like unto
the Pastorals or Eclogues of Virgil in La­
tine.



Embrochation, is a devise that Physicians have
for to foment the head or any other part,
with a liquour falling from aloft upon it,
in manner of raine; whereupon it tooke
the name in Greeke Embroche, and hath
found none yet in Latine, unlesse we should
use Superfusio.



Emollitives, medicines that do soften any hard
swelling.



Empirickes, were those Physicians, who with­
out any regard either of the cause in a dis­
ease, or the constitution and nature of the
patient, went to worke with those medicines
whereof they had experience in others, fall
it out as it would.



Empiricke bookes of Diodorus, contained re­
ceits approved and found effectuall by ex­
perience.



Emunctories, bee those kernellie places in the
bodie, by which the principall and noble
parts doe void their superfluities, or such
things as offend, to wit, under the eares for
the braine, the arme-pits for the heart, and 
the share for the liver, &c.





Emplastration in the Hortyard, is grafting by
inoculation with a scutcheon; in Physick, the
applying of a salve or plastre.



Epilepsie, i. the falling sicknesse.



Errhines be devises make like tents, sharper at 
one end than the other, to bee put up into
the nose, either to cure some ulcer there, or
to draw downe and void humors out of the
head, or to provoke sneesing, &c.



Eschare, is that crust which ariseth upon a cau­
terie, either actuall or potentiall, as also the
roufe or scab that groweth upon a sore.



Evacuation, i. Voidance and riddance of any
thing out of the bodie by vomite, purging,
bleeding, sweating, &c.



Excalfactorie, i. Heating or chaufing.



Excoriation, i. fretting the skin off, when a part
is made raw: a way to exulceration.



Excrescence, i. overgrowing unnaturally of any 
thing in mans bodie.



Exoticall, i. forraine, and brought from other
countries.



Exorcismes, i. coniurations by certain charmes
and spels.



Exorcists, they that practised such Exorcismes.



To Expectorat, i. to rid and discharge out of the 
breast by coughing or reaching.



Expiatorie, were sacrifices or oblations for to
make satisfaction and attonement.



Exiccative, See Desiccative.



Extenuat, i. to make thin.



Exulceration, i. a soreness of any part inward or
outward, when not onely the skin is off, but
the humor doth fret deeper still. 



Exulcerative, bee such things as are apt to eat
into the flesh and make an ulcer.



F


FErmentation, i. an equall mixture of things
working as it were together: a tearme bor­
rowed from the levaine, which disperseth it
selfe into the whole masse or lumpe of
dough.



Filaments, bee the small strings that hang to a 
root like threads or haires, which some call
the beard of the root: and in resemblance
thereof, other things growing likewise, bee
so called.



Fissures, clifts, or chaps, whether it bee in the
hands, feet, lips, or fundament.



Flatuosities, i. windinesse gathered within the 
bodie.



Flora, the goddesse of Flowers among the Pai­
nims.



Fomentations properly be devises for to be ap­
plied unto any affected part, either to com­
fort and cherish it, or to allay the paine, or
else to open the pores to make way for oint­
ments and plastres. If they be liquid things,
they are laid too by the meanes of bladders,
spunges, or such like: if drie, within bags or 
quilts.



Fractures, i. bones broken.



Frictions or Frications, rubbings of the bodie
upward or downeward gently or otherwise,
as the cause requireth.



Frontall, the forme of an outward medicine
applied unto the forehead, to allay pain, to
procure sleepe, &c.



Fukes, i. paintings, to beautifie the face in out­
ward appearance. They are called at this day
complexions, whereas they bee cleane con­
trarie: for the complexion is naturall, and
these altogether artificiall.



Fumosities bee vapours steaming up into the 
head, troubling the braine.



Fungous, i. of an hollow and light substance
like to Fusses or Mushromes.



G


GArgarismes bee collutions of the mouth,
and parts toward the throat, either to
draw downe and purge humours out of the
head, or to represse and restraine their flux,
or to mundifie and heale any sore there 
growing.



Gargarising or Gargling is the action of using a
liquor to the said purpose.



Gestation, an exercise of the bodie, by beeing
carried in coach, litter, upon horsebacke, or
in a vessell on the water.



Glandulous swellings. See Kings evill.



Gleir, i. the white of an egge.



Gymnicke exercises, were those that were per­
formed by men naked, and the place for
such exercises, was thereupon called Gym­
nasium.



H


HAbit of the bodie, is taken for the outward
parts therof, opposit unto the bowels and 
principall within; which beeing comforted
and fortified, doe thrust forth offensive mat­
ters to the habit and exterior skin.



Hemine, a measure in Rome, as well of liquors
as drie things: so called, because it was halfe
Sextarius: it contained ten ounces, and is



somewhat under our wine pint, it is the
same that Cotyla in Greeke.



Humiditie, i. moisture.



Hydromantia, a kind of magicall divination or
foreknowledge of things to come, by obser­
vation of the water.



Hydrophobie, is a symptome or accident befal­
ling to them that are bitten by a mad dog,
whereby they are afraid of water.



Hypochondriall parts, be the flanks or soft parts
under the short ribs.



I


ILiacke passion, the wrings and torments of
the upper small guts, occasioned by wind
or sharpe humors. Some improperly call it
the collicke of the stomacke.



Imbibition, a drinking or receiving of any li­
quor into a thing: as when drougs lie stee­
ped therein untill they be throughly soaked
therewith.



Impostumes, properly be collections or gathe­
rings of wind and humours especially be­
tweene parts of the bodie, wherupon there
appeareth a rising or swelling, and in time
they become corrupt and doe rankle, unlesse
by some meanes they be either drawn away
or dispersed. Some tearme them wens, how­
beit, the word is taken for inflammations 
and biles.



To Incorporat, is to mix and unite well toge­
ther.



To Incrassate, is to make thicke.



Indigestion, i. want of concoction and digesti­
on, by which meanes many crudities and 
raw humors are engendered, and by conse­
quence abundance of rheumes.



Inflation, i. swelling or puffing up with wind.



Infrangible, i. that cannot be broken.



Infusion signifieth the conveighance of some
medicinable liquour into the bodie by cly­
stre or other instrument. It importeth also
the steeping of drougs in a convenient li­
quor: and the liquor it selfe, when it is strai­
ned from the rest.



Ingredients, be those simples that goe unto the
making or any medicine compound.



Iniection, is the conveighance of any liquid
medicine by syringe or such like instrument
into any part of the bodie or hollow and fi­
stulous ulcer.



Insects, little vermine or small creatures, which
have (as it were) a cut or division betweene
their heads and bodies, as Pismires, Flies,
Grashoppers, under which are comprehen­
ded Earthwormes, Caterpillers, &c.



Insessions be bathing tubs or vessels halfe full,
wherin the patient may sit up to the middle
or above in some convenient decoction.



Intermittent feaver,, are those which come by
fits, and yeeld some rest betweene whiles.



Inunction, i. annointing.



Iulebs or Iuleps, be drinkes given commonly as
preparatives for to open the passages of the
inward parts, and to prepare the humours
for a purgation, made either of some stil­
led waters and syrrups mixed together, or
of a decoction sweetened with honey or su­
gar, or els mingled with syrrups.



K


Kings evill, is the hard swelling of the
Glandules or Kernels commonly about
the necke: they be called also Scrophules.



L


LAchrymal, is the corner of the eye wher­
in the teares appeare first, and thereof it
taketh the name.



Lassitude, is wearinesse or unlustinesse.



Lavature, Lotion, or Loture, is a liquour to
bath or wash withall: likewise to cleanse and
mundifie any part.



Ligula, Lingua, or Lingula, a small measure a­
mong the Romanes, both of liquour and
drie things, containing the fourth part of
Cyathus, to wit, three drams and one scrip­
tule or scruple, somewhat under halfe an 
ounce, and may goe well for our spoone­
full.



A Liniment is thicker than oyle, and thinner
than an ointment, it may be taken for a thin­
ner kind of ointment.



Lobes and fibres are the lappets and extreame
parts of the liver, with the maister veines
growing thereto.



Locall medicines, be those which are appropri­
at for the forehead, Errhine or Nasal for the 
nosthrils, &c. or to be applied outwardly as
ointments, which are not to be used before
generall or universall means by evacuation.



Loch or Lohoch, is a medicine more liquid than
an electuarie, appropriat for the lungs and
windpipe, and is to bee licked and let goe
downe leisurely.



Longaon, is the nethermost gut reaching to
the very seat or the fundament.



 

Luted, i. close stopped with cley, dough, or
such like.



M


MAturatives be medicines that help to ripen
any swelling impostume, bile, or botch.



Maturitie, is the ripenesse thereof.



Membranes, be fine skins which enwrap other
parts, as the brains, eyes, and muscles of the
flesh.



Metrenchyte, an instrument serving to infuse or
inject a liquid medicine into the matrice of
a woman, in manner of clystre.



Mitigatives, be such remedies as doe assuage
paine.



Mna or Mina, was a Roman weight, which poi­
sed twentie ounces, that is to say, the ordi­
narie pound, called Libra or Pondo, & two
third parts: for the common Libra called
Medica, weighed twelve ounces, so that 
Mina seemed to answere unto the measure
Sextarius.



Mollitive. See Emollitives.



Mordicative, is biting and stinging, as Senvie
seed.



Mucilage, is a slimie liquor drawne from some
roots or seeds, as from the marsh Mallow or
Althea root, the seed of Psillium or Flea­
wort and others.



Muscles be the fleshie parts of the bodie, conshy;
tained within their severall membranes or
skins.



N


NArcoticke medicines, bee those that be­
num and stupifie with their coldnesse,
as Opium, Hemlocke, and such like.



Nasals be Nose-tents. See Errhina.



Nerves, i. Sinewes.



Nodosities, hard knubs and knots growing up­
on the joints in old gouts, and in other
parts.



O


OBolus, halfe a scriptule, or the sixt part of a 
dram.



Obstructions, i. Stoppings.



Opiats, were properly at the first such electua­
ries or confections, which had a good
quantitie of Opium, i. the juice of Poppie
in them, such as Philonium and Requies,
which were devised to mittigat intollerable
paine, and to bring the patient to sleepe:
howbeit, in these daies all electuaries, even
cordials, in a liquid forme be called Opiats,
although there be not one grain of Opium
in them.



Opilation. See Obstruction.



Orthopnoicke, are those that have the disease
Orthopnœa, which is a difficultie of draw­
ing their wind, unlesse they sit upright.



Osses, be words cast forth at unwares, presaging
somewhat.



Otenchyte, an instrument, devised for to infuse
or poure some medicinable liquor into the
eares.



Oxycrate, a mixture of water and vinegre toge­
ther.



P


To PAlliat, i. to cover. And such cures be cal­
led Palliative, which search not to the
root and cause, but give a shew only of cure;
as when a sore is healed up aloft, and yet fe­
stereth underneath: and so sweet Poman­
ders doe palliat a stinking breath, occasio­
ned by a corrupt stomack or diseased lungs,
and such like.



Paradoxes, strange opinions.



Pectorals, i. such medicines as bee fit for the
breast and lungs.



Pellicles. See Membranes.



Penetrative, i. Percing.



Periodicall, such agues bee called, as returne at
their iust course from day to day, every third
fourth or fift day, &c.



Peripneumonie, is the inflammation of the
lungs.



Pessarie, is a devise made like a finger or sup­
positorie, to be put up into the natural parts
of a woman.



Phlebotomie, i. bloud-letting, or opening of a
veine by incision or pricke.



Phthysicke, to speake properly, is the consump­
tion of the bodie occasioned by the fault of
exulcerat and putrified lungs. But Plinie
otherwhiles seemeth to take it for any other
consumption.



Pomona, a devised goddesse among the Pai­
nims, of apples and such fruits.



Prodigies be straunge sights and wonderfull to­
kens, presaging some fearefull thing to 
come.



Propinquitie, nearenesse or affinitie.



Proscription, was a kind of outlawing and de­
priving a man of the protection of the state,


 
with confiscation of his lands and goods.



Propagat, to grow and encrease, after the man­
ner of Vine braunches, which being drawn
along in the ground from the motherstock
doe take root.



Propitious, i. gracious and mercifull.



Proximitie, neere neighbourhood or resem­
blance.



Ptisane, the decoction of husked Barley: a
grewell made therewith, or the creame
thereof.



Pulpous, i. full of pulpe, or resembling pulpe,
which is the soft substance in Apples or
such fruits, answerable to the flesh in living
bodies.



Purulent, yeelding filth and Attyr.



Putrefactive, such venomous medicines or
humors, as do corrupt and putrifie the part
of the bodie which they possesse.



Q


QVindecemvirs, were certain officers, fifteen
in number, joined in one commission.



R


REceptorie, a vessell standing underneath,
readie to receive that which droppeth
and destilleth from something above it.



Reciprocall, going and comming, as the tides
of the sea ebbing and flowing.



To Rectifie, i. to set streight, reforme, or a­
mend.



Repercussive, i. driving or smiting backe.



Residence, i. the setling toward the bottome, as
in urine.



Retentive facultie, i. the naturall power that ech
part or member of the bodie hath to hold
that which is committed unto it, the due
time, as the stomacke, meat; the bladder,
urine, &c.



Reverberation, i. rebounding or striking back.



Rhagadies, be properly the chaps in the funda­
ment or seat.



Rubified, i. made red, as when by application
of mustard plastres, called Sinapismes; or
beating a part that is benummed with Net­
tles, it recovereth a fresh colour againe,
whereupon such plastres be called Rubifica­
tive, and the operation is named by the
Greekes Phœnigmos.



Rupture, the disease of bursting, as when the
guts or other parts fall downe into the bag
of the cods.



S


SAlivation, is a drawing of humours to the
mouth, and a deliverie of them from
thence in manner of spittle.



Sarcling is the baring of roots, by ridding a­
way the earth and weeds from about them,
that did clog them.



Scarification, is a kind of pouncing or opening
of the skin by way of incision slightly, with
the fleame or launcet, either to give some
issue for the bloud & humors to passe forth,
or to prepare a place for the cupping-glasse
to extract more.



Schirre, is a hard swelling almost sencelesse.



Scriptule, or Scruple, is foure and twentie grains
weight, or the third part of a dram.



Scrophules. See Kings evill.



Seat, is the circumference or compasse about
the tuill or fundament.



Secundine, i. the afterbirth that infolded the in­
fant within the mothers wombe.



Seege, a stoole of easement, whereupon we sit
to discharge the ordure and excrements of
the guts.



Serosities, or Serous humours, bee the thinner
parts of the masse of bloud, answering to the
whey in milke, such as we see to floate upon
bloud that hath run out of a veine.



Sextarius, a measure among the Romanes,
whereof six goe to their Congius, whereup­
on it tooke that name: it containeth two he­
mines, and is somewhat lesse than a wine
quart with us, it beareth twentie ounces.



Sinapisme, a practise by a plastre of mustard
seed, and such like, to revive a place in man­
ner mortified, and to draw fresh humors and
colour to it.



Solstice, i. the Sunnestead, as well in Winter as
Summer, when hee is come to his utmost
points North and South, but usually it is
put for Midsummer onely.



Sophisticated, i. falsified and made corrupt, how­
beit, going for the right. Thus drougs and
gems are many times thrust upon us.



Spasmes, be painefull crampes or pluckings of
the sinewes and cords of the Muscles.



Spasmaticke, are such as be thus plucked.



Species, be either the simple ingredients into a
composition, or els the bare pouders min­
gled together, readie to be reduced into an
electuarie liquid, or Tables.



Speculative knowledge, or Speculation, is the in­
sight into a thing by reading only and con­


 
templation, without practise & experience.



Sperme, is naturall seed.



Spondyles, be the turning joynts of the chine or
backbone.



Stomachicall flux, is the same that Cœliaca
passio. See Cœliaci.



Stomaticall medecins, be such as are appropriat
for the diseases incident to the mouth, and
the parts adjoyning.



Stypticke, be such things as by a certaine harsh
tast, doe shew that they be astringent, as
medlars, and alumne, which thereupon is 
named Stypteria, and such like.



Succedan, that drug which may be used for de­
fault of another. The Apothecaries call
such, Quid pro quo.



Suffusion. See Cataract.



Suffumigation, is the smoke that is received in­
to the body from under a stoole, for the dis­
eases of the guts, fundament, or matrice.



Suppuration, is when a bile or impostume ga­
thereth to an head and must be broken.



Sympathie, i. a fellow feeling, used in Plinie for
the agreement or amitie naturall in divers
senslesse things, as betweene yron and the
loadstone.



Symptome, an accident accompanying sicknes,
as head-ach the ague; stitch, shortnesse of
wind; spitting bloud, cough, and ague, the
pleurisie.



Syringe, an instrument in manner of a pipe to
inject a medicinable liquor into the bladder.



T


TEllus, the Earth.



Tenacitie, clamminesse, such as is in glew,
birdlime, and bitumen.



Theoricke, or Theoretique, contemplative know­
ledge without action and practise.



Tinesme, an inordinat desire to the stoole with­
out doing any thing to the purpose.



Tonsils. See Amygdals.



Transparent, i. cleare and bright throughout;
as crystall, amber, aire, and water.



Transvasation, i. the pouring of liquor out of
one vessell into another.



Triviall, i. vulgar, common, and of base rec­
koning.



Triumvirat, the Tripartite dominion of Anto­
nie, Octavius, and Lepidus, when they held
all the world their hands, each one their
third part.



Trochisques, or Troques, be little cakes or roun­
dles, into which divers things medicinable
are reduced for to be kept the better, and to
be readie at hand when they shall be used.



Tuil , the same that the Fundement or neather­
most gut.



V


VEgetative, that power in nature which God
hath given to creatures, wherby they live,
are nourished, and grow.



Ventositie, windinesse.



Vicinitie, nearenesse, or neighbourhood.



Victoriat, a silver coine in Rome, Halfe a dena­
rius, so called because it had the image of
Victorie stamped on the one side: it is some­
what under our groat.



Vnction, annointing.



Vnguent, an ointment.



Vreters, bee the passages or conduits whereby
the water or urine passeth from the kidnies
into the bladder.



Vulnerarie, i. belonging to a wound; as Sani­
cle is a vulnerarie hearb, and Machaon was
a vulnerarie Physician.




