





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 9 6 2 0

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )



A DICTIONARIE IN SPA­
NISH and ENGLISH, first published into the
English tongue by Ric. Perciuale Gent. Now enlarged and
amplified with many thousand words, as by this marke * to each of them
prefixed may appeere; together with the accenting of euery worde throughout the
whole Dictionarie, for the true pronunciation of the language, as also for the diuers signifi­
cation of one and the selfesame word: And for the learners ease and furtherance, the declining of
all hard and irregular verbs; and for the same cause the former order of the Alphabet is
altered, diuers hard and vncouth phrases and speeches out of sundry of the best
Authors explaned, with diuers necessarie notes and especiall directions
for all such as shall be desirous to attaine the per­
fection of the Spanish tongue.

All done by IOHN MINSHEU
Professor of Languages in London.

Hereunto for the further profite and pleasure of the learner
or delighted in this tongue, is annexed an ample English Dictionarie,
Alphabetically set downe with the Spanish words thereunto adioyned, as
also an Alphabeticall Table of the Arabicke and Moorish words now
commonly receiued and vsed in the Spanish tongue, which
being dispersed in their seuerall due places throughout
the whole Dictionarie are marked thus †:
by the same Iohn Minsheu.

For the right vse of this worke, I referre you to the directions
before the Dictionarie, contriued in diuers points differing
from other Dictionaries heretofore set foorth.
{ornament}


Imprinted at London, by
Edm. Bollifant.

1599.












TO THE RIGHT
VERTVOVS, AND THRISE
worthy, Sir Iohn Scot, sir Henry Bromley, sir Edward
Greuel Knights, and Master William Fortescue
Esquire, their humble deuoted IOHN MINSHEU
wisheth health to their persons, increase to their
possessions, and euerlasting felicitie
to their soules.

RIght vertuous and woorthily worshipfull, after I
had spent some yeares past in this kinde, the most
vnprofitable and vnpleasant studie of searching
words for a Dictionarie, in such sort, Vt nec tem­
pori, nec rei familiari, nec mihi parcerem: but Come
la candela, far' ben' a gli altri & male ami stesso; with
the candle to light others, and burne out my
selfe: at last looking backe to repentance, I be­
ganne to addresse my endeuours to some good
happe, and founde you among many as fower
principall pillars that haue supported my declining estate, and giuen life
by your liberalities to my dying pen.  Wherefore I thinke reason biddeth,
nay dutie rather bindeth, or your due challengeth, what I presume heere
to dedicate.  And although each of you deserue much more then euer my
abilitie will bee able to reach vnto, yet according to the common custome
of badde debters, I deuide my substance, desiring my creditors euerie one
to take his part.  If any cauill about the number of fower; let him bee ad­
uertised, There be fower elements placed in the world:  likewise fower seasons in the
yeere:  also fower humors that possesse the bodie; and fower vertues that shoulde
gouerne the minde:  and you fower principall corner stones to support the
building of this present worke, without which it could not haue yet beene
finished:  Wherefore let the honour by yours, and the labour mine.  When I
had waded farre in it, as without helpe I could not get ouer, nor without dan­
ger and shame returne backe:  then did you curteous entertainer of vertue,
right woorthie and valorous sir Iohn Scot, of your owne good nature, bountie,
and kindnes (the like whereof in one person is hardly to be matched) plaie the
Vnicorne for the rest to drinke.  Next you curteous and vertuous sir Henry
Bromley, louer and liberall to all good letters, whose purse and paines is alwaies
open for your Prince and countrie; so is it neuer shut to the aduancement
of vertue, who as you are endued with an excellent memorie, and well read in
all kind of learning, so are you a true Mecænas of learning and vertue, and a
bountifull benefactour to the same, as sundrie schollers at the vniuersitie (some
whereof at your owne charge you maintaine) can better testifie.  You the third,





not second to any, well accomplisht and woorthie knight, sir Edward Greuel,
beloued in the court, and honored in the countrie, among the great, great,
and ouermatching your equals with the greatnes of your bright shining ver­
tues, giue exceeding cause to all, especially to me, not to forget the honor of
your name:  for who knoweth not that knoweth you, that the fower cardinall
vertues, vpon which the rest doe depend, haue their aboundant influence in­
to your minde.  Last, you the mirror of a good minde, right vertuous Master
William FortEscu, for all vertuous actions and goodnes, a strong shielde
as your name in French doth import; whose right honorable father endued
with singular memorie, learning, and excellent vertues, (by which especiallie
he hat been aduanced) in those gifts of the minde you succeed and follow:
haue bound me by your bountie and exceeding curtesies to make some pub­
like testimonie of the same.  But what go I about to decipher that which is im­
possible sufficiently to be set downe, and to praise them whose peeres as yet I
haue not found, whose many qualities and exceeding vertues do so farre sur­
mount the greatest parte of men, as the glorious sun with his bright beames
the lesser celestiall bodies:  whereof for me to speake with condigne praises
is a thing more due to your deserts, then easie for my rude pen, and rather ap­
pertaineth to my dutie, the standeth with my abilitie:  but as the French saith,
Bonne volonté supplie a la faculté: if your worships receiue me and my meaning
with that vertue which is woont to be in you, I shall not onely be encouraged
hereafter, but others will labour to honor you for this example.  And herewith
I do most humble and faithfully commend vnto you my selfe and these
my labors with an vnfained hart, and humble deuotion, to be
commanded as best pleaseth you:  Whom God
long keepe and preserue to your
Prince, countrey, and
friendes.


Yours bound and assured
IOHN MINSHEU.







To the Reader.

THreefold Reader, for so thou wilt diuide thy selfe, into good, bad,
and indifferent; whom I likewise compare to three kindes of crea­
tures, the Bee, the Spider, & the Cameleon:  The first, only I hold in
account, and I hope he will account of me and my labours, as that it
may not be said, Perit quod facis ingrato.  The second, whom I as
little regard, as he the credit of others; because like the Spider,
conuerting all to poyson; or as cupping glasses drawing out nothing
but corrupt blood, he thinketh himselfe graced to haue only a grace
in backbiting.  But let me aske him this one question, whether he euer published his owne la­
bours in Print?  If he answere yea:  then I say with the Italian, Chi vuol dir' mal d'altrui,
prima pensidi lui, He that will speake ill of another, let him first looke into himselfe:  and
may he finde, that Nemo sine crimine viuit, or Nemo sine crimine scribit:  so that Bene
audire qui vult, bene dicere oportet.  To other moat- finders, that neuer smelt the oyle of
the presse, I say with the Poet, Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua, and let them consider
this is my first worke; & as Seneca saith, in euery first worke there must be of force some im­
perfection & error, which if he beleeue not, I say with Terence, Tu si hie sies, aliter senties.
They that busie themselues in reprehending the faults of other mens writings, their owne are
likely neuer to come to light:  wherefore I wish them to deale gentlemanlike & not vpon ods;
then may we see, if El dezir y el hazér comen juntos a su mesa, If speaking and dooing
dine together at their table.  Besides, I have vndertaken more then one worke at one time;
as first the Spanish Dictionarie with English following; then an English Alphabet with
Spanish following; then another little Dictionarie with generall heads shewing the particular
parts, as a man and his parts, a house with the implements therein, ships at sea, officers in war,
trades and occupations, and diuers other things, quæ nunc perscribere longum est, &c.
which is left out being somewhat preuented by time, besides Dialogues Spanish and English:
and I have done as the Italian prouerbe saith, Chi tutto abbraccia, nulla stringe, or Chi
due lepri caccia, vno perde altro lascia. Qui vbique est, nullibi est. Furthermore,
the worke is long and my time but short, and as the Poet saith, Tantum opere in magno
fas est obrepere somnum, that is, In a great worke it is tollerable to let passe diuers errours
which time and perusing might haue corrected; and therefore saith Horace in his Arte
poetica, that a worke that is finished, should be nine yeeres after in the Authors hands, to
the intent, he might blot out, adde to, alter and amend:  And I want nine yeeres yet to come,
before I should thereof make an end, as those that be well experienced in this kinde can best
deeme.  Yet some that presume much, and can iudge little, haue affirmed that a Dictionarie
in a yeere might be gathered compleat enough, I answere, that in conceit it may so be, and in
much lesse time.  And herewithall it comes now to my minde, that talking hereof with a gen­
tleman well read in the Greeke, Latin, and vulgar toongs, which entred into a worke, prote­
sting and vowing to me, that he thought when he began, it could by no meanes possible hold
him a moneths time, & since that, he hath continually dwelt thereon almost this three yeeres,
and thinkes he hath scarce halfe done.  Before we begin, we lay downe our plot in conceit one­
lie, and thinke we may as soone make an ende, as our imagination or thought (which is the
swiftest thing in the world) can flie ouer it.  I confesse my selfe I was seduced by this errour,
till practise brought me into the right path, & repentance scourged me for going astray: if he
take not my word herein, which haue tried, how would he haue his taken which neuer prooued.
I acknowledge these workes Abortiues, borne before their due time into the world, which
being so full of trouble and sickenes consumed the fathers substance thereon, for Moult des­
pendre, rien gaigner n'acquerir:  fait l'homme en fin son pain querir.  Therefore meanes
was made in great haste that it was brought foorth as you see, which if the fathers wealth had





beene answerable to his will, it would haue bin better able to haue done his countrey seruice:
Notwithstanding all this the enuious, who canker and eate vp theselues in their owne rust
(seeing they are of most continuance and antiquitie in the world, taking their beginning from
the Serpent which seduced Eue,) so laboured that it might not be printed, that they left no
stone vnturned which they thought might any waie hinder the same:  a strange nature, to
seeke to stop that should runne to the publike good; besides to some of their helpes, to
pull them out when  they sticke fast, and to other some to reape other profit by.  Which
droue me into remembrance of a fable, how Iupiter disposed to suruey the earth, sent his mes­
senger downe, who met with a couetous and enuious man, for whose companie at their parting,
he promised to giue either of them, what he woulde aske, and the other foorthwith shoulde re­
ceaue double the value:  the couetous would not demand first, because he would haue double
so much; neither would the enuious, because he coulde not abide his fellow to do so well:  and be­
ing in this conflict who shoulde aske first, knowing a demand must be made, the enuious de­
maunded one of his owne eies to be pulled out, that the other might receaue double:  the ma­
litious are neuer sadde, but when some harme is happened to themselues, or some good to ano­
ther man, therefore saith Antisthenes, Inuidos tam ciuitati esse mutiles, quam lolium
tritico aut ignanum bello; Enuious persons as vnprofitable in a citie as darnell or cockle in
the wheat, or a coward in the war:  they resemble the Viper, which first gnawes out his dams
guts, afterwards stings & poisons others; or muzeled dogs, which when they cannot bite them­
selues, they set others on, & oftentimes like the serpent Porphirius, who is ful of poison, but be­
ing toothlesse hurteth none but himselfe; but let them passe as they are, & prosper as they wish
to others.  Another sort of people which are so puffed vp with pride, & swollen with fat of for­
tune, & riches so metamorphosed, & looking so proudly as if they were borne to be princes com­
panions, and lifting their heads so high as if they had beene bred to looke no lower then stars,
hold in beggerly and base account learning and arte, forgetting now as the priest that euer he
was parish clarke:  yet as the peacocke wrapt in all the pride of his plumes is knowne to be but a
dunghil birde by his foule feete; so though the high lookes, and costly sutes, argue to the eies of
the world, they were men of worship, yet the churlish illiberalitie of their minds bewraie, that
fish that is bred in puddle, will alwaies stinke of mudde.  This sort woulde thinke it a fantasti­
call humour to honour greatly grauers in stone, as Romulus did, or priestes as Numa Pom­
pilius his successor did:  or goldsmithes as Catus Cæsar:  or writers as Claudius:  or good
painters, as Vespasian:  or to respect learning as Alexander did, which neither in peace or
warre left Homers Iliades (together with his sword) from vnder his beds head:  or to write
Commentaries as Cæsar.  And heere I cannot forget a gentleman or rare wit, and excellent
learning, sir Edward Hobbie knight, who as hee hath gotten the perfection of the Spanish
toong in a short time, so hath he publikely in print manifested it in like sort, as also in curtesie
vouchsafed due praises, to the helpes he had for the same:  well knowing, that Honos alit ar­
tes; and Ars non habet inimicum nisi ignorentem. The thirde sorte of Readers which
are as Iohn Indifferent, and resemble the Cameleon, which change that selfe into any colour
according to the obiect that is neere it; so these men not able to iudge themselues, or not loo­
Quien quiete
mula sin ta­
cha que se ste
sin ella. He
that will haue a
mule without a
fault, let him be
without her.
* Note, Pero
as it is in the
Grammar, pag.
1 and 20 for a
sower apple
tree.
king into the matter, harken what another saith of it, and so he affirmeth the same, not weigh­
ing whether the other spake of malice or ignorance:  he that would holde esteeme of them,
were not woorthie to be esteemed himselfe.  Yet do I notwithstanding submit my selfe and
doings, to the iudgement of the discreete, learned, and wise, that whatsoeuer is amisse, being
aduertised thereof, I promise to labour with my best endeuours to correct and amende:  for
no doubt many things may escape in Printing, and much the more for that I was in the coun­
trey vpon necessitie, when the Dictionarie was at the presse, and there remained till it was all
done:  wherefore I mean to peruse the whole worke ouer, which shall be augmented, and if any
thing be amisse it shall be amended:  As for the captious (which take vp matters before they
fall let them allow me maintenance, and I will make it to their liking:  knowing it is harde to
please fewe, harder to please many, impossible to please all:  I leaue these my labours to the 
viewe of all, so to be censured as they shall find themselues profited by them. 

Vale.
Iohn Mynsheu.







Directions for the vnderstanding the vse of this Dictionarie,
contriued in diuers points differing from other Dictionaries
heretofore set foorth, for the speedier furtherance
of the learner in this toong.

FIrst I haue declined all the Irregular and hardest Verbes thorow this whole Booke as they
1
fall in their Alphabeticall order, in the singular number in two moodes, the Indicatiue and
Subiunctiue, and three Tenses (by which the other are formed) and in the Indicatiue
moode in three persons, and the Subiunctiue in two, viz. the Present tense, the first Preter­
perfect tense, and the Future tense of the Indicatiue moode.  The Present tense, the Preterim­
perfect tense, & the Future tense of the Subiunctiue moode, to make the learner & desirous of
the toong exact & readie with little or no labour in any of them.  The maner of setting downe
thus. Præs. for Present tense, 1. Præt. for first Preterperfect tense, Fut. for Future tense.  Sub. for
Subiunctiue moode.  Imperfect. for Preterimperfect tense, &c. as for example this Verbe,
Traér, to fetch or bring, Indicat. Præs. Tráygo, tráes, tráe. 1. Præt. Trúxe, truxíste, trúxo, or Tráxe,
traxíste, tráxo. Fut. Traeré, traerás, traerá. Sub. Præs Tráyga. Imperfect. Truxéra, Traería or
Truxésse, or Traxéra, Traería or Traxésse. Fut. Truxiére.

Also for the more ease of the learner, and to make vse of this Declining hard and Irregular
2
verbes.  I set downe the Tenses of such verbes in their owne Alphabet, as Trúxe, Trúxo, Truxéra,
Truxesse, and say, vide Traér, and there hee shall see him declined at large, lest hee might mi­
stake and thinke Trúxe, Trúxo, Truxéra, Truxésse, might come of Truxér, or the like, and not
of Traér. In like manner I say Cúpe, Cúpo, Cupiéra, Cupiésse, vide Cabér. also Quíse, Quisiéra, Qui­
siésse, vide Qverér. Díxe, Díxo, Dixésse, Dixéra, vide Dezír, and so of all the rest: so that by this
meanes he shall not onely finde euerie one of these and their like in their right Alphabet as
they shall looke, but also know the true signification and declining them to make him most
perfect in any or all of them.

Likewise I accent euery word in the whole Dictionarie to cause the learner to pronounce
3
it right, otherwise when he speaketh he shall not be vnderstoode of the naturall Spaniard:  as
Bacía, a bowle, a basen, a trey, not Bácia: as Bárrio, a warde, not Barrío: as Difícil, hard, difficult,
not Díficil, nor Dificíl: as Amór, loue, not ámor: Pastór, a shepheard, not Pástor: as Religión, not
Relígion: Caridád,  dearnes, charitie, not Cáridad: as Davíd, not Dávid: as Tenér, to holde, not
Tener,  and so of an infinit company of the rest.

This accenting serueth also and maketh one and the selfe same word of diuers significati­
4
ons (wherefore I thought it needfull for the learners behalfe) as ámo, a maister, or I loue, amó, he
hath loued.  Cérco,  a siege, Cercó, he hath besieged.  Házia towardes, Hazía, I or he did make.
Báxa, a daunce so called.  Baxá, a Bassa or commaunder among the Turkes.  ésta, shee or this
thing.  Está, it standeth, éste, hee. Esté, let it stand.  De, of or from.  Dé, let him giue.  Péro, a peare
tree; Peró, but, &c.

The two letters for two genders m. for masculine, and f. for feminine.  The neuter is of
5
small vse in the Spanish toong, when it is the common of two, or doubtfull, I referre it to euery
Latinist to consider how easily he may discerne them, to others, this profiteth nothing.

Further to shew wherehence the compounds do arise, to know their Radix and originall, I
6
make the composition in a smaller letter, and the simple in a greater, thus: absTenér, to abstaine,
of Tenér, to hold, and abs, from; and so absTenér, to hold from or abstaine:  so abSuelto, loosed
from or absolued.  desAtár, to vntie: desArmár, to vnarme:  desDícha, mishap:  desVentúra, misfor­
tune.  reTenér, to retaine:  reHécho, made againe.

Besides, I would haue those that haue not read much in this toong to be aduertised, that in
7
diuers good Authors one word is written sometime with one letter or character, and sometime
with another, and yet the selfe same worde and the selfesame signification, whereby they con­
found and vse one letter for another, as B for V consonant, and V consonant for B, as Ballésta 





or Vallésta, a crossebow.  Vandéra, or Bandéra, an ensigne, a banner, a flag of a ship.  Bisárma, or
Visárma, a weapon with two pikes.  Visabuélo, or Bisabuélo, a great grandfather. Bogár, or  Vogár
to row.  Volúmen, or Bolúmen, a volumne of a booke:  so in the middle of a word, as Cábo, or Cávo,
an end.  Wherefore I aduise the Reader if he finde not the word in B turne to V: if not in V
looke to B. In like sort these following, as ç cerilla for z, and z for ç cerilla, as Hacér, for Hazér,
to make or to do; as Rezélo, for wary feare, suspition, for Reçélo; as Corçílla, or Corzílla, a little
row bucke:  so e for i, and i for e, as Desfavór, Disfavór, Disfamár, Desfamár: also o and u, as
Mocháco, Muchácho, a boy, a lad:  so f and ph, as Filósofo, Philósopho, a Philosopher:  g for j, and
j for g, as Magestád, or Majestád: j for x, Dejár for Dexár, to leaue:  and x for j, as Tiséras for
Tijéras, or Tigéras, sheares or scissers:  also x for ch, as Cartúxo for Cartúcho, Patáche, Patáge, or
Patáje, a pinasse: Aledréz, Aljedréz, or Axedréz, chesse-boord or chesse-play.  The like to
these would I wish the Reader if he finde them not in one letter or Alphabet, to turne to the
other, and no doubt he may be satisfied.

Moreouer, when you finde not a word in the single letter, looke in the double; or not in the
8
double, looke in the single, as Eféto, or Efféto, effect: Asalto, Assalto, an assault:  Atónito, Attónito,
astonished, &c.  But take heed you take not this double letter with a crooked line ouer him
thus ñ: for this single n, as Peña, a rocke, pronounced Pennia for Pena, punishment or paine:  nor
the single l for the double ll, nor the double for the single:  both which letters alwaies make a
differing signification and pronuntiation.

Be in like manner well aduised whether two words be ioyned in one (a thing too common
9
with Spanish writers) as Encasa, for en Casa,in the house:  Eneféto, for en Eféto, in effect:  Decáda,
for de Cáda, of euerie:  Defuéra, for de Fuéra, without:  Del, for de El, of him:  Deléxos, for de Léxos,
from farre.

Furthermore, marke Amálle, for Amár le, to loue him: Castigálle, for Castigár le, to chastise
10
him: Hablálle, for Hablár le, to speak vnto him:  Creélle, for Creér le, to beleeue him: Dezílle, 
for Dezír le, to tel him.

Also Castigálde, for Castigád le, do yee chastise him: Leéldo, for Leéd lo, read yee it: Dezílde,
11
for Dezíd le, tell yee him.

For the learners more readie finding out of wordes in this Dictionarie, I bestowed a good
12
deale of time and paines in bringing the wordes into the Alphabet, I heere vse in this booke
differing from Nebrissensis, Cristouall de Casa, and M. Perciuals in English:  which place next
Ca, Cl, and not Ce Ch, and place Ch after the ende of Cu, &c.  And for the giuing notice of what
I haue done without defrauding any thing from the labours of any that haue trauelled in this
kinde, I haue made a difference of the words I haue merely added by a starre thus *, whereby it
may be seene what and how much I haue enlarged by my long labour and paines:  and for the
most part of the rest of the wordes I haue augmented with diuers Englishes more then hereto­
fore hath beene set downe, as I haue found them in Authors, which the nature of the word may
and will containe:  as also put out, and quite altered the English of sundry of them mistaken:
which, if gentle Reader desirous of this toong, it may further thy knowledge to thy good liking,
it shall further encourage me (after this my first beginning) hereafter to do my best to satisfie
thy desire.

IOHN MYNSHEU.







A DICTIONARIE IN SPANISH
AND ENGLISH.

A
	
A, The first letter in the A, B, C, and
the first vowell A.

A, A Preposition signifying for, to, at,
towards.

* A, a signe of Infinitiue moode of
verbes; as a Sufrir, to suffer, a Hazér,
to make or doe.

* A, the third person of the verbe
He, as Mucho tiempo a, it hath been
much time: or it is a good while since.

A, A, an Interiection of dreading, of one
suddenly frighted, in Latine At at. 

* A, A, A, an Interiection of laughing, as
Ha, ha, ha. 

Aarón, m. the herbe Wake-Robin, Cuc­
kowpintle, or Calues feete, or a proper
name Aaron.



* Ába el lóbo, beware the wolfe, or be­
hold or take heede of the wolfe.

Abád, m. an Abbot, or Prior, or religious
man.

* Abáda, m.a beast in the Indies of the
bignesse of a great bull, skinned ouer as
it were with scallop shels, which with
going and mouing maketh a noise:  it
hath but one horne, and that is placed
vnder his eies vpon his nose.  It is an
enimie to the horse, so that when he
seeth him, he maketh at haste, and with
swift running ouertaketh and killeth
him. Vide Rinocerónte.

Abadéngo, m.pertaining to an Abbot.

Abadéjo, m.a kinde of greene and blew
flie called Cantharis, breeding in the
tops of Ashes, Oliues, &c. raising bli­
sters, the iuice of it is venemous.  Also a
bird called a Wagtaile.

* Abadéjo peçe, a kinde of Newlande
fish.

Abadéssa, f. an Abbesse, or Ladie ouer
a Nunnerie.

Abadia, f. an Abbotship, the dignitie of
an Abbot, or Ladie Abbesse.  Also the
Abbie it selfe.

* Abahádo, m.the reeking or fume
kept in.

Abahár, to keepe or stop in the reeking or
fuming of any thing.

* aBájo, vide aBáxo. 

Abalançar, to thrust into the middest of
a companie.

Aballár, to remooue with paine or much
adoe, to depart away, or to put away.
Also to set price on a thing.

* Abanderádo, m.v. Avanderádo, an
Ensignes seruant which carieth the en­
signe for his master.

* Abandéro, vide Abanderádo. 

* Abandonádo, cast off, forsaken, aban­
doned or giuen ouer.

* Abandonár, to forsake, to abandon, to
cast off or giue ouer.

* Abaratár, to make good cheape, to sell
for lowe price.

Abárca, f. a high shoo such as countrey
men vse of vndressed leather, a start­
vp, a wooden shoo, a woodden patten.

Abarcádo, shod with such startups, high
shooes, or woodden shooes.  Also trussed
or tucked vnder the arme.

* Abarrádo, flung against the wall, or
dashed against anything.

Abarraganáda, f. a leman or concubine,
a strumpet or queane giuen ouer to the
flesh, keeping still companie with one
man.

Abbaraganádo, m.a married man that
keepeth a harlot for his leman or con­
cubine, a leman keeper.  Also any man
keeping a queane at racke and manger.

Abarraganamiénto, m.leman keeping,
loosenesse of life, wicked fleshly liuing
togither betwixt two keeping togither
in fleshie filthinesse at rack & manger.

* Abarraganár, to leaue the vse of the
lawfull husband or wife, and to follow
whooredome vnlawfully with another.

* Abarrajádo, m.dashed against the
wall, spoiled, destroied, scattered, rui­
nated, confounded, subuerted, dis­
persed.

Abarrajár, to dash against the wall, to
destroy, to spoile, to ruine, to vnbarre,
to hauocke, to disorder, to scatter, to
doe violence.

Abarrancádo, m.standing on a steepe
hils side or on a rocks side.

Abarrancadéro, m.A steepe downefall, a
dangerous hill or rocke to be on, for
feare of falling.

Abarrancár, Præs. yo Abarránco,
1. Præt. Abarranqué, to throw down
headlong, to ouerthrowe or tumble
downe dangerously, to deale rashly or
vnaduisedly.

* Abarranqué vide Abarrancár. 

Abarrár, to dash against the wall, to
strike or beat violently or vehemently.

* Abarratár vide Abaratár. 

Abarráz. m.an herbe called Stauesagre,
or Lowse bane.

Abarrísco, wholy, altogither, vtterly,
perfectly or throughly.

* aBastáda cósa, f. a matter good enough
or sufficient, a substantiall thing, a
copious matter, such a thing as may
content with reason.

* aBastáda cása, f. a sufficient house well
furnished with all manner of imple­
ments and necessaries.

* aBastádo, m.sufficient, good enough,
large reasonable.

aBastánça, or aBásto, as much as neede,
enough, indifferently, sufficiently, well
enough.

aBastançár vide aBastár. 

* aBastánza vide aBastánça. 

aBastár, to be sufficient enough, to satis­
fie or content, to serue with.

* aBasteçér, yo Abastésco, to furnish,
strengthen, fortifie, fence, repare or
amend.

aBásto vide aBastança. 

* abatanádo, m.fulled or thicked as wol­
len cloth.

* aBatanadór, m.fuller of cloth.

* aBatanár, to full cloth.

aBatidaménte, faintly, feebly, basely,
without hart, negligently, desperately,
demissely.

aBatido, m. cast downe, vndone, forlorne,
base, abiect, out of conceite, desperate,
lowly, sent packing, submisse, demisse,
discouraged.

* aBatidór, m.a debaser, a caster downe,
a maker of men in heauie case, a driuer
out of hart, a cooler of mans courage,
one that keepeth vnder, &c. a discou­
rager.

aBatimiénto, a discouragement, a ma­
king hartlesse, a driuing out of con­
ceit, a suppressing and keeping downe,
a debasing, &c.

* aBatióse el girafálte, the Gerfalkon
bated, or hoong from the fist or pearch,
&c.

aBatir or aBatírse, to beate downe, to
discourage, to debase, to driue out of
hart.  Also to stowpe as a hawke or
such like, to abase or vaile bonet.

* Abaxádero, m.a place of descending,
a side of a hill, a downe comming.

Abaxádo, humbled, brought downe, pro­
strated, diminished, alighted, abased,
submitted, &c.

* aBaxadór, m.a suppressor, maker to
stowpe, humbler, diminisher, maker to
fall prostrate, &c.

aBaxamiénto, m. an abasing, humbling,
prostrating, alighting, submitting, go­
ing downe, casting downe.

aBaxár, to humble, to abase, to prostrate,
to stowpe, to alight, to descend or come
downe, to cast downe, to alay.

* aBáxo, belowe, vnderneath, of lesse va­
lue or price, neare hand, fast by. 

* Abbreviatúra or Abreviadura, f. a
short note, an abridgement or briefe
setting downe of a matter, &c.

* Abece, the crosse rowe or Alphabet of 





all the letters.

* Abecedário, m.the first booke to learn
children the letters, to spell and reade.
Also a teacher to spell, reade, and the
vse of the Abc, &c.

Abéja, f. a bee that gathereth honie.

Abejéra, Torongil, or Cidréra, f. balm
gentle or Eeewoort, and herbe that bees
delight in wonderfully.

* Abejeria, f. a companie of bees, or a
place where many bees are.

Abejerúco, m.a birde that vseth to eate
bees called a Witwall or Woodwall,
whose nature is to keepe and feede their
parents when they cannot flie abroad.

Abejón, m.a great bee that hauing lost
the sting flieth vp and downe, and ma­
keth a buzzing noise.

Abejón, juégo, a kinde of sport or play
when they crie buzze, and so hit one
another a boxe on the eare, except
quickly he pull away his head.

Abejonázo, m.a great bee.

Abejorúco, vide Abejerúco. 

Abenús, Abenúz, or Ébano, Hebene
tree, the wood whereof is as blacke as
ieat; and this tree beareth no fruit nor
leaues.  Also the Hebene wood.

* Aberiguación, vide Averiguación, 
f. auouching or verifying a thing to
be so.

* Aberiguádo, vide Averiguádo. 

* Aberiguár, vide Averiguár. 

Abertura, f. an opening, a chinke or
breach, a yawning, an vnclosing of that
which was close, a leake made in a ship,
&c.

Abestrúz, vide Avestrúz, an Oistrich.

Abeto, m.a Firre tree.

Abezádo, or Avezádo, taught, instru­
cted, accustomed or enured.

Abezár or Avezár, to accustome, enure,
to bring to passe by long vsage and
continuance.  Also to teach, instruct, or
perswade to, &c.

* Abiertaménte, openly, plainly, mani­
festly or euidently.

Abiérto, m.open, cleere, manifest, plaine,
euident, vncouered, &c.

Ábil or Hábil, apt, fit, able, handsome,
conuenient, capable.

Abilidád or Habilidád, f. ablenesse,
handsomnes, fitnesse, power, meetnesse,
capacitie.

* Abilitádo or Habilitádo,  made able,
fitted, qualified, become of power, ena­
bled, made capable.

Abilitár or Habilitár, to make able, to
qualifie, to fit or make handsome, &c.

Abilménte, aptly, fitly, sufficiently, of
capacitie, like one of abilitie.

Abiltadaménte, basely, vilely, like an
abiect, shamefully.

Abiltár, vide Aviltár, to make vile, to
debase, to cast downe, to set at naught,
to cast off, to hold scorne of.

* Abintestáto, m.one that dieth without
making a will.

Abismo, a bottonlesse pit, a deepe gulfe
where many seas or waters meete, a
place in the sea so deepe as it cannot be
sounded, a whirlepoole, a place in hell.

Abispa f. a waspe.

Ábispillo, vide Obispillo, the rumpe of
a bird.

Abispón, vide Tavárro, a hornet or
great waspe.

* Abitación or Habitación, f. a dwel­
ling place, a mansion, habitation, a so­
iourning or abiding place.

* Abitadór or Habitadór, m.a dweller,
inhabiter, or one that hath some place
of abode.

* Abitádo or Habitádo, m.one that hath
dwelt or inhabited in a place.

* Abitár or Habitár, to dwell, inhabite,
lodge or abide in a place.

* Abitillo or Habitillo, m.a little ha­
bite, a little forme or fashion of attire.
a light custome of maner.  Dimin. of
Ábito.

Ábito or Hábito, the habite, forme, fa­
shion, attire, apparell, custome or man­
ners of people.

Abituádo, m.growne to a habite, fashio­
ned in manners, become a custome, enu­
red by long practise.

Abituár, to become so as by nature, to fa­
shion in maners, to growe into custome,
to enure by daily practise.

* Abivádo, m.quickened, rowzed, awa­
ked, stirred vp.

* Abivár or Avivár, to quicken, to a­
wake, to rowze vp or make to stirre.

* Abla, vide Exe, an axletree of a cart,
waggon, &c.

* Ablandádo, m.smoothed, softened, pa­
cified, appeased, asswaged, made gentle.

* Ablandadór, m.a smoothbootes, a fine
tongued fellow, a softener, pacifier or
appeaser.

Ablandadúra, f. a smoothing, softening,
asswaging, pacifying, winning by gen­
tle meanes, flattering.

Ablandár, to soften, to smooth, to flatter,
to win by gentle meanes, to pacifie, to
asswage.

* Ablentadór, m.a fanne to fanne corne
with, or a fanner or winnower that
maketh cleane corne.

* Ablentár, to fanne or winnow corne.

* aBobádo or aBovádo, m.become foo­
lish or amazed in gaping or gazing on
a thing.

* aBobár or aBovár, to become foolish or 
to make a foole.

* Abocadádo, bitten or snapped with
the mouth as horses snap one another.

* Abocadár, vide Abocadeár. 

* Abocadeár, to bite with the mouth,
to snap with the mouth as horses doe
or any other liuing thing.

* aBocadillos, by little morsels or
mouthfuls, by little bits or peece meale.

aBocádos, by mouthfuls, morsels or bits,
peecemeale.

* Aboçár vergas de náo, to tie vp or
fasten in the yards of a ship, in battell at
sea vsed least a shot of ordinance
should make them fall on their heads.

* aBoseteádo, m.beaten on the face, buf­
fetted, cuffed, boxed, striken about the
eares.

* aBoseteadór, m.a buffetter, one that
beateth about the eares, or striketh on
the cheekes, that cuffeth with fistes like
a boy.

aboseteár, to buffet, to cuffe or boxe a­
bout the eares, to strike on the cheekes or
face, to fight with fistes as boyes doe.

* Abogacía or Avogacía, f. the office or
dutie of a counsellor at law.

* Abogación, f. the pleading as a coun­
sellor, the handling of a matter like a 
cunning lawyer.

* Abogádo sin lettras, a pettifogger, a
sollicitor, an aduocate without lear­
ning.

Abogár or Avogár, Præs. yo Abógo,
1. Præt. yo Abogué, to pleade as a
counsellor or aduocate.

Aboléngo or Abolório, m.a pedigree,
stocke or descent of kindred.  Also a pa­
trimonie.

aBolládo, m.dented in with blowes, brui­
sed, beaten togither or crushed.

* aBolladór, m.a bosse maker, one that
beateth together, one that indenteth
with beating or striking.

aBolladúra, f. an indenting with blowes
or striking, making of bosses, crushing
or beating togither.

aBollár, to beat in or indent with blowes,
to make bosses, to crush togither or to
batter with strokes.

aBollonádo, bunched or bumped out
with blowes, hauing knobs or bunches
with beating or buffetting.

aBollonár, to make bunches, knobs or
knops with blowes, strokes or buffets.

Abolório, vide Aboléngo. 

Abomináble, abhominable, detestable,
lothsome, execrable.

Abominación, f. detestation, loathing,
abhomination.

* Abominádo, abhorred, loathed, de­
tested.





Abominár, to detest, to abhorre, to loath,
to thinke vilely of.

Abonádo, m.that hath put in sureties,
that goeth vnder baile, one that is suf­
ficient to answer a matter.

* Abonadór, m.a putter in of baile or
sureties, one the vndertaketh for ano­
ther.

* Abonamiénto, m.a putting in of sure­
ties, a bailing of one out of prison, vn­
dertaking for another to make good a
matter, a making good.

aBonánça, f. vide Bonánça, faire or
cleere weather, calmnesse, quietnesse.

Abonançár, to waxe faire weather, to
become calme and quiet.

Abonár, to make good, to put in sureties,
to make perfect, to baile out of prison,
to put in baile.

Abonárse el tiempo, to waxe faire wea­
ther, to become calme and quiet.

Abondamiénto, m.plentie, abundance,
great store, fulnesse.

* Abondánte, vide Abundánte. 

Abondár, to be plentifull, to abound, to
haue store, to be full.

Abondosaménte, plentifully, abun­
dantly.

Abondóso or Abundánte, plentifull,
abundant.

* Abondo, idem. 

Abóno, vide Abonamiénto. 

* Abordadúra, f. boording of a ship.

* Abordár vna náo, to lay aboord a
ship, or to enter into another bodies ship
making prize thereof.

Abordatúra, vide Abordadúra, f. 

* aBorrár, vide Borrár, to blot, to blurre
or deface.

* Aborrascár, Præs. yo Aborrásco,
1. Præt. yo Aborrasqué, to swell or
puffe vp, as weather when there begin­
neth a tempest.

Aborrecedór, m.one that abhorreth,
loatheth or detesteth, hateth.

Aborrecér, yo Aborrésco, to abhorre,
loath, detest, to hate for to thinke, vt­
terly to mislike.

Aborcecíble, detestable, loathsome,
woorthie to be abhorred, hatefull.

* Aborrecído, m.abhorred, loathed, de­
tested, hated, vtterly misliked or de­
spised.

Aborrecemiénto, m.a detesting, loa­
thing, abhorring, vtter misliking.

Aborrescído, vide Aborrecído. 

Aborescér, vide Aborrecér. 

* Aborrir, vide Aborrecér. 

Abortádo, m.that which is borne or
brought into the worlde before the
time.

Abortadúra, f. an vntimely birth, that
commeth into the world before the due
season, the suffering of such vntimely
deliuerance.

Abortár, to bring foorth yoong before
due time, to bee deliuered before hir
season.

* Abortívo, a childe borne before the
time, an abortiue.

Abortón, m.a yoong creature borne or
brought into the worlde before due
time.

* aBotonádo, m.buttoned, clasped, hoo­
ked.

aBotonadúra, f. a button or claspe.

aBotonadúra de óro opláta, a claspe,
or button of siluer or gold.

aBotonár, to button, to claspe, &c. to bud.

aBotonár los árboles, to bud, sprout, or
begin to blossome as trees and herbes
doe.

* Abovádo, vide Abobádo. 

* Abrá, i. Avrá, shall or will haue: the
future tense of the Infinitiue Avér.

* Ábra, a place in Antwerpe so called,
where is a hauen comming from sea.

* Abraçáda, f. an embracing, hugging, or
clasping in the armes.  Also a fathome.

* Abraçáda vid. a vine wreathed one
with another.

Abraçádo, m.embraced, hugged, or clas­
ped in armes.

* Abraçádor, m.one that embraceth,
huggeth, or claspeth in his armes.

* Abraçamiénto, m.an embracing, hug­
ging or clasping in his armes.

Abraçár, to embrace, hug, or claspe in
armes.

* aBraço, m.an embracing, hugging or
clasping in the armes.

* Abrasádo, m.fired, or set on fire, burned,
burned to coles.

* Abrasadór, m.a setter on fire, one that
burneth to coles.

Abrasamiénto, m.a setting on fire, a
burning to coles.

Abrasár or Abrassár, to set on fire, to
burne to coles, to consume halfe with
fire, sindge or halfe burne, to blast, to
scorch.

* Ábrego, the south winde.

* Abré, I shall or will haue. Vide Avér.

* Abrémos, we shall or will haue.  Vide Avér.

Abrevadéro, m.a watering place for
cattell, a poole.

Abrevádo, m.made to drinke, watered.

Abrevár, to cause to drinke, to water.

* Abreviádo, m.abridged, shortened,
drawen into a briefe methode or note,
cut off short.

Abreviadúra or Abbreviatúra, f. an
abridgement, a cutting off short of the
matter, a drawing of it into a short
course.

Abreviár, to abridge, to cut short, to draw
intoa briefe course.

* Abrí, m.a sunne shining place, a sha­
dowe place from extremitie of heate.

Abridór, m.one that openeth.

Abrigádo, m.set on sunne shining, warm,
nourished, cherished.

Abrigáño, a warme sunne shining banke.

Abrigár, Præs. yo Abrigo, 1. Præt. yo
Abrigué, to set or place in the sunne
for warmth, to foster, to cherish.

Abrigo, m.the warme sunne shine, a che­
rishing, a fostering.

* Abrigué, vide Abrigár. 

Abril, m.the moneth Aprill.

* Abrimiénto, m.an opening, a disco­
uerie.

Abrir, to open, to shew, to discouer, to be­
wray, to reueale, to disclose, to declare,
to cleaue asunder, to expound, to laie
abroad, to vnfasten.

* aBrochádo, m.laced, tied, fastened,
buckled, clasped.

aBrochadúra, f. lacing of clothes, or tying
of them, fastening, buckling or clas­
ping.

aBrochár, to tie or lace clothes, to fasten,
bucke or claspe them.

* Abrogación, f. an abrogating, a taking
away, a disanulling.

* Abrogádo, m.abolished, abrogated, ta­
ken away, made void or of none effect,
disanulled.

Abrogár, Præs. yo Abrógo, 1. Præt. yo Abrogué, to abolish, abrogate, disa­
null, make void or of none effect.

Abrójos, brambles, a kinde of sharpe
thistles, Caltrops with pricke to hinder
the enimies horses from entring.  In the
Caltrop foure pricks of iron are so set,
that which way soeuer it turneth, some
of the pricks are upward.

Abrótono, vide Lombriguéra. Sou­
thernwood the herbe.

* Abséncia or Auséncia, f. absense, or
being away.

* Absolución, f. an absoluing, a remissi­
on, pardon or forgiuing, assoyling, dis­
charging.

Absolvér, Præs. yo Absuélvo, Sub.
Præs. yo Absuélva, to pardon, absolue,
forgiue, discharge or assoyle.

Abstenéncia, f. abstaining or refraining
from meate, or from other things, tem­
perance, shunning of vices, &c.

* Abstenér, Præs. Absténgo, abstié­
nes, abstiéne, 1. Præt. Abstúve, ab­
stuvíste, abstúvo, Fut. Abstendré, ab­
stendrás, abstendrá. Sub. Præs. Ab­
sténga, Imperf. Abstuviéra, absten­
dría, or abstuviésse. Fut. Abstuviére,
to abstaine or refraine from meates,
drinks, or delights, to holde his hands,





to vse temperance.

* Absténga, absténgo, vide Abstenér. 

* Abstenido, m.that hath abstained
from meates, drinks, and all various de­
lights, that hath staied himselfe.

* Abstúve, abstuviésse, abstuviéra, ab­
stúvo, vide Abstenér. 

* Absuélva, Absuélvo, vide Absolvér. 

* abSuélto, m. absolued, pardoned, forgi­
uen, discharged or assoyled.

Absýnthio, m.an herbe called Worme­
wood.

* Abubádo, m.full of the French ill or
pockes.

Abubilla, f. a bird called a Hoope.  Some
thinke it to be the Lapwing.

* Abucáste, m.a kinde of ducke.

Abuéla, or Aguéla, f. a grandmother.

Abuélo, or Aguélo, m.a grandfather.

Abuélo segundo, or Bisabuélo, m.a
great grandfather.

Abuélo Tercéro, m.a grandfathers
grandfather.

Abuélos, ancestors.

* aBuéña déllo, together with that.

aBuen tiémpo, in very good season, fitly,
in due time, euen as one would wish.

Abuhádo or Abuhetádo, m.mumpe­
sicke, swollen about the face or other
part of the bodie.

Abuhannénto, m.a swelling about the
cheekes, the mumpes.

Abuhetádo, vide Abuhádo. 

* Abultádo, m.bulked out, great, grosse.

* Boz abultáda, f. a great voice or big
voice.

* Abliltár, to bulke or bumpe out, to be
great, huge, or big.

* aBillio, m.a bulking out, a grosse big­
nesse.

Abundáncia, f. vide Abondamiénto, plentie, abundance, copie or store.

* Abundánte, plentifull, copious, aboun­
ding.

* Abundár, to abound, to haue store or
plentie, to haue copie, to exceed or ouer­
flowe, to be rich.

* Abondosaménte, copiously, plentiful­
ly, abundantly, richly, exceedingly.

* Abundosidád, f. copie or abundance,
great store or plentie.

* Abundóso, m.hauing plentie at will,
furnished with store.

Aburádo, m.burned, scorched, sindged
with fire.

Aburár, to burne, scorch or sindge with
fire.

Aburrído, m.desperate, forlorne,

Aburrimiénto, m.a desperate or forlorn
case, despaire.

Aburrir, to despaire, to forlorne, to be
past all hope.

* abVsádo, m.misused, spent vainely,
prodigally or ill, not applied to the right
vse.

abVsár, to misuse, to spend prodigally, not
to vse as he ought, to bestowe ill or
vainly.

Abusión, f. an abuse, misorder, misspen­
ding, or ill bestowing of any thing.

* Abúso, m.vide Abusión. 

Abutárda, f. a Bustard.  Also a Horne­
owle.

* Abuvádo, vide Abubádo. 

* Abuvílla, a bird called a Hoope.  Some
take it for the Lapwing.


A C and A ç
Acá, hither.

Acá, acúlla, hither and thither.

Acabadaménte, finally, to conclude, to
make an end, precisely, perfectly, abso­
lutely.

Acabádo, m.finished, ended, brought to
a good passe, concluded, fully dispat­
ched, deceased out of this life, perfected,
consummated.

Acabadór, m.a finisher, concluder, dis­
patcher, ender of matters.

Acabamiénto, m.an ending, finishing,
concluding, bringing to some good passe.

Acabár, to make an end, to finish, to con­
clude, to cut off a matter, to bring to a
good passe, to make perfect, to accom­
plish or consummate, to depart out of
this life.

* aCábo or aCávo, at the head or end.

Açacán, m.a waterbearer, in Spaine
one that carieth water vp and downe
the streetes vpon an asse, and crieth the
same, and so selleth the water.

* Açacán en el reál, a drudge or slaue
to carrie water or wood into an armie.

Acácia, a kinde of shrub with prickles,
whose leaues are like rue.  Also a liquor
drawen out of the seede of Acácia, in
steede whereof the iuice of sloes is com­
monly vsed.

Açáda, f. a spade or pickaxe, a mattocke.

aCáda, in, at, or by euery one.

aCáda bárrio, in or at euery warde.

aCáda cása, at euery house.

* aCáda trécho, at euery space of time
or place.

* aCáda pásso, at euery step.

Acadarrado, m.rheumaticke, subiect to
catarrhes.

* Académia, f. an vniuersitie.  Platoes
schoole in Athens was first called by
that name.  Now euery notable place of
learning is so called.

* Académico, a student of the vniuer­
sitie, or a teacher there.

* Açadonáda, f. a picking of the spade,
pickaxe or mattocke into the ground.

* Açadonázo, m.a great spade, mat­
tock, or pickaxe, or a blow with a spade
or mattocke.

* Açadoncillo, m.a
little spade, mattocke or pickaxe.

* Açadón, m.a mattocke, spade or pick­
axe to dig withall.

* Açadonéro, m.he that laboureth with
the spade, mattocke or pickaxe, a dig­
ger, a deluer.

* Açadonzillo, vide Açadoncillo. 

Acadúz, Alcaduz or Arcaduz, m.the
scoupe or scuppet of a water wheele, the
pipe that leadeth water to a conduit.

Acaecér, vide Acontecér,  to happen,
chaunce or fall out.

Acaecido, vide Acontecido, m.happe­
ned, chaunced or fallen out.

Acaecemiénto, m.vide Acontecimi­
énto, a hap, chaunce, &c.

Acaescér, vide Acaecér. 

Açafrán, m.saffron.

Açafranádo, m.dressed with saffron.

Açafranár, to dresse with saffron.

* Açagáya, vide Azagáya, f. a bore­
speare or halfe pike.

Açaguán or çaguán, a porch or gallerie,
a pond, brooke or place where women
wash.

* Açahár, vide Azahár. 

* Acahescér, vide Acaecér. 

* Açaléja, vide Azaléja, f. a towell to
wipe with.

* aCalládo, m.stilled, quieted.

aCallár, to make still or quiet.

* Acalorádo, m.made very hote.

* Acampádo, m.encamped, laide siege
vnto.

* aCampár, to encampe or lay siege.

* Acampeár, idem. 

aCanaládo, m.made with gutters or
with chanels, halfe rounde like a gutter­
tile or roofe tile, chamfured.

* Acaneládo, m.done or dressed with
cinnamon or the colour of cinnamon.

aCanáles, by gutters.

* Acanilládo, made after the manner of
canes or reedes.  Also cloth wouen vne­
uen with some greater threads then
other some.

* aCañavereádo, m.pearsed or wounded
with canes or great reedes.

* aCañaveradór, m.one that pearseth
with canes or reedes.

aCañavereár, to pearse with canes or
great reedes.

* aCanoneár, to shoote off canons.

* Acantarádo, m.measured with tan­
kards or cans.  Also beaten or strooken
with a tankard.

* Acántho, m.a kinde of white Thistle
in Spaine called Yerva gigante, in
Fraunce Blanca vrsina, in English





Beare foote or Beare clawe.

* Acapádo, m.hid vnder the cloke, stolne
on by creeping priuily.

* Acapár, to hide vnder the cloke, to
steale on by creeping priuily.

* Acaparrádo, come vnder another
mans cloke, defended, protected or
shrowded by another man.

* Acaparrárse, to come vnder an other
mans cloke, to shrowd, protect or defend
himselfe by or vnder another man.

* Açár, vide Azár. 

* Açarcón, vide Azarcón. 

* Acareár, vide Acarreár. 

* aCariciádo, cockered, dandled or much
made of.

aCariciár, to cocker, dandle, make much
of , or entertaine with all curtesie.

* Acarnánia, f. a prouince in Albania
famous for horses.  Also a part of
Greece called Epirus.  Also a countrie
in Egypt, and a citie by Syracúsa in
Sicilie.

* Açaróte, vide Azaróte. the name of
a tree in Perisa like the incense
tree.

Acarreadízo, any thing brought or ca­
ried.

* Acarreadór, a bringer or carrier of any
thing.

Acarreadúra, a cariage or bringing.

Acarreár, to bring, to carie, to conuey
any thing by cariage any way, or by
any meane.

* Acarréo, m.any thing brought, ca­
riage.

aCarréto, m.vide Acarreadúra, a ca­
riage.

* aCáso, by chance.

* Acatádo, reuerenced, respected, regar­
ded, honored.

aCatadúra, the countencance, presence,
aspect, view, shew or semblance.

aCatamiénto, reuerence, beholding, re­
gard, marking, noting, aspect.

Acatár, to reuerence, to honor, to beholde,
to regarde, to looke to, to marke.

* aCavállo, on horse backe.

* Acavár or Acabár, to make an end of,
to finish, to conclude, to die.

* Acaudaladór, m.a summer vp, a brin­
ger to a head.

aCaudalár, to summe vp, to set forward,
to bring to a head.

Acaudilladór, m.a commaunder or lea­
der of soldiers.

aCaudillamiénto, the leading or guiding
of soldiers, the commaund ouer men at
armes.

aCaudillár, to leade, guide, or haue com­
maund ouer soldiers.

* aCávo or aCábo, at the head or end.

* Açébo, vide Azébo. 

* Acebúche, vide Azebúche. 

* Accepción, allowance, an accepting or
taking in good part.

* Accessór, m.an accessarie, a consenter
vnto.

* Accessoriaménte, accessarily, con­
sentingly.

* Accésso, an adding to, an addition.

* Accessório, m.any thing that is acces­
sarie or second, and not principall, that
is more than ordinarie.

Acción, a deede, an action.

* Accomodádo, vide Acomodádo. 

* Accomodár, vide Acomodár. 

* Accreditádo, m.vide Acreditádo,
hauing good credite or reputation.

* Accustumbrádo, vide Acostum­
brádo. 

* Acechádo or Assechádo, watched,
marked, eied, lien in waite for, en­
trapped.

* Acechadór or Assechadór, one that
lieth watching or spying, one that lieth
in ambush to entrap.

* Acechadóra cósa, or Assechadóra
cósa, any thing lieing in waite, spying
or prying into any thing.

* Acechamiénto, m.vide Assechánça. 

* Acechánça or Acechánza, f. a lying 
in waite, a watching to entrap.

* Acechándo, by eying, peering or pry­
ing, by lying in waite.

* Acechár or Assechár, to eie, marke,
peere or peepe, to lie in waite or am­
bush.

* Acéchia, f. a gutter or conduit to con­
uey away the water.

* Acecinadór, m.one that salteth flesh.

* Açedár, vide Azedár. 

* Açedía, vide Azedía. 

* Acédo, vide Azédo. 

* Açedúra, vide Azedúra. 

* Aceleración, f. a haste making, a spee­
ding or making speede.

* Acelerádo, m.hastened speeded.

* Aceleramiénto, m.a hastning, a speed
making.

* Acelerár, to make haste, to hasten, to
make speede.

† Acélga, f. an herbe called a Beete. Some
say it is Birch.

* aCemitárra, vide Cimitárra. 

† Acemíte, flower of meale, the finest of
the bran.

* aCéna, vide Acéña, also at supper.

Acendrádo, excellent, perfect, cleere.

* Acendrár, to make very pure, cleere,
perfect, excellent.

† Acéña, Haçéña, or Hazéña, a water
mill.

* Acendér, vide Encendér. 

Aceñéro, m.a miller keeping a water
mill.

Acénto, m.an accent, the tune, or manner
of pronunciation of a sullable long or
short.

Acentuár, to accent, to tune, or note the
accent.

* Acepilládo, m.smoothed or planed.

* Acepilladór, m.one that smootheth,
shaueth or planeth as a Ioyner vseth.

Acepilladúras, f. shauings, rindes or
scales of wood, mettall, &c. remnants,
fragments, scantlings, &c.

Acepillár, to shaue, smooth or plane a
thing, to sleeke.

Aceptáble, woorthie the allowance, ac­
ceptable, welcome, well thought of.

Aceptación, f. allowance, acceptance,
welcoming, taking in good part.

* Aceptádo, m.allowed, well thought of
accepted, welcome, taken in good part.

Aceptár, vide Acetár, to accept, to allow,
to take in good part, to thinke well of.

Acépto, vide Acéto, m.acceptance ta­
king in good part.

† Acéquia, f. a trench, furrow, gap or ditch
to conuey water, a kennell in the streets
for a water course.

aCérca, near by, close by, fast, or hard by.

* aCercádo, m.come neere to, approched,
prest, or ready at hand.

aCercamiénto, m.a comming neere to,
an approching or drawing neere to.

aCercár, Præs. yo acérco, 1. Præt. yo
acerqué, to approch, to draw neere, or
to come nigh to. To be prest or readie at
hand.

* aCércateme, come thou about me, or,
be neere me, or readie at my hande.
Come hither.

* Acerbaménte, sharply, sowerly.

* Acérbo, or Ágro, m.sharpe, sower,
tart, eager in tast, &c.

* Acéro, vide Azéro. steele.

* aCerravélas, or Aserravélas, coards
in a ship called the marke lines.

* Acertádo, m.assured, vndoubted, be­
ing so without faile.

* Acertadór, m.hee that doth a thing
without faile.  A good shooter, a hitter
of the white.

Acertamiénto, m.a hitting right, hit­
ting the nayle on the head, not fayling.

Acertár, yo aciérto, to hit the nayle on
the head, to happen right, not to faile.  To
be out of doubt.

* Acessório, m.any thing that is accessa­
rie, an not principall.

Acetádo, or Aceptádo, m.allowed.

* Acetár, or Aceptár, to allow, to ac­
cept, to like well of.

* Acetósa yérua, f. a kind of herbe.

* Acéto, or Acépto, m.an acceptance, an
allowance, or taking in good part.

Acétre, m.a bucket of brasse, a copper





kettle, such as brewers take vp water
with.

Acetrería, f. the place where are solde or
made kettels, brasse buckets, or such
like, &c. A brasiers shop.  Also vide Cetreria.

Acetréro, m.a brasier, one that selleth or
maketh kettles, &c.  Also vsed for a
fawlconer.

aCevadádo, m.cloyed with meate, cram­
med, made to loath food.

aCevadamiénto, m.a cramming or cloy­
ing with meate.

* aCevadár, to cram, or cloy with meate.

aCevadárse, or aCevastarse, to be cram­
med or cloyed with meate, to loath, to
be ouerfull.

Aceviládo, m.wretched, miserable, base,
of small reputation.

* Acevilarse, to be base, wretched, mise­
rable, or of no reputation.

Acezár, to breath, to fetch winde hardly,
to gaspe for breath, to sigh, to pant.

Acezo, m.breathing, fetching of winde
hardly, sighing, panting.

Acezóso, m.he that breatheth, panteth,
sigheth, or fetcheth his winde hardly.

* Ácha, or hácha, f. a torch, a hatchet
or battle axe.

Achacár, Præs. yo Acháco, 1. Præt.
yo achaqué, to excuse, to finde an er­
rand, or some excuse, to finde occasion,
to lay to ones charge, to beare wit­
nesse.

Achacóso, m.one that findeth excuses
or occasions, a cauiller.

Achaque, m.an errand, excuse, occasion,
cauill.

* Acherón, m.a riuer by the hill Auer­
nus, called the infernall lake: the Po­
ets saine Acherón to be the sonne of
Ceres, and that assoone as he was born,
not daring to behold the light, he ran
downe to hell, where he became a bitter
riuer: Acheron also signifieth sad,
heauie.

aChicádo, m.diminished, made small,
shortened, drawen togither into a little
compasse.

aChicadúra, f. diminishing, making
small, curtailling, bringing into short.

aChicár, Præs. yo Achico, 1. Præt.
yo Achiqué, to lessen, diminish, make
little, or short, to couch togither
briefly.

* Achocádo, m.striken downe, laide
along, felled.

* Achocadór, m.one that striketh down,
felleth, or laieth along.

Achocár, Præs. yo Achuéco, 1. Præt.
yo Achoqué, to strike downe, to fell,
or make fall, to lay along.

* Achuchár, to presse or straine close to­
gither.

* Achuéco, Achoque, vide Acho­
cár. 

* Achuecádo, vide Achocádo. 

* Achuecadór, vide Achocadór. 

† Acibar, m.a bitter herbe, or iuice of an
herbe called Aloes.

* Acibarrár en la paréd, to dash against
the wall.

Acicaládo, m.polished, burnished, or
trimmed vp.

Acicaladúra, f. polishing, burnishing, or
trimming vp.

† Acicalár, to polish, burnish, trimme, or
smooth vp.

* Acidália, f. the surname of Venus.

Acidentál, chauncing, happening, or ca­
suall.

Acidénte, a chaunce, accident, or that
happeneth.

Acidia, f. sloth, lasines.

* Acidióso, m.slothfull.

* aCiégas, blindfold.

Aciél, vide Azéro, steele.

* Acierte, Acierto, vide Acertár. 

Ación, f. an action, also a styrrup lea­
ther.

Aciónes, f. stirrup leathers.

Aciprés, m.cypres trees.

* Acipréste, an arch-priest, a chiefe
priest.

† Acitára de silla, the saddle tree.  Acitára, signifieth the wall or railes that
are made brest high in a turret of a
wall or house.

Aclaración, f. making manifest, clea­
ring.

Aclarádo, m.manifested, cleared, made
euident.

* Aclarádor, m.a declarer manifestly,
one that cleareth or maketh the matter
plaine, a quieter of controuersies.

Aclarár, to cleare, to make manifest, to
open, to explaine, to make faire, to
quiet.

* Aclavílla, f. a kinde of instrument,
which diers vse in dying their cloth or
stuffe.

* Acobardár, or Acovardár, to plaie
the coward, to be timorous or feare­
full.

* Açoçár, to eg, to set on, to incite, prouoke or stirre vp.

aCoceádo, m.kicked, spurned.

aCoceadór, m.a kicker, a spurner.

aCoceamiénto, m.kicking, spurning.

aCoceár, to kicke, to spurne, to trample
vnder foote.

* aCodádo, m.vide Recodádo, leaned
on the elbowe.

Acodadúra, leaning on the elbow, stri­
king with the elbow.

aCodar, to leane on the elbowe, or to
strike with the elbowe.

aCodár vides, to ioint vines, to plant
them in the ground.

aCodadúra de vides, f. the taking
roote, or the rootes of vines vnder
ground.

† Açótar, m.brasse as it was mined.

* Açosarádo, done or laid on with
brasse, brased.

† Açoféifa, Azoféifa, or Açoféyfa, f. 
a fruit called of apothecaries Iujuba.

* Açofeifádo, or Açofeyfádo, m.a
kinde of meate, or any thing with Iujuba the
fruite.

* † Açoféifo, or Açoféyfo, m.the tree
that beareth the fruite of Açofeifa,
id est Iujuba, the Iujuba tree.

aCogedór, m.one that doth entertaine,
one that retireth.

aCogér, yo aCójo, Sub. Præs. a Coja,
to entertaine, to retire, to bring backe,
to prouide.

* aCogido, m.entertained, returned,
prouided, brought backe.

aCogimiénto, m.entertainment, re­
turne, prouision, bringing backe.

* Açógue, vide Azógue. 

* Acohombrádo, m.made like a cu­
cumber.

* aCója, aCójo, vide aCogér. 

Açomádo, prouoked, mooued, stirred vp,
incited.

Açomamiénto, a stirring, prouocation,
incitement.

Açomár, to prouoke, to stir vp, to mooue,
or incite.

Açómbre, vide Açúmbre, a measure
about three wine quarters in Eng. and,
it containeth fower Quartillos in
Spaine.

aCometedór, m.one that setteth on, as­
saileth, or taketh a thing in hand.

aCometedóra, cósa, f. an inuasiue mat­
ter.

aCometér, to assaile, to set vpon, to take
in hand, to inuade.

* aCometída, f. an assailing, a setting
vpon, an inuading.

* aCometido, m.set vpon, assailed, vn­
dertaken, inuaded.

aCometimiénto, m.an inuading, assai­
ling, setting on, or taking in hand.

* Acomodádo, m.fitted, made handsom,
setled, made apt for the purpose.

* Acomodamiénto, m.fitting, ma­
king handsome, setling, &c.

* Acomodár, to make fit, meete, conue­
nient or handsome, to settle, or place
well.

* aCompañádo, m.accompanied, follo­
wed, borne, or kept companie with.





aCompañadór, m.one that vseth com­
panie, fellowship, goeth or commeth
with, &c.

aCompañamiénto, m.a keeping com­
panie, fellowship, going or comming
with, &c.

aCompañár, to accompanie, to associate,
to bee fellowlike with, to go or come
with.

* aComplimiénto, m.a supplie of soul­
diers, a supplie of any matter else.

* Acónito, Libbardes bane, or Wolues
bane, an herbe to poison.

* aConsejádo, m.counselled, aduised.

* aConsejár, to counsell, to aduise, to
direct.

aContecér, yo aContésco, to happen,
to chance, or fall out.

* aContecído, aContescído, or aCa­
ecído, hapned, chanced, or fallen out.

* Acontecimiénto, vide Acaecimi­
énto. 

* aContésca, aContésco, vide aCon­
tecér. 

* aContescér, vide aContecér. 

* Acopádo, árbol. m.a tree whose boughs
grow, or are made to grow round togi­
ther as a cup.

* † Açór, m.a hauke, a goshauke.

Açorado, m.firece, wilde.

* Acoraládo, m.done with corrall.  Also
vide Acorraládo.

Açorárse, to waxe fierce, to be wilde.

* Acordádo, remembered, thought vpon,
agreed, tuned, or agreed as in musicke
or harmonie.

Acordár, yo Acuérdo, to remember, to
awake, to cal to remembrance, to agree,
to put in minde, to agree togither, to
sound well in harmonie, to determine.

Acórde, m.agreement, consenting in
opinions, or in musicall harmonie.

* Acordeléjo, m.an instrument to plucke
haires from the head or eie-browes.  Al­
so a iesting, mocking, or scoffing at one
to withdraw him from any thing.  Al­
so a racking with coardes.

* † Açóres, haukes.  Also the Ilands Açó­
res, where many haukes are.

Acóro, m.sweete Cane, Galingale.

* Acorraládo, m.driuen vp, or closed vp
in a corner, pounded vp.  Also dressed or
done with corall.

Acorralár, to close vp, to driue into a cor­
ner, to pound vp.  Also to dresse with 
corall.

aCorrér, to run to, to helpe, to succour, or
aide.

Acórro, m.helpe, succour, or aide.

* aCortádo, shortned, clipped, cut off,
abridged.

* aCortár, to shorten, to cut off, to clyp,
to abridge, to diminish, to abate, to de­
falke.

* aColsádo, or aCosádo, m.pricked,
spurred on, stung, set on, incited.

aCossadór, m.one that pricketh, sting­
eth, vrgeth much, inciteth, &c.

* aCossamiénto, m.pricking, stinging,
vrging.

aCossár, to pricke, to sting, to incite, or
vrge vehemently.

* aCósta. i. a Cósta, f. at cost, charge, or
expence, or at the seacoast.

* aCostádo, m.leaned, or layne downe
vpon the side, belonging to, attending
on.

aCostamiénto, m.sitting, lying, leaning
vpon one side.  Bribes, waiting or attend­
ing on.

Acostár, Acostárse, to sit, to lye, to leane
on one side.  Also to bribe.

* aCostumbrádo, m.accustomed, woon­
ted, vsuall.

* aCostumbrár, to accustome, to vse, to be
woont.

* Acotación, f. marking downe, or quo­
ting of a thing.

Açotadízo, m.he that is whipped, or one
subiect to whipping.

* Açotádo, m.whipped or scourged.

* Acotádo, m.quoted, marked, noted as a
booke.

Açotadór, m.a whipper, a scourger. Also
a whip, a scourge.

Açotamiénto, m.whipping, scourging.

Açotár, to whip, to scourge.

* Acotár, to marke downe, or quote a
thing.

* Acotatión v. Acotación, f. a quoting 
of any thing.

Açóte, m.a whip.

Açotéa, f. a flat roofe couered with lead
or plaister:  a leades.

* Acotejádo, m.quoted or compared to­
gither.

aCovardádo, or aCobardádo, made a
coward.

aCovardár, or aCobardár, to make
cowardlike, hartles, whiteliuered.

aCrecentádo, m.augmented, increased,
inlarged.

* aCrecentadór, m.an inlarger, increa­
ser, augmenter.

aCrecentamiénto, m.increase, aug­
menting, enlarging.

aCrecentár yo aCreciénto, to aug­
ment, to increase, to inlarge.

* aCreciénte, aCreciénto, vide aCre­
centár. 

* aCreditádo varón, m.a man of good
credit, reputation, or wealth.

* aCreditár, to coutenance one, to giue
him credit.  To helpe one to office or
place.

* aCreedór, m.a creditor.

* aCrescér, or aCrecér, to grow, in­
crease, or augment.

* aCrescimiénto, m.vide acrecimi­
énto, an increase or growing.

* Acrevilládo, m.pierced thorow with
diuers holes.  Also one wounded with
diuers stocadoes.

* Acrevillár, to pierce thorow with di­
uers holes.  To wound with diuers sto­
cadoes.

* Acrisoládo, m.purified in a melting
pan, or pot of a goldsmith.  Also purifi­
ed, refined, as gold and siluer.

* Acrisolár, to put into a goldsmithes
melting pot.  To refine or purifie gold or
siluer.

* Áctimo, m.a small distance in mea­
sure.

* Áctio, vide. Acción. 

* Ácto, vide. Aúto. 

* Actór, a dealer, an actor.

* Açúar, vide Acúcar. 

† Açúcar, m.Sugar.

Açúcar piédra, or Açúcar candy, su­
gar candie.

Açucarádo, m.dressed with sugar.

† Açucéna, white Lilly.

aCuchilládos, with blowes, with cuts
or slashes.

* aCuchilladízo, one that is slashed, cut
or wounded with cuts and slashes.

* aCuchilládo, m.cut, slashed, wounded, 
hewed.

* aCuchilladór, m.a hackster, a cutting
fellow, a swashbuckler.

aCuchillár, to cut, to wound, to hew, to
slash, to kill, to fight.

Acúçia, f. sharpnes of edge, quicknes of
wit, diligence, curiosity, heedfulnes.

Acuciár, to sharpen, to make quicke con­
ceited, to make heedfull, or diligent.

Acuciosaménte, sharply, wittily, heed­
fully, diligently.

Acucióso, m.sharp, witty, heedfull, dili­
gent.

* Acuclíllas, on the buttocks as dogs or
diuers beastes sit.

† Açúda, f. a trench, a great wheele to cast
water with, or drawe water withall
from any place.

* Acudído, m.repaired vnto, drawen
neere vnto, assembled, approched to,
come vnto, yeelded to, restored.

Acudimiénto, m.a gathering to, repay­
ring vnto, assembling, approching neer,
comming vnto, restored, or yeelded
vnto.

Acudír, to come to, to repaire vnto, to as­
semble, to approch or draw neere vnto.
To restore, to yeeld vnto.

Açuéla, or Haçuéla, f. a little pick axe, a
little axe, a hatchet, a coopers ads or
axe.





* Acuérde, acuérdo, vide Acordár. 

Acuérdo, or Conciérto, m.a decree, an
ordinance, a determination, an agree­
ment.

* aCuéstás, vpon the shoulders, on the
backe.

* Sessenta áños aCuéstas, three score
yeeres on the backe, or three score yeeres
olde.

* aCuéste, aCuésto, vide aCostár. 

* Açusrádo, m.smoked, perfumed or
done with brimstone.

* Açufrár, to smoke or doe with brim­
stone.

* † Açúfre or çúfre, m.brimstone.

Acúlla, there, thither, thence, that way.

* † Açumbár, vide Azumbár. 

† Açúmbre, m.a kinde of measure about
three wine quartes of England.

aCumuládo, m.heaped on.

Acumulár, to heape on, to lay one vpon
another.

* Acunçadór, m.one that polisheth any
thing, setteth in order or trimmeth vp.

* † Acunçár, to polish, set in order, or trim
vp.

* Acuñádo, m.coined as monie, cleaued
with wedges, forged with hammers,
&c.

Acuñadór, m.a coiner. Also a cleauer
with wedges, one that striketh a stampe
into a thing.

Acuñár, to cleaue with wedges, to coine,
to forge as Smithes do, to giue a stampe
vnto.

* Acurtidór, vide Curtidór, m.

* Acurtir, to steepe, to make readie, to tan
leather.

Acusación, f. an accusing, blaming, lay­
ing to ones charge.

Acusádo, m.accused, blamed, founde
fault with, laide to his charge, complai­
ned of, reprooued, guiltie.

* Acusadór, m.an accuser, a finder of
faults, a blamer, a reproouer, a promo­
ter, a plaintife.

Acusadóra cósa, f. a matter procuring 
blame, or belonging to accusation, re­
proofe or complaint.

Acusár, to accuse or lay to ones charge, to
blame, finde fault with, to reprooue, 
promote, or commence plea against.

* Acusatívo, m.accusatiue, full of accu­
sations or finding faults or blames, full
of complaints.

* Acusatívo cáso, m.the accusatiue
case.

* Acustumbrár, vide Acostumbrár. 

* † Açutéa. f. the roofe of a house couered
with Lead or plaister, or a high walke
or gallerie on the top of a house, as in
Spaine they for the most part haue: the
Leads.


A D
* Adagío, a prouerbe.

* † Adahála, f. vide Adehála, any thing
or gift giuen or taken ouer and aboue
the price agreed vpon in a bargaine.

† Adalíd, m.a leader or gouernor of men,
a guide.

† Adárga, f. a short and light target or
buckler, which the Africans and
Spanyards doe vse.

Adargádo, m.a targettier, one that ca­
rieth or vseth such a target or buckler.

Adargár, Adargárse, Præs. yo Adár­
go, 1. Præt. yo Adargué, to vse such
a target or buckler.  Also to make a
stand, or prepare for defence.

Adárme or Adáreme, m.a dram in
weight.  Also a certaine peece of monie
vsed of some for agrote.

† Adárves, m.battlements of wals.

* Adaután bevér, to carowse in drin­
king.

* Abdertído, vide Advertído. 

* Adbítrio, arbitriment, award, iudge­
ment, aduise, opinion, will, pleasure.

* † Adehála, f. any thing or gift giuen or
taken ouer and aboue the price agreed
vpon in a bargaine.

* Adejár, id est, aDexár, to leaue, to
forsake, to forgoe, to let passe. Vide
Dexár.

* Adelánde, vide Adelánte. 

Adelantádo, m.a Lord deputie or presi­
dent of a countrie for the king, a prin­
ces lieutenant in a prouince, or any
great place of charge.  Also preceded,
gone before, exceeded, aduaunced for­
ward.

Adelantamiénto, m.the authoritie and
office of such a Lord president or de­
putie.  Also a going before, an aduaun­
cing forward, a preceding.

Adelantár, Adelantárse, to excell other,
to go before other, to leade other the
way, to be the principall man.

Adelánte, before, aforehand, beyond.

* alli Adelánte, thencefoorth.

* mas Adelánte, furthermore, moreouer.

Adélsa, f. the herbe called Enula cam­
pana.

† Adelgaçár, vide Adelgazár. 

Adelgazádo, m.made small, fine or slen­
der, drawne out in length.

* Adelgazadór, m.one that maketh
small, fine or slender, one that draweth
at length.

Adelgazamiénto, m.making small, fine
or slender, drawing at length.

Adelgazár or Adelgaçár, to make slen­
der, small or fine, to draw out at length.

* Adelgazár la plúma, to make a pen to
write small.  Also to write or endite
curiously with skill and finenesse.

Ademán or Ademánes, m.behauiour,
gesture, cariage of a man.

* aDemás, ouer and aboue.

aDentelládas, f. by bites, by mouthfuls,
bitingly.

* aDentelládo, m.bitten, gnawed with
the teeth.

* aDentelladór, m.a biter, one that
gnaweth like a dog.

aDentelladúra, f. biting, gnawing.

aDentellár, to gnaw, to bite.

aDéntro, within, inwardly, priuately, in
secret.

Adereçadaménte, directly, redilie,
prouidently, orderly.

* Adereçádo, m.made readie, prepared,
furnished, prouided, directed.

Adereçamiénto, m.readines, preparati­
on, furnishing, ordering.

Adereçár yo Aderésco, to prepare, to 
make readie, to make streight, to pro­
uide, to direct.

* Aderéços de casa, furniture for a
house.

Aderéço, m.preparation, making
streight, direction, order.

Adesóras, f. or Adezóras, out of time,
out of season, vnlooked for, vnthought
on: vpon a sodaine, in hast.

aDespécho, m.in despight, despightful­
ly, maugre his bearde, will he, nill he.

* aDestrár yo aDiéstro, to direct or
guide into the right way or course, to
make dextrous or readie.

aDeudádo, m.indebted, bound to ano­
ther in summes of money.

aDeudárse, to be indebted, to be bound or
in danger to another.

* aDevinár, to prophecie, to tell afore­
hand, or to tell strangely.

* aDevíno, m.a soothsaie, one that can
prophecie or tell things strangely.

* aDiáfano, or aDiáphano, vide Diá­
fano, a thing transparent or to be seene
thorow, as water, aire, &c.

* Adición, f. an addition or putting to
of any thing.

* aDiestrádo, m.directed or guided in­
to the right, made readie or dextrous
in any thing.

* aDiestradór, m.one that directeth or 
guideth into the right.  A maker ready,
or dextrous in any thing.

* aDiestrá, Adiéstro, vide aDestrár. 

* Aditaménto, an addition, a supply.

* † Adívas, the quincie, or squinancie in a
beast.  Also crooked pinnes that put into
dogs meate killeth them.

Adíves, dogs in Barberie, which in the
night do barke continually.

aDivinación, f. prophecying, foretelling
of things to come, or strange reuealing





of matters.

* aDivinadór, one that can prophecie,
foretell things to come, or can reueale
strangely.

* aDivinánça, f. soothsaying, prochecy­
ing, or reuealing of things strangely.

aDivinár, to tell of things to come, to pro­
phecie or reueale strange things.

aDivíno, m.a soothsayer, a teller of for­
tunes, a reuealer of strange matters.

adMinistración, f. bearing an office,
managing of affaires, exploiting of
some thing.

adMinistradór, m.he that beareth and
vseth an office, manageth affaires, or
employeth any thing.

adMinistradóra cosa, f. a matter that
may be ordered by gouernement.

adMinistrár ofício, to beare or discharge
an office.

adMinistrár la haziénda, to manage 
affaires, to exploite a matter, to go­
uerne a houshold, to dispose of goods.

* adMiráble, woonderfull, maruellous,
admirable, excellent.

* adMirableménte, wonderfully, in mar
uellous manner, admirable, miracu­
louslie, excellently, honorably.

* adMiración, f. woondering, maruel­
ling, admiration, surpassing common
reason.

adMirádo, m.woondered at, admired,
holden in great estimation, honored.

* adMiradór, m.one that maruelleth,
woondereth at, or holdeth in great ac­
count.

* adMirár, to woonder at, to hold in ad­
miration, to honor, to account miracu­
lous.

* Admitído, m.allowed, admitted, re­
ceiued, liked, permitted.

* Admitír, to allowe, to admit, or permit,
to receiue in, to bring in, to commit, to
approoue, to like.

* aDo, where.

Adóba, f. vide Adóbo, sauce, dipping,
mending, or botching or things.

Adobádo, m.mended, patched, or bot­
ched, dawbed, or plaistered, dipped in
sauce.

* Adobadór, m.a botcher, mender, or
patcher.

Adobár, to mende, to sauce, to botch clo­
thes, or cobble shooes, to daube, or plai­
ster.

Adobár manjáres, to dip meates in sauce

Adóbe de bárro, mortar, clay, &c.

* Adóbio, vide Adóbo, m.

* Adóbo, mending, repairing. Also
sauce for meate.

Adóbo de manjáres, m.sauce for meate.

Adolecér, to waxe sicke, to become fee­
ble, or ill at ease, to greeue, to be sorrie,
or ill apaide.

Adolentárse, to be sicke, to be sorrie, to
be greeued, to bee ill at ease, or full of
paine.

aDónde, whither, where.

aDonde quíera, whither soeuer, where­
soeuer.

Adopción, f. taking for his childe, chal­
lenging for his owne.

Adoptádo, m.taken to be as a naturall
sonne or heire, challenged or taken to be
his owne.

* Adoptadór, m.one that taketh another
mans childe to be as his owne, a challen­
ger of other mens works to be his owne.

Adoptár, to take another mans childe to
be as his owne naturall, to arrogate or
challenge another mans praise as his
owne, to take from another to himselfe.

Adoración, f. worshipping, with great
submission.

* Adorádo, m.worshipped with great
submission.

Adorár, to worship with kissing the hand,
and in most reuerend and humble sort.
To reuerence.

aDormescér, or adormecér, to nap, to
sleepe, to bring a sleepe.

aDormecído, or aDormido, m.brought
a sleepe, napping, lulled a sleepe.

* aDormidéras, f. a certaine herbe pro­
uoking or causing sleepe, growing much
in the field, called wilde Poppie.

aDormído, or aDormecído, sleepie, gi­
uen to sleepe, sluggish.

aDormir yo aDuérmo, to fall on sleepe,
to sleepe.

* aDormimiénto, m.a drowsie sleeping,
a sleepie slugging.

* adOrnádo, m.decked, trimmed vp,
adorned, garnished.

* adOrnadór, m.a decker, furnisher,
trimmer vp of things.

adOrnamiénto, m.decking, garnishing,
trimming vp, making faire to the shew,
or burnishing.

adOrnár, to decke, to trim vp, to adorne,
to burnish, to apparell, to aduance, to
furnish, to honor, to make faire, to shew,
to beautifie.

* adOrnáto, m.decked, furnished, made
faire to looke to, apparelled, honored, or
a decking, trimming, furnishing, beau­
tifieng.

* adÓrno, m.garnishing, furniture,
beautifieng.

* adÓrno poético, m.poeticall grace,
handling the matter like a poet.

* Adovádo, vide Adobádo. 

* Adovár, vide Adobár. 

* Adovár, to amend, to botch, to cobble, to
sawce, to dawbe or plaister.

adQuerído, or adQuirído, m.a Gotten
to, fastened thereto, made fast, procu­
red, purchased, obtayned.

* adQuiére, adQuiéro, vide Qui­
ár. 

adQuiridór, m.a procurer, getter to, ob­
tayner, purchaser.

* adQuirimiénto, m.getting thereto, 
purchasing, obtayning, procuring, tying, 
or fastening to.

adQuirír yo asQuiéro, to get or winne
to, to purchase, obtaine, or procure.  To
tye or fasten vnto.

Adráda, f. rare, that which happeneth
sildome.

* Adreçár, uide Adereçár. 

Adréde, purposely, wittingly, of set pur­
pose.

Adriánes, cornes in the feete or toes, called
of some wragnailes.

† Aduána, f. custome, toll, a custome house,
a toll-house.

† Aduanéros, m.customers, takers of toll.

† Aduár, m.a village of tents remoouea­
ble.  A streete of boothes or tents in
faires.  A shepherdes house or cottage.

adVenedízo, m.a stranger, strange, hap­
pening, chancing, casuall.

Avenedíza cosa, f. a strange matter.
A thing casuall.

* Advénga, Advéngo, vide Advenír. 

* adVenidéro, m.that which is to come,
or shall come.

* adVenimiénto, that which chaunceth
or happeneth. A casuall chaunce, a hap­
pening or falling out.

* adVenir, Præs. Advéngo, adviénes,
adviéne, 1. Præt. Advine, adviniste, 
advíno, Fut. Advendré, advendrás,
advendrá, Sub. Præs. Advénga, 
Imperfect. Adviniéra, adviniésse, or
Advendría, Fut. Adviniére, to come
to, to approch, to arriue.  To happen, to
chaunce, to fall out.

Adversário, m.an aduersare, an enimy, a
crosse friend.

Adversidád, f. aduersitie, ill fortune,
crosse-hap, pouertie, enemitie, contra­
rietie.

* Advérso, m.against, contrarie, aduerse,
vnfortunate, backward.

Adverténcia, f. marking, heed, looking,
weighing or considering or a matter.

* Advertidaménte, heedfully, warily,
with consideration.

* Advertído, m.Marked, taken heede
vnto.

Advertír yo adviérto, to marke, to take
heed of, to looke diligently vnto, to
weigh or consider, to admonish or giue
warning of.

† Adúse, a timbrell.

† Aduséro or Adusséro, a player on a 
Taber, a player on a timbrell, or one





that selleth them.

* Adviérta, Adviérto, vide Advertír. 

* adVine, adviniéra, adviniésse, vide adVenir. 

* Aduladór, m.a flatterer, a clawbacke,
a smoothbootes.

* Aduladóras palábras, f. fawning or 
flattering speech.

aDulcár, to sweeten, to make sweeter.

* aDulçir, to make sweete, to sweeten.

Adulterár, to commit adulterie, or whor­
dome, to counterface, or play false.

Adulterino, m.counterfaited, false, for­
ged, falsified.

Adultério, adulterie, whoredome.

Adúltero, m.an adulterer, a whoremon­
ger.

* Advogár, Præs. yo Advógo, 1. Præt.
 yo Advogué, to play the aduocate or
counsailor, to plead as a counsailor, to
giue counsell in lawe.

* Advogué, vide Advogár. 


A E
* aEcho, the voice, Echo, which answe­
reth by resounding the last word.

* aÉllos, m.to them.

aEmpuxónes, by thrusts, with pushings,
or thrusting, iustling, shouing.

* Aere, m.the aire.

* aEscondér, id est aEsconder, to hide,
to keepe secret, to keepe close.

aEscondidas, secretly, priuily, like a mi­
cher.

* aEscúras, in the darke, blindfoldly.


A F
Afabilidád, f. affabilitie, readinesse of
speech, easines to talke with, faire lan­
guage.

Afable, faire spoken, gentle in speech, cur­
teous to speake vnto, faire toonged, af­
fable.

* aFamádo, m.made famous.

* aFamadór, m.a bruter abroad of mens
reports, a carrier of newes.

* aFamár, to make famous.

Afán, m.labor, trauell, wearinesse, vex­
ation.

Afanádo, m.wearied, vexed, hauing la­
boured.

Afanár, to trauell, to labour, to weary, to
vexe.

aFé, by the faith, verily, truely, in good
sooth, in earnest.

* aFeádo, m.become foule, defiled, made
vnhandsome, dishonested, shamed, re­
uiled, deformed.

aFeadór, m.a defiler, one that maketh
foule, one that shameth, a reuiler.

aFeamiénto, m.making foule, defiling,
dishonesting, shaming, reuiling.

aFeár, or aFFeár, to make foule, to shame,
to defile, to dishonest, to disforme, to
reuile.

Afectádo, m.affected, minded, well li­
ked, wished before, desired.

* Afectár, to like, to affect.

Afécto, vide Aféto, affection, inclinati­
on, good liking.

Aféres, trifling busines, matters of small
moment.

* Aferrádo, m.grapled, hooked, fastened
togither.

* Aferrádos navíos, ships grapling to­
gither.

* Aferrár, yo Afiérro, to grapple, gripe, 
or hooke togither, to clinch or catch hold
on.

* Aféto, affection, inclination, good li­
king.

Afeytadéra, f. a barbers shop.

Afeytádo, m.barbed, combed, made faire
or white, painted on the face, shauen,
coloured, trimmed or decked vp.

Afeytadór, m.a barber, trimmer, dres­
ser, painter of faces, maker of folke
faire.

† Afeytár, to barbe, to combe, to trim, to
dresse, to paint the face, to make faire,
to die with colours, to crispe or curle
the haire, to make fine and braue.

Aféyte, m.painting for faces, colouring,
waters to make the face shine white,
flouish, or glasse to make a thing gli­
ster:  trim clothing.

Affamár, vide aFamár, to make famous.

* Affán, vide aFán. 

* Affanár, vide Afanár. 

Affeár, vide aFeár. 

* Affectádo, vide Afectádo. 

* Affécto, vide Aféto. 

* Afferrár, vide aFerrár. 

* Afféto, vide Aféto. 

* Áfice, m.an officer called a searcher or
ouerseer.

* aFFiére, vide aFerrár. 

* aFFilár, vide aFilár. 

* aFFirmár, vide aFirmár. 

* aFForrár, vide aForrár. 

Afición, f. affection, inclination, dispo­
sition.

* Aficionádo, m.affected, inclined, di­
sposed.

* Aficionár, to affect, like, bend him­
selfe to.

* Afiére, vide Aferrár. 

Afigír yo Afijo, to fasten, to ioyne to.

Afiláda, f. a file, to sharpen sawes with­
all, &c.

* Afiládo, m.filed, sharpned.

* Afiladór, m.one that doth sharpen
tooles.

Afiladúra, f. the edge of a toole or wea­
pon.

Afilár, to sharpen, whet, or file.

* aFinádo, made an ende of, perfected,
brought to an end, dead.

* aFinadór, m.a refiner, finisher, or ma­
ker perfect.

aFinadúra, perfecting, finishing, making
fine, dying.

aFinár, to make fine, to make perfect, to
finish, or bring to an end, to die.

* Afíne, kin, or hauing alliance by mar­
riage.  Also neere vnto, ioyning neere
togither.

* Afinidád, f. affinitie, alliance or kindred
by marriage.

Afirmación, f. an affirming, a warrant,
auouching or a making strong.

Afirmadaménte, affirmatiuely, by way
of warrant, auouching it to be so.

* Afirmádo, m.affirmed, warranted,
auouched, or made firme, fast and
strong.

* Afirmádo, or hécho Fírme, made
firme, fast, or strong.

Afirmadór, m.one that warranteth,
affirmeth, or confirmeth, or one that
maketh firme or strong.

Afirmár, to affirme, to warrant, to rati­
fie, to confirme, to set downe for cer­
taine, to establish, to auouch, to make
firme, strong, or fast.

Afistoládo, fistoled, or hauing a fistula,
a disease or soare growing to a perpe­
tuall issue thorow a long narrowe and
hard hole.  Also whistled or piped.

* Afistolár, to fisolate, to growe to a
fistula, a disease growing to a perpetu­
all issue, to whistle to pipe.

* Afixár, to set vp or fasten.

* Afletamiénto, the paying of fraight
for a ship.

* Afletár náos, to pay the fraight for the
goods or marchandize in a ship.

* Afligído, m.afflicted, distressed, 
brought to a hard passe, troubled.

* Afligidór, m.a troubler, afflicter, di­
stresser, a bringer to miserie.

Afligiménto, m.affliction, trouble, vex­
ation, anguish, molestation.

Afligír yo Aflíjo, to afflict, to vexe, to
greeue, to trouble, to molest.

* Aflija, Aflijo, vide Afligír. 

* aFloxádo, m.mitigated, asswaged,
softened, mollified, released, vnbended,
weakened.

* aFloxadór, m.one that slackneth, mit­
igateth, releaseth, asswageth, weak­
neth, mollifieth.

aFloxadúra, f. slacknes, weaknes, idle­
nes, slouthfulnes, basenesse of minde,
loosenes.

aFloxár, to let loose, to slacken, to wea­
ken, to be discouraged, to be idle, to





vnbend a bowe, to waxe base minded,
to waxe feeble.

* aFloxár las agujétas, to vntie points,
to vntrusse points.

* aFloxár el árco, to vnbende a bow.

* Aforádo, made subiect to the law.

* aForrádo, m.furred.

* aForradór, m.a skinner, a furrier.

* aForradúra, f. furring.

* aForrár, to furre.

aFórro, furre.

* aFortunadaménte, fortunately, lucke­
ly, happely.

* aFortunádo, m.fortunate, luckie,
happie.

* aFortunár, to make fortunate, luckie,
or happie.

* Afrechádo, m.the bran beaten out of 
meale.  Also all to be done with bran.

* Afrechadúra, f. the bolting or bea­
ting out of bran out of meale.  Also
dressing with branne.

* Afrechár, to bolt or beate out the
bran out of meale.  Also to beebran or
dresse with bran by casting bran on
any thing.

* Afrécho, bran.

Afrénta, f. shame, reproch, perill, danger,
disgrace, opprobate, disdaine, scorne.

* Afrentádo, m.reproched, disdained,
scorned.

* Afrentadór, one that reprocheth, dis­
graceth, casteth in the teeth, or scor­
neth.

Afrentár, or Afrontár, to reproch, to
disgrace, to dishonest, to bring into
danger.

* Afrentosaménte, reprochfully, disgra­
ciously, dangerously.

* aFrentóso, m.reprochfull, out of counte­
nance, out of grace, dangerous.

* Africáno, of or pertayning to Africke,
a man of Africke.

Afrontár, vide aFrentár. 

* aFuéra, without, aloofe of.

* Afúste, a company of pyoners, wheele
carriage of ordinances.

* Afuziádo, m.put in confidence or assu­
red hope.

* Afuziadór, m.one that putteth in sure
hope or confidence.

Afuziár, to put in hope, to trust, to assure,
to bid.


A G
Agaçapádo, squatted as a hare or co­
nie.

* Agaçapadór, m.one that squatteth as
a hare or conie.

† Agaçapár, or Agaçapárse, vide Aga­
chár. 

Agachádo, m.squatted as a hare or co­
nie.

† Agachár, to squat as a hare or conie.

Agálla, gálha, or Bugálla, gaules. The 
kernels in the necke.  The gill of a fish.

* Agálla de cípres, the Cypres nut.

Agállas de pésce, the gils of a fish.

Agállas en la gargánta, kernels in the
throte.

* Agardár, vide aGuardár. 

* Agarrádo, clasped, buckled.

Agarrár, to claspe, to buckle.

* † Agaréno, or Móro, a blacke Moore,
or neager.

Agárico, m.Agarike, a white and sweete
smelling mushrome, which shineth very
bright in the darke night: it groweth on
high in trees, especially in the larix tree.

* aGarrócha, vide Garrócha, a kinde
of dart of fadome long with a pike of
steele or yron, with which in Spaine
they cast, wound and strike in a bull set
loose within a raile betweene them.

* aGarrochádo, pricked or stroke in with
a dart, called in Spaine a Garrocha,
when they baite buls on horsebacke.

* aGarrochár, to strike in or wound a
bull with a Garrocha, which is a dart
of the height of a man with a steele
point or pike.  In Spaine knights and
gentlemen vse that exercise on horse­
backe to a bull being loose and vntied.

* aGarrachón, m.a great Garrócha,
which noblemen, knights, and gentle­
men vse a horsebacke, vide Garró­
cha.

* Agatádo, m.laide downe, creeping or
crowching on all fower.

* Agatár, to goe creeping on all fower, as
hands and feete.  A borrowed speech of
Gáto, which is a cat, to goe creeping as
a cat.

aGátas, creeping as a cat.

Agazadéra, vide Aguzadéra, a whet­
stone, whereon oyle being put, the gra­
uers and caruers do whet their instru­
ments.  It may be also taken for a bar­
bers whetstone.

* Agenádo, m.alienated, estranged.

* Agenadór, m.one that alienateth or
estrangeth, or withdraweth away his
friendship.

Agenamiénto, m.casting off, aliena­
ting or estranging.

Agenár, to alienate, to be vnacquainted
with, to abstaine from, to alter, to e­
strange.

Agenár el híjo, to cast off a sonne.

Agéno, or Ajéno, m.strange, diuers, vn­
like, not agreeable, estranged from vs,
not agreeing with.

Agéno sér de algúna cósa, to be vnac­
quainted with a matter.  To be estran­
ged or alienated from a matter.

Ageráto, m.a kinde of Agrimonie:  some
call it Mawdline, Eupatorie.

* Agí, m.a kinde of pepper which groweth
in India, it beareth a fruit or seed long
as ones finger: it bites in the mouth like
pepper, and for that vse the Indians
vse it in sauces and other meates.  It is a
kinde of long pepper.  The Spaniard cal­
leth it Pimiénto, id est. pepper.

Agijón, vide Aguijón, a pricke, a sting.

* Ágil, m.nimble, actiue.

* Agitides, veines vnder the toong.

* Agnádo, a kinsman by the fathers
side.

* Agiustár, to make iust, euen, straight.

* aGoçár, id est aGozár, to enioy, take
pleasure or delight in.

* Agolár la véla de navío, to hoise vp
saile as high as it will goe.

Agonía, f. Agonie.

* Agoniádo, m.pressed or vexed.

Agonizándo, giuing vp the ghost.

Agóra, id est, a óra, now of late, or a
while ago, hereafter, euen nowe, at
length.

Agorár yo Aguéro, to gesse at, to di­
uine, to foretell, to tell fortunes.

Agoréro, m.a soothsayer, a diuiner, a tel­
ler of fortunes, or of things to come, one
that gesseth neerely at matters, a cun­
ning man.

Agorería, f. skill in soothsaying, telling
of things to come, &c.

* aGorrachádo, vide aGarrochádo. 

* aGorrochár, vide aGarrochár. 

Agostadéro, m.a summer house, a ban­
quetting house, or garden house.

* Agostadór, m.one that dwelleth in a
summer house.

Agostár, to dwell in a summer house, to
summer in a place, to keepe in a garden
house.  Also to digge the grounde for 
vines in August.

Agósto, vide Aósto, m.the moneth Au­
gust.

* aGotádo, emptied, quite out, drawen
out euery drop.

* aGotadór, m.a emptier of welles or
pits, &c.

* aGotadúra, f. emptying of a well, pit,
or any other thing, drawing out of eue­
rie drop.

aGotár, to emptie, to drawe quite out.

Agoveár, to submit, to humble him­
selfe.

Ágra, vide Agúda. 

* aGraciádo, m.gratious, in fauour.

* Agradáble, gratefull, acceptable, well
liked of, pleasant.

* Agradableménte, pleasantly, accep­
tablie.

Agradádo, m.accepted, liked of.

Agradamiénto, gratefulnes, good accep­
tance, well liking, pleasing.





Agradár, to please, to like well, to de­
light.

Agradecér yo agradésco, to thanke, to
giueth thankes, to shewe gratitude.

Agradecído, m.thankefull, gratefull,
taken in good part.

Agradecimiénto, m.gratefulnes, thanks
giuing, gratifying, doing good.

Agradescér, vide Agradecér. 

Agraménte, sharply, sowerly.

Agramónia, vide Agrimónia. 

* Agravadaménte, vide Agraviada­
ménte. 

* Agravádo, vide Agraviádo. 

* Agravár, vide Agraviár. 

Agraviadaménte, greeuously, in achase,
vexingly, molestfully.

* Agraviádo, m.greeued, vexed, mo­
lested, greeuous, hainous.

* Agraviadór, m.one that vexeth, gree­
ueth, molesteth, troubleth, setteth in
a chase.

Agraviár, to greeue, to vexe, molest, or
set in a chase, to trouble.

Agrávio, m.greefe, vexation, trouble,
affliction, molestation.

Agrás, or Agráz, Veriuice, a sower
grape, honie vnmade, oyle vnclarified.

* Ágras palábras, sharpe or sower spee­
ches, bitter wordes.

* Agrélles, an herbe called Sorrell.

* Ágria, f. a nit in the haire.

* Agricultúra, f. husbandrie, tilling of
the ground, plowing.

* Agricultór, a tiller of the grounde, a
plowman, a husbandman.

Agrimónia, f. an herbe called Agrimo­
nie.

* Ágrio, vide Acérbo, sharpe, sower,
tarte.

Ágrio, or Acérbo, m.sower, tart, sharp.
Also a field.

Ágro, or Cámpo, m.a field.

Agrúra, f. sharpenes, tartnes of taste.

Água, f. water.

* Água de ángeles, a water drawen
out of white Roses, white Lillies, and
Iasmins.

* Água de Azahár, f. water of flo­
wers of Orenges.

Água rozáda, f. water of rose.

* Água de trébol, water of Tre­
foile.

Águas vívas, the spring tides, the flo­
wing and ebbing of the sea.

* Águas muértas, dead, or standing wa­
ters.  Also a cittie in Prouence.

* Aguáda, as Hagámos aguáda, let vs
take in fresh water into a ship. 

* Hazér aguáda, to take in fresh wa­
ter into a ship.

† Aguadáña, f. Guadáña, A syeth.

Aguadéro, m.a water bearer. Also the
sinke of a kitchin, &c.

Aguadór, vide Aguadéro. 

* Aguadór del Reál, a water bearer
to a campe.

Aguádo, m.watered, foundered as a
horse.  Also it signifieth one that drin­
keth nothing but water.

Aguadúcho, m.a conduit, a water­
course.

Aguaitádo, m.watched for, lyen in waite
for.

Aguaitadór, m.a lyer in waite for, a de­
ceiuer.

Aguaitadóra cósa, f. a deceitful matter,
a matter craftily compassed.

Aguaitamiénto, m.an ambush, a lying
in wait, craftie, packing, cunning con­
ueyance, deceitfull dealing.

Aguaitár, vide Assechár, to lay an am­
bush, to lye in waite for, to seeke for, to
deceiue or intrap.

Aguamanil, m.a bason, an ewer, a lauer.
Sometime a cruse, sinall pot or pit­
cher.

* Aguamános, water to wash the
handes.

Aguamiél, water with hony, meade.

Aguanóso, m.full of water, waterish.

Aguapie, m.the smaller, or second wine,
sharpe wine.  The first wine is called
Yénia; the second, Aguapie: the
third, Niéto.

* Aguár, to water, to alay with water.

* Aguár vino, to lay the strength of wine
by putting in water:  or, to mingle wa­
ter with wine.

* Aguardár, to waite for, to stay for, to
tarry for.

* Aguárdame vn póco, stay, or tarrie
for me a little.

* Aguarvár, vide Agradár. 

Aguatócho, m.the cocke of a conduit, a
tap to draw drinke at, a spoute, a sy­
ring: a water squirt.

* Agúcia, vide Acúcia, sharpnes, quick­
nes of conceit.

* Aguciadaménte, vide Acuciada­
ménte, sharply, wittily.

* Aguciár, vide Acuciár, to sharpen, to
quicken the wit.

* Agúda, or Ágra, vide Agra­
ménte. 

Agudaménte, sharply, wittilie, rea­
dily.

Agudéza, f. sharpnes, quicknes of conceit,
readines of wit, nimblenes of sight, the
edge of any weapon or toole.

Agúdo, m.sharpe in taste, quicke, concei­
ted, ready witted, quicke of sight, sharp
in cutting.

* Aguéla, or Abuéla, f. a grandmo­
ther.

Aguélo, or Abuélo, m.a grandfather.

* Aguére, Aguéro, vide Agorár, to 
soothsay, to tell fortunes, or foreshew of
things to come.

Aguéro, m.a soothsaying, a telling of for­
tunes, foreshewing of things to come.

* Agugerár, vide Agujerár, to make full
of holes.

* Agugéta, vide Agujéta, a point, a
lace.

* Agugetéro, vide Agujetéro, a point­
maker.

Agúja, f. a needle, a stone broad and large
below, and sharpe and narrow aboue.
Also a kind of fish.

* Agúja de bolsár, a stitching needle.

* Agúja de mareár, a compasse for mari­
ners to sayle by.

* Agúja marína, a fish with a long sharpe
beake like a needle.  Also an hearb with
a kinde of blade showting vp sharpe.

* Agújas pampíllas, an hearbe called
storkes bill.

Agúja péce, a garfish, piper fish, or horne­
beake.

* Agujáda, vide Aguijáda, f. a goade.

* Agujerádo, m.full of holes, made like a
lattish, cast crosse, cancelled or cut off.

Agujereádo, idem. 

* Agujerár or Agugerár, to make full of
holes, to make like a lattish, to cancell, to
misuse, to cast crosse.

* Agujerár vn nauio, to gowge or make
holes in a ship.

† Agujéro, m.a hole, a craine, a clift.

† Agujéta, f. a point, a lace, a latchet.

† Agujetéro, m.a point-maker, a maker
of laces.

Aguíja, f. a small peeble stone, shingle on
the seashore, grauell.

Aguijáda, f. a goade.

Aguijadór, m.one that pricketh forward,
he that driueth on or vrgeth.

Aguijadúra, f. pricking forward, driuing
on, hastening, posting on.

Aguijár, to pricke forwarde, to vrge or
driue on, to hasten, to make poast haste.

Aguijéño, m.full of peeble stones, grauel­
ly, or full of grauell.

Aguijón, m.a pricke of a goad, a sting.

* Aguijonázo, m.the pricking with a
goad or sting.

Aguijoneár, to sting, to pricke, to vrge or
driue forward.

Águila, f. an eagle.

* Águila pescadéra, an osprey.

* Águila négra, a hawke called a Saker.

* Águila atahorma, a hearon.

* Aguilándo, or Aguináldo, m.handsel,
or the first money that one taketh, a re­
ward.

* Aguileñádo, m.hooke nosed like an
eagle.

Aguiléño, of an eagle, or like an eagle.





Also long visaged.

* Aguilla, or Agulia, vide Agúja, f. 

Aguilócho, m.an eagles chicken, a yoong
eagle.

† Aguináldo, vide Aguilándo, handsel,
or reward.

* Agúlia, or Aguilla, vide Agúja, f. 

aGústo, m.with liking, to the good liking,
to his minde, as he would haue it.

* Aguxerár, vide Agujerár. 

* † Aguxerár vn nauío, to gowge a
ship.

Aguzadéra, f. a whetstone.

* Aguzamiénto, m.whetting, making
sharpe.

Aguzaniéve, a bird called a wagtaile.

Aguzár, to whet, to sharpen, to make the
point sharpe, to gnash with the tuskes as
a boare doth.


A H
* Ahagár, vide Ahogár. 

aHáo, ho, an aduerbe of calling.

* Ahechadór, m.a sifter or boulter of
meale, one that winnoweth corne, &c.

* aHechádo, m.sifted, winnowed, or fan­
ned.

aHechadúras, branne, chaffe, drosse or
dust of corne, &c.

Ahechár, to sift, to boult, to fan or win­
now corne, to purge, to make cleane.

Aheleár, to taste of gall, to be bitter.

* aHerrojádo, m.tyed with yrons or
chaines, loaden with yrons or chaines.

* aHí, as Quien viéne ahí? who comes
heere? or who is there, or who goes
there?

* aHidalgaménte, gentlemanlike, like
one of good bringing vp.

* aHidalgádo, brought vp like a gentle­
man, well nurtured, of gentleman like
conditions.

* aHijáda, f. adopted, or taken as his own
daughter, brought vp by hand from or
without the dame, a goddaughter.

aHijádo, m.adopted, or taken as his owne
sonne, brought vp by hand without the 
dame, a godson.

aHijamiénto, m.taking as his own child,
suckling by hand & fostering without
the dame.

aHijár, to adopt, or take for his owne
childe, to suckle by hande, to foster
without the dame, to beget spiritually,
or to be his ghostly father, or rather
his godfather.

aHiládo, m.waxed leane, become lanke,
or slender, mouldie.

aHilamiénto, m.waxing leane, becom­
ming lanke, growing mouldie.

aHilar, to waxe leane, to become lanke, to
grow mouldie.

aHincadaménte, earnestly.

aHincár, to be earnest, to pricke on or
vrge much, to hasten.

aHínco, earnestnesse, importunitie, 
haste.

aHinojár, to kneele.

* Ahirmádo, vide Afirmádo. 

* Ahirmár, vide Afirmár. 

Ahitádo, rawe stomacked.

Ahitárse, to haue a raw stomack, to want
good digestion of that he had eaten. 

Ahíto, m.rawnes of the stomacke, ill dige­
stion.

aHocinádo, m.any crooked thing made
like a hooke.

aHocinárse, to become crooked as a 
hooke.

Ahogádo, m.choaked, stopped, drowned,
quenched.

Ahogadór, m.a choaker, quencher, stran­
gler, or stopper.  A drowner.

Ahogamiénto, m.strangling, choaking,
quenching, stopping, drowning.

Ahogár, Præs, yo ahógo, 1. Præt. yo
ahogué, to choake, to strangle, to stop,
to quench, to drowne.

* Ahogue, vide Ahogár. 

* aHojadádo pan, m.a fritter, a fine
cake, or the rising of the crust in baking
as it were pimples.

* aHondamiénto, m.a diuing to the bot­
tome, a putting to the bottome.

aHóra, aóra, or agóra, now, of late, or a
while agoe, euen but now, at length,
hereafter.

* Ahorcadízo, m.one that is hanged, or
woorthie to be hanged.

Ahorcádo, m.hanged.  Also an vngrati­
ous gallowes.

* Ahorcadór, vide Verdúgo, m.

Ahorcadúra, f. hanging, execution of
malefactors.

Ahorcár, Præs. yo aHórco, 1. Præt. yo
Ahorqué, to hang vp on the gallowes,
to hang by.

* Ahornádo, m.put in an ouen, vide En­
hornádo.

aHornagárse la tiérra, to bee blasted,
burnt or scorched.

* aHórque, vide aHorcár. 

Ahorrádo, m.manumitted, or set free
where he was bond before, spared, deli­
uered.

* Ahorradúra, m.making free of one
that was bond, sparing, sauing of char­
ges.

Ahorramiénto, sauing of charge, spa­
ring, deliuerie.

Ahorrár, to saue charge, to spare, to deli­
uer, to make a bondman free.

* Ahorrár esclávo, to manumit, or set
free a bondman.

Ahotádo, m.bold, stomackefull, hardie,
emboldened.

* Ahotár, to make bold, stomackefull or
hardie.

* aHoyádo, m.ditched.

* aHoyadór, m.a ditcher.

aHoyadúra, f. digging of a ditch, or dit­
ches.

aHoyár, to dig a ditch.

* Ahuchár, to put in a hutch, chest,
trough, cupboord or presse.  To hoord
vp money.

* aHuéca, aHuéco, vide Aocár. 

Ahullár, vide Aullár, to howle, to roare.

aHumádas, f. smoakings.

aHumádo, m.smoakie or smoaked.

aHumár, to smoake, to make a smooother.

* aHurtáda, slily, or by stealth.

* aHurtadíllos, by stealth, vnawares.

aHusáda figúra, f. a thing shaped or fra­
med spindlewise.

* aHuyentádo, m.put to flight, made to
run away.

* aHuyentadór, m.one that putteth to
flight, or maketh to run away.

aHuyentár, to driue away, to put to
flight.

* Ahuziádo, trusted.

* Ahuzamiénto, m.a trusting, a confi­
dence.


A I
Ai, vide Ay, there, or at that place.

Ai or Ay, there is, there are.  Sometime it
is an Interiection of complayning and
signifieth, out alas.  But then AïorAÿ
is of two syllables.

Áia, vide Áya, f. a nurse, a schoolemi­
stresse.  A dame or mistresse.

* Ajáda, f. sauce made of garlike.

* Aianmádo, vide Animádo, m.anima­
ted, encouraged, hartened.

Aje, vide Agí. 

* Ajenamiénto, vide Agenamién­
to. 

Ajenár, vide Agenár. 

Ajéno, or Agéno, strange, of another
sort.

Áio, vide Áyo, a tutor, a schoolema­
ster.

* Aidúda, or Cristél, vide Ayúda, a 
glister.

* Aiér, vide Ayér, yesterday.

* Aiguiér, m.a sinke to wash vessell in.

Áime, vide Áyme, woe is me, alas.

Aina, vide Ayna, quickly, hastily.

Ájo, m.Garlike.

† Ajónge, or Ajónje, m.the iuice that
commeth from an herbe whereof they





make birdlime.

† Ajonjolí, a kinde of medicinall herbe
growing in Indies.

* Ajórcas, f. bracelets at the hands.

* Airadaménte, vide Ayradaménte, 
angrily, disdainefully, in a great chafe.

Airádo, vide Ayrádo, angie, in a great
chafe.

Airamiénto, vide Ayramiénto, anger,
disdaine.

Airár, vide Ayrár, to be angrie, to be in a
great chafe, to disdaine.

Áire, vide Áyre, m.the aire, winde,
breath, countenance, pleasantnes, beau­
tie, comelines.

Airóso, m.pleasant, comely, beautifull,
faire.  also airie, or of the ayre.

* Aisládo, vide Aysládo, compassed with
water.

Aislár, vide Ayslár, to compasse rounde
with water.

Aiúda, vide Ayúda, helpe, ayde. Also a
glister, or purgation.

* Aiudádo, vide Ayudádo, m.holpen,
aided.

Aiudadór, vide Ayudadór, m.a helper,
an ayder, one that standeth to it at a
pinch.

Aiudár, vide Ayudár, to ayde, to helpe.

Aiunár, vide Ayunár, to fast, or forbeare
meats.

Aiúno, vide Ayúno, fasting from meate.

* Aiunque, vide Ayunque. 

* Aiuntádo, vide Ayuntádo, ioyned, or
coupled to.

* Aiuntadór, vide Ayuntadór, one that
coupleth or ioyneth togither.

Aiuntamiénto, vide Ayuntamiénto, 
ioyning or coupling togither.

Aiuntamiénto con pariénta, Incest.

Aiuntár, vide Ayuntár, to ioyne, to cou­
ple togither, to marrie, to run togither,
to gather togither.

Aiúso, vide Ayúso, below, downwardes,
vnderneath.

* Dios en Ayúso, God excepted.

* Ajustádo, m.made Iust, euen, plaine,
straight.


A L
Al, or aEl, to the, vnto.

* Al, id est álgo, some, something, some be­
side.

Ala, f. a wing, the fins of a fish, the eaues
of a house.

Ala de Batálla, the wing of a battle.

* Ala de la gente de cavallo, a wing of
horsemen.

Ala yerva, an herbe called Enula cam­
pana.

* Ala de tejádo, the edge or skirt of a
gutter tile.  The eaues of a house.

* Alabádo, praised, commended, well spo­
ken of.

* Alabadór, m.one that praiseth, com­
mendeth or reporteth well.

Alabánça, f. praise, commendation,
laude.

Alabancióso, m.praising, commending, 
boasting, bragging.

* Alabánza, vide Alabánça. 

Alabár, to praise, to laude, to boast, to
vaunt, to commend.

Alabárda, f. a halbert.

* Alabardázo, m.a blow or stroke with
a halbert.

* Alabardéro, m.a halberdier, a yeoman
of the guard.

* Alabastríno, m.made of alabaster.

Alabástro, m.alabaster.

* Alaçán, vide Alazán. 

* Alacér, a circle.  Also a kind of herbe.

Alácha, f. herring, or a fish like a mac­
kerell.

† Alaçór, or Cartámo, m.an herbe
wherewith they die carnation. Bastard
saffron.

Alacrán, m.a scorpion.

Aladár, m.the haire of the head that
hangeth downe on the temples of the
head.

Aládo, m.winged.

* al Ládo, by the side.

* a la Fé, f. in faith, in troth.

* a la hé, f. idem. 

* a La gála, a La gála, f. gallantly, gal­
lantly, brauely, brauely.

* Alagár, or Halagár, to cocker, to flat­
ter, to make much of.

* Alágas, vide Halágos, cockerings,
making much of.

Alaguéno, or Halaguéño, flattering, 
cherishing, making much of, friendlie
entertainments, fawning blandish­
ments.

* al Álua, at the breake of the daie, at
the dawning of the daie.

* ala Máno, f. readie at hand.

* ala Máno alas Mános, at handes, at
blowes, at strokes.

* venír alas Mános, to come to handie
blowes, or to fight.

Alamáres, m.lace buttons.

* Alamarádo, m.laced with such but­
tons.

† Alambíque, m.or Alquitára, a lym­
becke or stillatorie.

† Alámbre, m.copper.

Alaméda, f. a poplar groue.

* † Alamín, a man of trust, a trustie
man, one on whom one may repose
trust and confidence.

Álamo blánco, m.poplar.

Álamo négro, or Negrillo, blacke pop­
lar, alder.

* † Alamúd, m.a bolt of yron with a
locke to it, a locke of a dore made bolt
wise.

* † Alamvíque, vide Alambíque. 

* † Alanbíque, vide Alambíque. 

Alançáda, f. an aker of ground.

* Alançádo, m.cast, buried, throwen.
Also vomited.

* Alançár, to cast, throw, hurle, to thrust
forward.  Also to vomite.

* Alanceádo, m.wounded or deadlie
hurt with the stroke of a launce.

* Alanceadór, m.one that woundeth
with a launce.

* Alanceár, to wounde or hurt with a 
launce.

Aláno, m.a mastie dogge.

* ala Par, euen against, iust with the like,
equall, euen with, hande to hand.

* Alár, vide Alárde, m.a muster.

* † Alárabes, m.Moores, or Arabi­
ans.

* † Alarácas, f. outcries, noise, crying
out, explaining, vociferation.

Alárde, m.a muster, an ouerseeing, and
ouer-viewing.

* ala Redóndo, m.wheeling rounde, in
compassing about, in fetching a circle
about.

* Alárga, f. a loose off, a farre off.

* aLargádo, m.largened, loosed, set at li­
bertie, vntied, vnfolded, prolonged,
stretched.

* aLargamiénto, m.an enlargement, a
loosing, a setting at libertie, an vnty­
ing, an vnfolding, a prolonging, a de­
laying.

aLargár, Præs. yo aLárgo, 1. Præt. yo
Alargué, to enlarge, to prolong, to vn­
fold, to spred, to set at libertie, to stretch
out.

* aLargár la véla, to spred the saile, or set
saile after it is hoised vp.

* aLargár la brída, to slacken or loosen
the bridle, to giue the horse the head.

aLárgas de tiémpo, driuing off, or pro­
longing of time.

* aLargue, vide Alargár. 

* Alarguéz, f. the seed or thin rinde of
a kind of weede to colour haire yellow.

Alaridos, m.cries, shoutes, exclamations,
a noise, clamors.

† Alarifádgo, m.a surveyorship, an ouer­
seership, a controllership.

† Alarífe, m.a surueyor, a master carpen­
ter, an ouerseer or controller in buil­
dings.

aLa Sazón, f. at that time, then.

* † Alasór, m.a kinde of small herbe in
Spaine vsed to make painting for wo­
mens faces, and wherewith they die
cornation.  Bastard saffron.

* Alastrádo, m.balasted with Balaste.

* Alastradór, m.one that doth balast





ships.

Alastrár, to balast a ship, to poise.

Alastrárse el animál, to burthen or load
a beast.

* alás Vézes, by course, by turnes, by fits.

* Álas wings.

* Álas de péce, fins of a fish.

* ala Tárde, f. at, or in the euening.

aLatón, or Latón, latten, a kinde of met­
tall so called.

* Alatonádo, m.made or done with the
mettall latten.

* Alatonár, to plate, worke or doe any
worke with the mettall latten.

* Alatrón, m.salt-peter.

* Alavánça, vide Alabánça. 

* Alavár, vide Alabár. 

* Alavárda, vide Alabárda. 

* Alavardázo, vide Alabardázo. 

* Alavardéro, vide Alabardéro. 

* Alavastríno, vide Alabastríno. 

* Alavástro, vide Alabástro. 

* alaVista, f. to looke to, to see to. In sight,
in presence.

* Alazán, m.a darke browne bay colour.

Alazéna, vide Alhazéna, f. 

* Álba, vide Álva, the break of the day.

† Albacéa, m.an executor, or an admi­
nistrator, or assigne of a will or Testa­
ment.

* Albaéca, vide Albacéa. 

† Albaháca, or Albahácha, f. Basill the
herbe so called.

* Albahaquéro, m.a earth paunch or
pitcher, where the hearbe Basill is set to
grow.

Albahaquílla salváge, f. wilde Basill, or
wilde small Basill.

Albahaquílla, f. a kinde of small Ba­
sill.

* † Albáida, f. white, whitenes.  Also a
piece of money in Spaine called, vna
Blánca: that is halfe a Maravedi.

* † Albalá, f. schedule or writing that
is giuen when one paieth tribute, or cu­
stome to the king.

* † Albanéga, a kinde of networke coife
that women weare on their heads.

† Albañár, vide Alvañár, m.a gutter or
sincke.

Albañí, or Albañíl, a mazon, tiler, or
bricklaier.

* † Albañír, m.idem. 

Albañilería, or Albañería, the mazons
craft.  Tiling.

* † Albaquía, f. the remnant, the residue,
that which remaines.

* Albár, vide Alvár. 

* † Albarázos, vide Alvarázos, m.
morphew.

† Albaráda, f. a stone wall, a bulwarke.

* † Albárchiga, Albérchiga, or Al­
várchiga, an apricocke.

* † Albarcóque, or Alvarcóque, m.an
apricocke.

* Albarcocál, m.a place where apricocks
grow.  Also an apricocke tree.

Albárda, vide Alvárda, f. a packesaddle,
a pannier, a dosser.

* Béstias de Albárda, sumpter horses or
great mules.

* Albardádo, or Alvardádo, m.sadled
with a packesaddle.

* Albardadór, or Alvardadór, m.one
that sadleth or setteth a packesaddle
on a beast.

* Albardán, m.a foole, a sot.

* Albardár, or Alvardár, to saddle with
a packesaddle.

Albardéro, or Alvardéro, m.a pannell
maker, or packesaddle maker.

* Albardílla, vide Alvardílla, f. a small
or little packesaddle.

* Albardín, m.small rushes, or mat­
weede.

Albardón, or Alvardón, m.a packe­
horse, an asse or mule that carrieth a
packe.  Also a great packesaddle.

* Albaríno, vide Alvaríno, m.a dun
swart colour.

* Albarjón, vide Alvarjón. 

† Albarráda, or Alvarráda, f. a wall of
stones heaped togither without morter
or lime, made in steede of a mound.  a 
bulwarke.  Also a causey.

† Albarrán, or Alvarrán, m.a batcheler.
one that is vnmarried, or one that hath
ground or pasture in a place and hath no
dwelling or abiding there.

† Albarrána, or Alvarrána, f. a turret
on a wall.

† Albarrána cebólla, a kinde of sea Oi­
nions.

† Albarranía, f. single life, the vnmar­
ried estate, or holding of grounde in a
place, hauing no dwelling house or
place.

* Albartáda, Albartádo, or Montón, 
a heape, a pile, a heymowe, a stacke, a
masse of any thing.

† Albatóça, f. a kinde of boate or barke.

* Albayaldádo, or alvayaldádo, m.
done or smeared ouer with white ceruse,
or painting for womens faces.

* † Albayálde, vide Alvayálde, m.
white ceruse, or painting for womens
faces.

† Albérca, f. vide Estánque, a poole, or
pond.

* † Albérchiga, or Alvérchiga, f. an
apricock.

* Albérchigo, or Alvérchigo, idem. 

* Albergádo, vide Alvergádo, lod­
ged.

* Albergár, Præs. yo Albérgo, 1.
Præt. yo Albergué, to lodge, to inne,
to harbor.

* Albérgo, or Alvérgo, m.a lodging, 
an Inne, a place of entertainment.

* Albérgue, or Alvérgue, idem. 

* Albergue, vide Albergár. 

* Albergueria, f. a lodging, a poise.

* Alberjána, vide Alverjána, f. a kinde
of weede in corne.

† Albéytar, m.a ferriar, a horse leech.

Albeytería, f. a ferriers forge, the fer­
riers Arte.

* † Albiháres, a kinde of flower called
Narcissus.

* Albíllo, vide Alvíllo. 

* Albín, m.the bloud stone that stoppeth
bloud.

* Albína, vide Alvína, f. the beating of
the tide, the raging of the sea.

* alBívo, or alVívo, to the quicke,
liuely.

* Álbo, vide Blánco, white.

† Albógue, a pipe, a flute.

† Alboguéro, a piper, or one that plaieth
on the flute.

* Albóndigas, f. a kinde of chopt meate
round like puddings.

* Alboráda, vide Alvoráda, f. musicke
plaied to one at the breake of the day.

Albór, or Alvór, the breaking or daw­
ning of day.

Albórbolas, a noise or rumour of ioy.

* Alborboleár, to make a noise of ioy or
reioysing.

Alboréa, or Alvoréa, vide Alva, the
morning or breake of day.

Alboreár, or Alvoreár, vide ama­
necér, to waxe or grow towards day.

† Alboréte, vide Alboróço, a tumult,
hurliburly, a sedition, a sudden fright
or feare.

* † Alborní, vide Borní. 

* † Albornía, f. an earthen pan to put
milke in or such like.

† Albornóz, a souldiers coate, a man­
dillion, a iacket, a cassocke, a Moores
cassocke.

† Alboroçár, vide Alborotár, to make 
a tumult.

† Alboróço, Alboróte, or Alboroto,
m.a tumult, a stirre, a hurly burley, a
sedition, an amasement, a fright.

* Aborotadaménte, tumultuouslie, se­
ditiously, factiouslie.

* Alboratádo, m.stirred into tumult.

Alboratadór, m.a maker of tumults, a
seditious fellowe.

Alborotadóra cosa, f. a seditious or
factious matter.

Alborotár, or Alvorotár, to raise a tu­
mult, to raise sedition or rebellion.

Alboróto, Alboréte, Alboróço, or
Bollício, vide Alboróço. 





† Albricias, f. reward for newes, libera­
litie for bringing glad tidings.

† Albúr, m.a fish called a mullet.

* Albúra, or Alvúra, or Blancúra, f. 
whitenes.

* † Alburéjo, m.a little mullet fish.

* † Alburquérque, a towne in Castile
in Spaine.

* † Alcabála, or Alcauála, f. tole,
custome, tallage, imposition, subsidie.

* † Alcabaléro, or Alcavaléro, m.a
collector or gatherer of subsidies, a cu­
stomer.

* Alcabúco, m.a forrest, or thicke
woode.

† Alcaçába, in the moorish toong, a ca­
stle or a strong house, or tower in Gra­
nada so called.

† Alcáçar, m.a place, a house of strength,
a tower, a fortresse.

* † Alcáçr reál, m.a roiall pallace, the
kings house, or strong pallace.

* Alcazarén, a place in Spaine so called.

* † Alcaçáva, vide Alcaçába, also
thicke woode, a forrest.

* † Alcacél, m.all manner or iron works,
greene barley cut for horses.

† Alcacér, m.greene barley.

* † Alçáda, the ending of a controuersie
in lawe.

* Alçadéra para saltár, f. a waight of
lead to holde in the handes for them
that leape to make them leape further.
Also a pole to lift one vp to leape
with.

* Alçádo, m.lift vp, taken vp, raised vp,
broken vp the ground, slacked.

* Alçadór, m.a lifter vp, a taker vp, a
raiser vp, a breaker of the ground vp,
one that slacketh a thing that is hard
bound.

Alçadúra, f. lifting vp, taking vp, raising
breaking of the ground, slacking.

† Alcadúz, or Acadúz, m.the scoope in
a water wheele, a pipe of a conduit.

* † Alcahuéta, f. a shee baude, a woman
baude.

† Alcahuéte, m.a baude, a ruffian, a
pandor, a man baude.

† Alcahuetería, f. the trade of bawdrie.

* † Alcaicería, f. a row or street of shops
of wares, a place where many shops are
on a row togither.

† Alcáide, vide Alcáyde, a captaine of
a castle, fort or strength.

* Alcayde de cárcel, the keeper of a 
prison, a gaoler, a warden of a prison.

† Alcaidía, vide Alcaydia, f. a captain­
ship of such castle, fort or strength.

* † Alcalá, the name of a towne in
Spaine.

† Alcálde, a iustice, a sheriffe, a conesta­
ble.

* † Alcalde mayór de justicia, the
Lord chiefe iustice.

* Alcálde de la córte, m.a chiefe iusti­
cer in the kings house.

* † Alcálde de Alcáldes, m.a high com­
missioner.

* Alcálde de las Alçádas, a chiefe iudge
or commissioner to iudge causes when
men appeale to him from the inferiour
Alcaldes.

† Alçáma, or Aljáma, f. an assembly of
Iewes.

* † Alcaná, f. a place where a row or ma­
ny shops of wares stand togither.

* Alcançádo reached vnto, gotten, pur­
chased, obtained, compassed, ouertooke.

* Alcançadór, m.one that reacheth vn­
to, a purchaser, a getter, an obtainer, an
ouertaker.

* Alcançamiénto, m.A reaching vnto,
an obtayning, a getting, an ouerta­
king.

Alcancár, to reach vnto, to purchase, to
get, to obtaine, to conquer, to arriue, to
compasse, to ouertake.

vn Alcánce, an obtayning, purchasing,
getting, pursuing, reaching, ouertaking.
A leuiying of money.

* † Alcançía, vide Alcanzía, f.

† Alcandára, f. a pearch for a hawke.

* † Alcandóra, f. a shirt.

† Alcanfór, m.Camphire.

* Alcanforádo, m.done or dressed with
Camphire.

* † Alcántara, f. a bridge.

* † Alcantarilla, f. a little small bridge.

† Alcanzía, f. balles made of earth and
filled with ashes, a pipkin or possenet
made of earth.  Also a chest or boxe to
keepe money in that cannot be gotten
out till you breake the boxe.

* Alcanzía de fuégo, balles filled with
powder, squibs made of powder to set a
traine of fire to them.

* Alcanzía para tirár, balles of wild fire
to throw or cast.

* † Alcanziár, to throw balles of earth or
ashes one at another.  A kinde of sport
vsed in Spaine a horsebacke.

* † Alcanziázo, m.the hitting or stroake
giuen with such balles of earth or a­
shes.

† Alcapárras, capers.

* † Alcaparrádo, m.like vnto capers.

† Alcaparrál, m.a bed of capers. A place
where capers grow.

* † Alcaparílla, f. a small or little bed of
capers, or a place in Spaine so called.

* † Alcaparronál, m.a place where great
store of capers grow.

* † Alcaparrónes, great capers.

* † Alcapárro, m.the stalke or tree wher­
on the capers grow.

* Alcaparróso, m.full of capers.

Alçár, to lift vp, to rise in rebellion, to e­
leuate, to exalt, to plucke vp.

* Alçár campo or Cérco, to raise a
siege.

Alçár barvécho, to plough vp ground.

Alçár de óbra, to leaue worke.

* Alçár las mésas, to take away the ta­
ble, to take vp the cloth.

* † Alcaraván, m.a fowle with long legs,
and beake, a Bitter.

† Alcarabéa, or Alcaravéa, the small
seed or graine within carrowaies.

† Alcarchósa, f. an artichoake.

Alcarchosádo terciopélo, wrought
veluet like an artichoake.

* Alcarchosádo colór, m.dun colour
like a artichoake.

† Alcarías, f. cottages.

* Alcartas pece, a kinde of fish.

† Alcartás, or Alcartáz para espécias, a spice bag or coffin for spices.

† Alcatára, vide Alquitára. 

† Alcatífa, f. a rug for a bed.

† Alcatráz, m.a kinde of fowle like a sea­
mow, a great eater of fish.

Alcavála, or Alcabála, f. subsidie, com­
mon reuenues, tole, custome, tallage,
imposition.

Alcavaléro, or Alcabaléro, a customer,
one that gathereth the subsidie, a col­
lector, a tale-gatherer.

† Alcaucí, or Alcaucíl, m.a small ar­
tichoake, a kinde of thistle like an arti­
choake eaten in Spaine.

* † Alcayáta, f. a crooked kind of hooke
or naile to hang cloakes, hates, or such
other things against a wall.

† Alcáyde, a iustice, a sheriffe, a cheefe
keeper of a prison, a captain of a castle,
a conestable.

† Alcaydía, iusticeship, a sherifealtie,
keeping of a castle, chiefe charge of kee­
ping a prison.

† Alcaýta, f. a hooke.

* Alcayzeria, f. a place where silke is
solde.

* † Alcazába, vide Alcaçába. 

* † Alcázar, vide Alcáçar. 

Alchimílla, f. the herbe starwoort.

* Alción, or Halción aue, a kinges
fisher.

† Alcóba, f. a closet a close roome for a
bedde.

* † Alcohéla, f. Endiue water, or water
of Endiue.

† Alcohól, a drug called Antimonium,
it is a kinde of white stone founde in
siluer mynes.

* † Alcoholádo, dawbed, smeared,
painted.

* Alcoholádo tóro, or Alcoholáda 
vaca, a bull or cow with blacke eies.





† Alcoholár, to smeare, to daube, to
paint, to lay on Alcohól  on the corners
of the eies.

* Alcón, vide Halcón, a hauke, a
faulcon.

* Alconcillo, or Alconzíllo, m.a little
hauke or faulcon.

Alconcíllo de brasíl, red inke.

* Alconcílla, or aféyte, a kinde of pain­
ting for women.

* † Alcorán, m.a gathering togither, or
summarie of the lawes of Mahomet,
a booke wherein the lawes of Maho­
met are written.

* † Alcórça, f. a conserue.

* Alcornocál, m.a place where corke
groweth.

Alcornóque, m.the corke tree.

* † Alcórque, a corke shoo, a pantosle.

* † Alcoscuçú, m.a kinde of meate or
paste made of flower and hony.

† Alcotán, m.a hauke called a hob­
bie.

* Alcóva, vide Alcóba. 

* † Alcrebíte, m.brimstone.

† Alcrivíte, m.brimstone.

* Alcuéntro, vide Encuéntro, to the
contrarie, an encountring, a mee­
ting.

† Alcuña, f. a stocke, a linage.

† Alcúza, or Azeytéra, f. an oyle pot.

* † Alcuzázo, a great oile pot, or a blow
therewith.

* † Alcuzílla, f. a little oile pot.

† Aldáva, or Aldába, the ring or ham­
mer of a barre, a bolt.

* † Aldaváda, f. the blowe or knocke at
the hammer or ring at the dore.

* † Aldavón, a great hammer or ring at
a dore.

† Aldéa, f. a village, or little towne.

Aldeána, f. a countrey lasse, an inhabi­
tant in a village, a countrey wench.

Aldeáno, a countrey man, a dweller in a
village.

† Aldeguéla, f. a little village.

* Aldrío, vide Alvedrío. 

* Aleantádo, m.breathed, relieued.

* Alébe, m.a traytor.

* Alécto, one of the three furies so cal­
led, signifieth a thing neuer resting.

* Aléche, m.a herring.

Aléda, f. the dregges of honie, wine or
other thing.

* Aledáño, m.vide Mojón. 

* Alegación, f. an allegation, an alled­
ging or protesting.

* Alegádo, m.alledged, protested.

* Alegadór, an alledger, a protester.

* Alegamiénto, an alledging, protesting, 
or an affirming.

* Alegár, Præs. yo Alégo 1. Præt. yo
Alegué, to alledge, to protest, to af­
firme.

Alegraménte, vide Alegreménte, 
merrily, pleasantly.

Alegrár, Alegrárse, to reioice, to be glad,
merrie iocond, frollicke, or plea­
sant.

Alégre, ioyfull, merrie, glad, iocond,
blithe, sportfull, frollicke.

Alegreménte, gladly, merrilie, plea­
santly, iocondly.

* Alegréza, f. mirth, ioy, gladnes, sport.

Alegría, vide Alegréza, f. mirth, ioy,
gladnes, pleasure, sport.

* Alegrón, m.a great sudden ioy or
mirth.

* Alegue, vide Alegár. 

Alejár, or Alexár, to depart, to goe far
off.

* † Alejú, vide Alexú. 

Alelúya, cuckoe meate.

* Alelúya, of ioy, a hymne or song of
ioy.

* Alemán, a German or Dutchman.

* gente Alemána, f. the high Dutch peo­
ple, the high Germans.

* Alemanádo, m.of or pertayning to
Germany.

* Alemanísco, m.a lynnen of Germany.

* Alemáña, m.Germanie, high Dutch­
lande.

* Aléndro, m.the rose baytree.

* Alentádo, vide Alientádo. 

Alentár yo Aliénto, to breath, to pawse,
to put life into.

Alérta, readie prepared, put in order.

* Alérto ójo, m.an eie readie prepared,
well beholding or marking.

† Alérze, Ceder.

Alésna, or Alézna, f. an awle, a bod­
kin.

Aléta, f. a little wing.

* Aléta de pésce, the finne of a fish.

Aléue, m.a traitor, a treacher.

* Alevosía, f. treason, conspiracie.

Alevóso, m.a traitor, a treacher.

* A vn traydór dos Alevósos, to one
traytor, two traytors: that is, a couple
of craftie knaues will coosen one:  the 
Italian saith, A vn fino, fino &
mezo.

Alexádo, m.departed, set far off, put far
asunder.

* Alexadór, m.one that putteth asunder
or separateth.

* Alexamiénto, m.a banishment, put­
ting far off, a diuorcing, or parting a­
sunder.

* Alexár, or Alejár, to depart, to goe far
off, to separate, to banish, to put farre
off.

* † Alexía, f. a paste made of flower and
water, a pudding, a pan pudding.

† Alexíxa, f. a pudding made of wheate,
a pan pudding.

† Alexú, or Alejú, a kinde of bisket, or
simnell made of honie and spice.

Alézna, vide Alésna, a shoomakers
awle.

† Alfabéga, vide Albaháca, Basill.

* † Alfahár, m.a place where earthen pots
are made.

* † Alfahatéro, m.a potter, a maker of
earthen vessels.

* † Alfaiáta, a woman tailor.

* † Alfajór, vide Alexú. 

† Alfálfa, f. three leafed grasse, clouers
grasse.

† Alfamár, a couerlet.  Also a bolster.

* † Alfanéque, a kinde of hawke.

* † Alfánje or Alfánge, m.a sword, a
cimitar, a turkie sword.

* Alfangázo, or Alfanjázo, m.a great
turkie sword.  Also a blow with a tur­
kie sword.

* † Alfaquí, m.a moorish word signifyieng
a chiefe priest among the Moores.

* † Alfárda, f. a tribute, subsidie, or dutie
to the prince.

† Alfárge or Alfárje de molino, m.a
mill stone, a grinding stone.

* † Alfargia, f. a plancke or boord sa­
wed in two, a thin plancke or boord.

* Alfaróbas, carobes, an herbe.

† Afaxór, vide Alexú. 

* Alfaxór víno, a wine made with hony,
a kind of meatheglin.

* † Alfayáta, f. a woman tailor.

* Alféna, or Alhéna, f. priuet, where­
with they make bowers in gardens.

† Alfeñique, sugar pellets.

* † Alferádgo, m.the office of an ensigne
in warre.

† Alféres, m.an auncient bearer, a stan­
dard bearer.  Also the Bishop at chesse.

Alfü, vide Aguéro, a diuining or pro­
phecying.

Alfidél, m.a pinne, such as women vse to
pin withall.

† Alfilér, m.idem. 

* alFín, at the ende, at the last, in so much
that.

† Alfócigo, or Alhócigo, or Alhósti­
go, phisticke nuts.

* † Alfómbra, f. a carpet in the Moores
toong.

† Alfórja, f. or Alfórxa, a wallet, a
budget, a clokebagge, a scrip.

* † Alfórnas, the herbe Fenugreeke.

* † Alfórxa, vide Alfórja. 

* † Alforría, f. setting at libertie, free­
ing.

† Alfórza de vestído, a plait in a gar­
ment, a tucke in a gowne or other gar­
ment.

* Alfóz. m.the limits or boundes of anie
thing.





* Algagías, f. ornaments for souldiers a
horsebacke.

Alga marina, f. reekes, or sea weede.

* † Algáida, f. a thicket, a wood or place
full of trees and bushes.

† Algália, ciuet, or sweete muske.

* † Algarabía, or Algaravía, f. the
Moores language or toong.

† Algaráda, f. a sodaine assault or as­
sailing with a great crie, noise, or stir,
a tumult, a hurly burly.

* † Algarasíta, pediers french.

* † Algárbe, or Algárve, the west.  Al­
so a prouince in Spaine betweene An­
dulazia and Portugal.

* † Algárve, idem. 

† Algaravía, f. the Algarbian or
Moores language.

* † Algáres, m.caues, dens, hoales, pits.

† Algárve, a den, a hole, a pit, a ditch.
Also a place in Portugall so called.

† Algarróva, or Algarróbo, Carobes,
or S. Iohns bread.

* † Algáyda, f. a thicket, a woode, or
place full of trees and bushes.

* † Algazára, vide Algaráda. 

† Algébra, f. bone setting.

† Algebrísta, m.a bone setter.

* † Algedréz, m.the chesse, or chesseplay.

* † Algeríza, vide Algezira. 

* † Algezira, f. a prouince in Spaine.
Also Ilands so called.

† Algibe, or Algíve, m.a cesterne, a pri­
son vnder ground, a dungeon.

Álgo, somewhat, ought, any thing.

† Algodón, m.bombast, cotton.

* Algodonádo, m.cottoned.

* Algodonadór, m.a cottoner, one that
raiseth the notte vpon cotton.

* Agodonadúra, f. cottoning, freezing
of cloth.

* † Algodonár, to cotton, to freeze cloth.

* Algongoli, vide Aljonjoli. 

† Algórfa, or Soberádo, to lofte, a story,
a garret.

* † Algorávas, vide Algarróvas. 

† Algualizázgo, or Alguaziládgo, m.
a sherifewicke, a bailiwicke, a mar­
shalship.

† Alguazil, m.a sheriffe, a baily, a mar­
shall, or chiefe executioner, a prouost
marshall.

† Alguarísmo, or Guarísmo, m.the
science of Arithmeticke.

Alguien, vide Algúno, some bodie.

alGuirnálda, f. a crowne or garlande, a
wreath.

Algúna véz, sometimes, at times, nowe
and then.

Algúno, or Alguien, some bodie, one or
other.

Algún tánto, about so much.

Algún tiémpo, sometime.

* Alha, vide Allá. 

† Alhadída, burnt brasse.

† Alhája, or axuár de cása, implements,
appurtenances, all maner of housholde
stuffe.

† Alhajéme, or alhaxéme, m.a barbor

† Alhailí, or Alhaylí, white violets, or
the flower deluce.

† Alhámbra, f. a pallace for a prince of
strength.

* † Alhamél, m.a porter that carrieth
burdens.

† Alhaquéque, m.in the Moores toong,
a herald at armes sent to entreat of
peace.

* † Alhaquí, vide Alfaquí. 

* † Alharácas, exclamations, outcries,
noise.

† Alharaquiénto, m.a crier, a proclai­
mer, one that maketh noise.

* † Alhaxéme, vide Alhajéme m.

† Alhazéna, f. a small basket, a hole in a
wall to set things in, an ambrey, a cub­
bord.

* † Alhélga, the staple of a locke or bolt.
Also the hollownes or gaping of teeth
standing wide one from another.

† Alhelí, vide Alhailí. 

† Alhéña, f. priuet, or priuie primtree.

† Alhilél, or Alfidél, a pin.

* † Alhólbas, fenugreeke.

† Alhóçigo, Alhóstigo, or Alfócigo,
fysticke nuts, or fisticke tree.

† Alholí, a place to keepe salt, a barne, a
corne garret, a garner, a maund.

† Alhólvas, fenugreeke.

† Alhómbra, f. a carpet.

† Alhóndiga, f. a shop, a merchants
warehouse, a barne, a garner for corne.

† Alhondiguero, m.a shopkeeper, he that
keepeth the barne or corn, a corn master.

Alhondón, m.the bottom of any thing.

* † Alhorí, vide Alholí. 

* † Alhorría, vide Alforría, f. setting
at libertie.

Alhóstiga, the fruite of the Pistack tree,
fisticke nuts.

† Alhóstigo, Alhócigo, or Alfócigo,
the fisticke tree, or fisticke nuts.

* † Alhóz, the borders, lymits, or bounds
of any place.

* † Alhózego, or Alhózigo, the pi­
stacke tree, or fisticke nuts.

* † Aluhuçéma, vide Ahuzéma. 

* Alhuçéna, f. vide Alhuzéma. 

† Alhurréca de la mar, f. the salt
fome that commeth out of the rootes of
canes.

† Alhuzéma, f. lauander.

Aliádo, m.allied, confederate, a partner,
accessarie, combined.

* † Aljáma, or Alçáma, an assemblie of
Jewes, or their synagogue.

* Aljamía, f. a barbarisme, a confusion
of toongs.

* Aljána, vide Aljáva, a quiuer.

Aliánça, f. alliance, confederacie, combi­
nation, part taking, brotherhood.

Aliár, to allie, confederate, combine, or
ioine in kindred or friendship.

† Aljáma, or Alçáma, f. a synagog, a
congregation of Jewes.

* † Aljamía, f. the Moores cal the Spa­
nish toong Aljamía.

* † Aljamiádo, made into the Spanish
toong.

† Aljáva, f. a quiuer for arrowes.

* † Alicátes, small pincers to pull haires
from the nostrels or eiebrowes, &c.

* Alieçán, vide Alazan. 

† Aliçáçe, or çánça, foundation.

* † Aljedréz, Axedréz, vide Alge­
drés, chesseplay.

* Aliénde, vide allénde. 

* Antójos de Aliénde, spectacles, that
make small things seeme great.

* Aliénde de ésso, furthermore, ouer
and aboue.

* Alientádo, m.breathed.

* Aliénte, Aliénto, vide Alentár. 

Aliénto, m.breath, spirit.

* aLigerádo, m.made light, nimble, or
quicke.

* aLigerár, or aLijerár, to make light,
nimble, swift, or quicke.

* Alimádo, m.filed.

* aLimadór, m.one that fileth.

Alimáña, f. a brute beast.

* aLimár, to file with a file.

* Alimentádo, m.nourished, fed, cheri­
shed, maintained, fostered, brought vp.

* Alimentadór, m.a nourisher, a foste­
rer, a feeder, a susteiner, a bringer vp.

Alimentár, to nourish, to feed, to foster, 
to bring vp, to maintaine,, to cherish.

Aliménto, m.nourishment, food, main­
tenance, bringing vp, sustenance.

Alimpiadéro, m.a streiner, to clense any
thing with.

* alimpiádo, m.streined, made cleane,
purged, brushed, wiped, made pure.

alimpiadór, a clenser, a purger, a puri­
fier, a refiner.

aLimpiadúra, f. clensing, purging, refi­
ning, puritie, brushing.

aLimpiadúras, m.the dregs, the scum,
the parings, the clensings.

aLimpiár, to clense, to purge, to refine, to
brush, to wipe, to purifie by sacrifice, to 
streine, to make neate.

* Alindádo, m.limited, bounded, confi­
ned, banished. Also made fine, neate,
gallant.

Alindár, to limit, to confine, to bounde,
to exile. Also to make fine, delicate,
and faire.





Alinde, f. the boundes, limits, or confines
of a countrey, or other place. Also a
kinde of spectacles.

* Aliñádo, m.made fit, set in order.

* Aliñadór, m.one that maketh fit, or
setteth in order.

Aliñár, vide Adereçár, to make fit, to set
in order.

Aliño, m.fitting, setting in order.

† Aljófar, pearle, the seed of pearle, small
pearle.

† Aljofifár, or Ladrilládo, m.pauing,
tile painted.

† Áljónge, or Aljónge, m.the gum of a
kind of thistle.

† Aljonjolí, or Aljonjolí, m.a white
graine whereof oile is made.Duplicate lexemes in form removed.

* Alióx, m.Marble.

* Alisádo, m.smoothed.

Alisadúra, f. smoothing, playning.

Alisár, to make smooth or plaine.

Alíso, m.a kind of willow.

Alísma, f. a kind of Plantaine.

* aListádo, m.enrolled, ones name taken
in a roll, catalogue, or muster booke.

aListár, to enroll, to make a roll of mens
names, to make a catalogue.

* † Aljúba, f. a kinde of moorish cassocke
reaching downe below the knee after
the manner of the Polonians.

† Aljubán morisco, m.a moorish cas­
socke.

* Aliviádo, m.lightened, eased, made
merrie.

* Aliviadór, m.one that lighteneth, ea­
seth, or maketh merrie.

* Alivianár, to make light headed, fan­
tasticall or foolish.

Aliviár, to lighten, to ease, to vnburthen,
to reioice.  To be merrie or light harted.

Alívio, m.lifting vp, ease, lightner of
hart, mirth, ioy, gladnes, solace, pastime.

* † Alizár, m.a kinde of painted bricke,
vide Azuléjo.

Allá, there, thither, in yonder place.

* alLádo, m.neere by, ioyning vnto, on
the one side.

Allanádo, m.made plaine, made smooth,
spread abroad, vnfolded.

* Allanadór, m.a plainer, a smoother.

Allanadúra, f. plaine, making smooth,
stretching or spreading abroad.

Allanár, to make plaine, to smooth.  To
spread abroad, to vnfold.

* Allár, vide Hallár. 

* aLlegádas móças, f. good louing, wel­
willing wenches, comming with others
for companie.

aLlegadízo, m.gathered togither, heaped
togither.

* aLlegádo, m.ioyned, or heaped togi­


ther, commen, hard by, approched.

aLlegádo en vándo, led away in affe­
ction.

aLlegadór, m.one that approcheth, arri­
ueth, or commeth neere.  Also a greedie
gatherer.

aLlegamiénto, m.an arriuing, a com­
ming or approching neere vnto, a gathe­
ring or vniting togither.

aLlegár, Præs yo allégo,
1. Præt. yo al­
legué, to arriue, to approch, to come
neere, to vnite, to gather togither, to be­
long vnto.

* Allegué, vide Allegár. 

* aLlenádo, m.made full, filled.

* aLlenár, to make full, to fill.

Allénde, beyond, on the otherside, fur­
thermore.

Allénde y aquénde, this way, and that
way.

Allí, there, thither, in that place.

Allogár, vide Allegár. 

* † Allózo, m.the Almond tree.

Álma, f. the soule, the minde, the spirit of
a man.

† Almáçiga, f. Masticke.

* † Almaçigár, to make or doe any thing
with Masticke.

† Almadáña, or Márra, m.a mattoke, a
spade, a shouell, a pickaxe.

† Almadén, m.a mine of mettall.

Almadráque, m.a bolster, a pillow.

† Almadráva, fishing for Tunnies.

* Almadravéro, m.a fisher for Tunnies.

† Almágra, or Almágre, red oker, red­
ding, red lead.

* Almagradór, m.one that marketh with
red oker.

Almagrár, to marke with oker, or red
lead, to red.

Almágre, vide Almágra. 

* Almaizál, or Almayzál, the womens
ornament of the head among the
Moores, it is of silke.

* Almaizaládo, or Almayzaládo, 
made of the fashions of a Moorish ker­
chiefe, or the head couered with a moo­
rish kerchiefe.

Almaizár, vide Almayzár, a wiping
cloth of haire. also vide Almaizál.

* † Almaláfa, f. an attire that the Turks
vse.

† Almanach, m.an almanacke, a prog­
nostication.

* † Almanáque, m.an almanacke, a
prognostication.

* † Almandarahe, a harbor or road for
ships.

Almariére, id est, Alhazéña, pequéña,
a litle cupboord, or place to set glasses in.

Almário, m.an armorie, an ambrie.

† Almarráza, an ewer of glasse, a casting
bottle, to cast sweete water.

† Almártaga, f. a kinde of headstall for
a horse, trimmed, gilt, and embrodered,
the scumme of leade.  Also a medicinall
herbe.

* Almartáxa, f. the scum, fome, froath,
or spume of siluer.

* Almástiga, f. masticke.

* † Almayzál, vide Almaizál. 

* Almayzaládo, m.made of the fashion
of a Moorish kerchiefe.

† Almayzár, a wiping cloth, a haire cloth.
also vide Almaizal.

† Almazén, m.an armorie, a trunke, a
cubboord, a conduit head, a storehouse,
a warehouse.

* Almazén de Aquadúcho, the con­
duit head from whence the water first
riseth.

* Almazén de suziedád, a retract
where to cast out the filth and ordure
of a citie.

* Almezenádo, m.put in a warehouse
to be kept.

* † Almáziga, vide Almáciga. 

† Alméa, vide Azumbar, red storax.

† Almeár de séno, m.a haie-loft.

* † Alméça, vide Alméza. 

* † Almedína, a great towne or cittie.

* † Alméj, f. a cockle.

* † Almejál, m.a place where cockles
breede.

* † Almejéro, or Almegéro, m.one that
gathereth or selleth cockles.

† Alména, the pinacles of a tower, the
battlements of a wall.

* Almenáda murálla, f. a wall made 
with battlements.

* Almenádo castillo, a castle made with
battlements.

† Almenária de fuégos, f. fiers made in
the night, beacons.

Almenára de açósar, a candlesticke of
brasse with many sockets.

Alméndra, Amélla, or Amendróa, f. 
an almond.

Almendráda, f. almond milke.

Almendrál, m.a garden of almond trees.

Alméndro, an almond tree.

* † Almenilla, f. a little battlement of
a wall.

* alMenos, at the least.

Alméte, m.a helmet.

* Alméza, f. a cockle fish.

† Álmez árbol, a lote tree, or nettle tree.

* alMez, monethly, euery moneth.

† Almiár, a hey reeke, or hey cocke, a
masse, a heape, a great stacke.

* † Almíbar, vide Almivar. 

Almidón, m.starch.





* † Almidonádo, m.starched.

* † Almidonár, to starch.

† Almilla, f. a wastcoate.

* Almína, a tower or turret.

† Almirálle, a king in the Arabian lan­
guage.

* Almiránta, f. the vice admiralship.

Almiránte, m.a Lord admirall, an admi­
rall at sea.  Also vsed in Spanish for the
second person at sea, the next person to
the generall.

† Almiréz, m.a brasen morter.

* † Almirón, m.a daintie meate for sicke
persons.

* † Almíscle, or Almísque, muske.

* † Almiscádo, or Almizcádo, done
with ciuet, or muske.

† Almívar, sugar made liquide.

† Almízque, m.muske.

† Almizquéra, f. a place where they lay
vp muske.

* Álmo, m.any thing it doth nourish.

* Álmo pádre, m.a fostering or cheri­
shing father.

† Almoçásre, m.a dib to set herbes.

* † Almocrébe, or Almocréve, m.a 
muliter, a driuer of mules.

† Almodrote, m.a hotchpot of garlicke
and cheese.

* † Almoféx, vide Almofrés. 

† Almofia, f. a pan of earth to make fire
in for want of a chimney.

† Almofrés, or Almofréx, a male made
in fashion like a pillowbeare.

† Almogávar, m.an aduenturer in war,
a light harnessed soldier.

† Almoháça, f. a currie combe.

* Almohaçádo, m.curried with a currie
combe.

† Almohaçár, or Almohazár, to cur­
rie.

† Almoháda, f. a pillow.

* † Almohadílla, f. a little pillow, a cu­
shinet.

* † Almoháza, vide Almoháça. 

* † Almohazár, vide Almohaçár. 

* Almohíno, m.to the ase a play when
two or three are set to coosen one.

* † Almojarifádgo, vide Almoxari­
fádgo, the customership.

* † Almojarífe, vide Almoxarífe. 

† Almojávana, f. a kind of cheese cake.

† Almonéda, f. open sale, an outcrie.

Almonedeár, to set to sale, to sell.

* † Almorasés, armor for the thighes.

Almorránas, f. the disease called the
piles.

Almorranamiénto, m.full of piles.

* Almoraniénto, full of piles.

† Almoradúx, m.Marieram.

Almorzár, or Almorçár, to breake fast,
to eate in a morning before dinner.

* † Almotaçanía, the office of the clarke
of the market. Also of one that looketh
to the keeping cleane of the streetes.

† Almotacén, m.one that hath the office
of a clarke of the market in Spaine, as
also to set fine on their heads which
keepe not the streets cleane.

† Almotacenádgo, m.the office of a
clarke of the market, and of one that
hath authoritie to command the streets
to be made cleane.

* † Almotaléfe, m.one that hath office to
see to silks: one that setteth to the seales
that it may be vendable.

† Almoxarifádgo, or † Almoxarifáz­
go, the customership.

† Almoxarífe, m.a customer.

† Almúd, vide Celemin, a pecke.

† Almuédano de móros, a crier.

Almuérzo, or Almuérço, a breakefast.

* alMuladar, m.a dunghill.

† Almuñecar, m.the place where they
sell raisons.

Álna, a yard, an ell.

* Alnádo, m.children that haue a step­
mother, stepchildren.

* † Alnáfe, m. a paunch pan, or a pan of
earth.

aLocádo, m.franticke, become a foole, a
dolt, become a foole or doting.

* † Alója, f. a kinde of wine called me­
theaglin.

* Alojádo, m.lodged.

* Alojadór, m.one that lodgeth.

Alojamiénto, lodging.

Alojár, to lodge, to inne.

aloMás, for the most part.

* aloMénos, at the least.

Alóndra, f. a Larke.

Alónes, the pinions of the wings.

Alongamiénto, m.prolonging, absence,
a deferring, a putting off from time to
time.

Alongár, Præs. yo Alóngo, 1. Præt.
yo Alongué, to prolong, to deferre: to
put off, to lengthen, to prorogue, to
adiorne.

Alongué, vide Alongár. 

Alósa péce, f. an Alose, or Shad fish.

† Alóxa, or Alója, f. wine called Me­
theagline.

* Aloxádo, vide Alojádo. 

* Aloxamiénto, vide Alojamiénto. 

* Aloxár, vide Alojár. 

* † Alóxo, vide Alója. 

* Alózna, f. Wormewood.

† Alpargáta, a shooe made of linnen
packthred.

* Apargatádo, m.shod with such a
shooe.

* Alpes, m.the Alpes.

* Alpechém, or Alpechín de azéyte, 
syrrupe in Oliues, the fruite of a tree
like Oliues.

† Alpechin, idem. 

* Alphabéta, f. an alphabet.

* Alphabética tábla, or Alphabética 
órden, an alphabet, the order alpha­
beticall.

* alPie, or alPiéde, at the foote.

* Alpina, pertaining to the Alpes, or a­
mongst the Alpes.

Alpiste, foxe tailes.

alPresénte, at the present time.

* alPrincipio, at the beginning.

* Alquemia, vide Alquimia, the Arte
of Alcumie.

* Alquemista, vide Alquimista, an
Alcumist.

† Alqueria, f. a farme or hired house.

† Alquérque, m.a kinde of play or game,
somewhat differing from table plaie.

* † Alquetífa, f. vide Alcatífa. 

* † Alquetiza, f. a carpet.

† Alquicél, or Alquicér morisco, a
Moores cassocke, or mandillion.

† Alquiladizo, m.to be let out to hire, to
be rented.

* Alquiládo, m.let out to be hired, rented.

Alquiladór, m.he that hireth or letteth
out for rent.

† Alquilár, to hire, to let out for rent.

† Alquilér, or Arrendamiento, hiring,
letting out for rent.

* Alquilládo, vide Alquiládo. 

* Alquimía, f. Alchimie.

Alquimísta, m.an Alcumist.

† Alquinál morísco, a moorish hand­
kercher.

† Alquitára, or Alcatára, f. a stillato­
rie, a limbecke to distill.

† Alquitíra, f. Dragagant.

† Alquitrán, m.Naptha.

* Alquitranádo, smeared with Alqui­
tran, or Naptha.

* Alquitranár, to smear  a ship with
Alquitran.

alRededór, round about.

alRevés, cleane contrarie.

* alSástre, vide Sástre, a Tailor.

* alSeréno, m.put into the euening dewe,
or ill blasting aire.

Alsine yerva, chickweed.

Álta, or Altámente, highly.

Altabáque, a basket, hamper, or pannier
of osiers.

Altabáxo, m.a downe right blow.

* Altanéras áves, high flying birdes,
soring haukes.

Altanéro, a faulcon.

Altár, or Ára, an altar.

* Altavájo, or Altabáxo, a downe right
stroke or blowe.

Alteráble, changeable, mutable, incon­
stant.

* Alteración, f. alteration, change, in­
constancie.





Alterádo, m.troubled, changed, remoo­
ued, angrie.

* Alteradór, m.a remoouer, a changer,
an inconstant man.

Alterár, to alter, to change, to remooue, to
growe angrie, to prooue inconstant.

* Altercár, Præs. yo Altérco, 1. Præt. 
yo Alterqué, to contend, to chide, to
brabble, to wrangle, to debate.

* Alterqué, vide Altercár. 

Altéza, f. highnes, loftinesse, greatnesse
in estate, mightines.

Altrivaménte, loftily, highly, proudlie,
stately.

* Altibáxos, or Altiváxos, vneasie
waies to go in, vp and downe, high
and lowe.

* Altivéz, f. pride, highnes of stomacke,
loftines.

Altivéza, loftines, pride, statelines.

Altivo, m.loftie, proud, stately, mighty
high minded, hautie, disdainfull.

Álto, m.high, loftie, stately, the loft or
storie in a house, deepe, profound.

Álto Hazér, to make a stande as soldi­
ers do, to state.

† Altramúzes, vide Atramúzes. 

alTravés, or alTravérs, ouerthwart, a
crosse, oblique.

Altúra, f. height, altitude, the depth, the
top of a hill.

Álva, or Álba, f. the morning day break,
the morning watch.  Also a white thing.

* Alvacéa, or Albacéa. 

* Alvaéca, vide Albaéca. 

* Alvaháca, vide Albaháca. 

* Alvahaquéro, or Albahaquéro. 

* † Alvahaquílla, f. small Basill.

Alvaiálde, vide Alvayálde. 

* Alvaialdádo, vide Albayaldádo, 
painted with a white colour, called Ce­
ruse.

† Alvalá, f. a handwriting, a bill, an ac­
quittance, a schedule, a ticket. Also a
kinde of taxe or tribute to the prince.

† Alvanéga, f. a kinde of coife.

* † Alvanár, or Albanár. 

* † Alvañi, Alvañir, Alvañil, Al­
bañi, a Mason, Tyler, craft, or Plai­
string.

Alvár, that which is soone ripe and soone
sodden.

† Alvarázos, morphew.

* † Alvárchiga, Alvérchiga, vide Al­
bárchiga, an apricocke.

† Alvarcóque, Albarcóque, or A­
barcoc, fruite called an Apricocke.

* Alvárda, or Albárda, a packe sad­
dle.

* Alvardadór, or Albardadór, m.one
that putteth on the pack-saddle.

* Alvardán, or Albardán, m.a foole,
a sotte.

* Alvardár, or Albardár, to saddle
with a pack-saddle.

* Alvardéro, or Albardéro, m.a maker
of pack-saddles.

Alvardílla, or Albardílla, a little packe
saddle.

* Alvardín, vide Albardín, Matweed,
small rushes.

* Alvardón, or Albardón, m.a great
pack-saddle, a sumpter saddle, or a
sumpter horse.

Aluarino, a dun or swart colour.

* † Alvarjón, m.great peaze.

* † Alvarráda, or Albarráda. 

* † Alvarrán, or Albarrán. 

* † Alvarrána, or Albarrána, f. a turret
on a wall.

* † Alvarranía, or Albarranía, f. the
single life, the vnmarried estate.

* † Alvatóza, or Albatóça, f. a kinde of
barke or boate.

* † Alvayaldádo, or Abayaldádo,
painted with white Ceruse.

* † Alvayálde, or Albayálde, a white
colour to painte womens faces called ce­
ruse.

* † Aluchalí, m.a captaine among the
Turkes.

* Alúdas, f. with wings, winged.

* Aludér, to allude, to haue a resemblance
with.

Alvedrár, to iudge to deeme, to arbitrate, 
to a ward, to giue sentence.

Alvedrío, m.free will, the sentence that
the arbitrator giueth, iudgement, an a
ward, opinion, will, pleasure, fancy.

* † Alvérca, a poole or ponde.

† Alvérchiga, Alvérchigo, Albérchi­
ga, or Albérchigo, an apricocke.

* † Alvérchiga, or Albérchigo, idem. 

Alvergádo, or Albergádo, lodged, hou­
sed.

Alvergár, or Albergár, Præs. yo Al­
vérgo, 1. Præt. yo Alvergué, to lodge,
to inne, to nestle, to dwell, to house, to lie,
to harbor.

* Alvérgo, or Albérgo, a lodging, an
inne.

* Alvergue, or Albergue, idem. 

* Alvérgue, vide Alvergár. 

Alvérgueria, a lodging, an inne, a dwel­
ling place.

† Alverjána, or Alberjána, f. a kinde of
weede in corne.

* † Alvérja, vide Arvéja, a pease.

* † Alvéytar, or Albéytar, m.a farrier, 
a horseleach.

* † Alveyteria, f. a farriars arte, or a
farriars forge.

* alUíbo, vide alBívo, to the quicke.

* Alujár, vide Alojár. 

* Alvillo, m.a kind of hard grey grapes.

Alvín, a blood stone, it stoppeth blood.

Alvina, f. the beating of the tide, the ra­
ging of sea.

* alVivo vide alBívo. 

Alumbrádo, m.lightened.

Alumbrádo con Alúmbre, dressed
with allume.

* Alumbradór, m.one that lighteneth or
one that dresseth with allume.

Alumbramiénto, m.a lightening or gi­
uing of light.

Alumbrár, to lighten, to giue light, to illu­
minate. Also to dresse with allume.

Alúmbre, Allume.

aLunádo, m.lunaticke, mad, in a fren­
sie.

* aLunár, to run made, to be lunaticke, to
be franticke, or out of his wits.

Álvo, vide Álbo, or Blánco, white.

* † Alvógue, vide Albógue. 

* † Alvoguéro, vide Alboguéro. 

* † Alvóndigas, vide Albóndigas. 

* Alvór, vide Albór, breake of day, the
dawning. Also whitishnes.

* Alvoráda, Alboráda, musicke giuen at
the breake of the day.

Alvorboleár, vide Alborboleár. 

* Alvoreár, Alboreár, or Amanecér,
to waxe, or grow towards day.

* † Alvoréte, vide Alboréte. 

* † Alvorní, vide Alborní. 

* † Alvornóz, vide Albornóz. 

* † Alvoróço, vide Alboróço. 

* Alvorotár, or Alborotár, to make a 
tumult, or raise a faction or sedition.

* † Alvoróto, vide Alboróto. 

* Alvúra, vide Albúra. 

* † Alvuréjo, vide Alburéjo. 

* † Alvurquérque, vide Alburquérque. 

* Aluziádo, m.made smooth, made
plaine.

Aluziár, to make smooth or plaine.

* Alxáva, vide Aljáva, a quiuer.

* Alzádo, vide Alçádo. 

* Alzárse, vide Alçárse, to faile, to
misse, to erre, to deceiue, to trespasse, to
defraude, to lift vp, to breake, to play
banquerout.



Áma, f. a mistresse, a nurse.

Amáble, louely, amiable, beautifull,
gentle, curteous.

Amableménte, louingly, amiably, gent­
lie.

Amádo, m.beloued, desired.

Amadór, m.a louer, a suter, a wooer.

Amadóra cosa, f. a louing thing, pertai­
ning to loue.

aMaestrádo, taught, instructed.

aMaestrár, to teach, to instruct, to
warne.

* Amagádo, m.offered to bee beaten or
stricken.





* Amagadór, m.one that offereth to
strike or beate.

Amagár, Præs. yo Amágo, 1. Præt.
yo Amagué, to threaten, to make of­
fer to strike, or giue a blow.

* Amagué, vide Amagár. 

* Amainádo navio, vide Amaynádo, 
a ship striking saile.

* Amainár, vide Amaynár, to strike
saile.

* Amamár, or Mamár, to suck the teate
or dugge as infants.

Amamantamiénto, m.a giuing sucke, a
sucking the dugge.

Amamantár, to giue sucke, to giue
milke.

* aMancebáda, f. a married woman com­
mitting whooredome with another
man.

aMancebádo, m.hee that haunteth or
vseth women, a looser liuer, a vser of
whoores or concubines.

* aMançebamiénto, m.a following or
haunting of whoores.

* aMancebár, to intangle himselfe with
a whore, to vse the company of women,
to grow effeminate.

aManderécha, f. on the right hand.

aManysquierda, f. on the left hand.

* Amaneár, vide Amanecér, to waxe
towards daie.

Amanecér, or Amanescér, to waxe
towards day.

Amaneciéndo, or Amanesciendo,
betimes, earely in the morning.

aManéra, in manner, in such sort, like vn­
to.

* Amanádo, one that is diligent in his
busines, one that is readie or dextrous
in his affaires.

Amañár, vide Aliñár. 

* Amañeár, vide Amaneár, to awake,
to rouse, to stirre vp.

Amanojáda, f. bundles of any thing tied
vp togither.

* aMansádo, m.made gentle, made soft,
pacified, tamed.

* aMansadór, a peacemaker, a pacifier, a
tamer.

Amansár, to make soft, to pacifie, to
make gentle, to tame, to appease.

Amánte, m.a louer, louing.

* Amantillos, m.certaine coardes in a
ship called the liftes.

* aManzilládo, m.made lamentable,
pittifull, or wretched.  Also spotted.

* aManzilládor, m.one that maketh la­
mentable, miserable, or wretched, or
one that spotteth.

* aManzillár, to make pittiful, wretched,
miserable, or to bespot.

Amapólas, f. wilde Poppie.

* Amapóllas, idem. 

Amár, to loue, to like, to reioice in, to take
pleasure in.

* Amargaménte, bitterly, sowerly, cru­
elly, seuerely, eagerly.

Amargár, Præs. yo Amárgo, 1. Præt.
yo Amargué, to make sower, or sharp,
to exasperate, to waxe cruell or fierce.

Amárgo, m.sharpe, bitter, cruell, se­
uere, angrie.

* Amargue, vide Amargár. 

Amargúra, f. bitternes, sharpnes, sower­
nes, crueltie, seueritie, eagernes.

* Amarílla, colour white, wan, or sal­
low coloured.

* Amarilleár, to waxe pale, to waxe
faint, or wan.

Amarilléz, f. palenes, wannesse, faint­
nes.

Amarillecér, to waxe pale, wan, or faint,
to be sallow coloured.

Amarillo, pale, wan, faint, sallow co­
loured.

Amárra, f. a coarde, a cable to fasten.

Amarrádo, m.fastened, tied, ancored.

* Amarradór, m.one that fasteneth, ti­
eth, or ancoreth.

Amarrár, to fasten, to tie, to ancor a
ship.

* Amarzillár, vide Amanzillár. 

Amassadéra, f. a tubbe wherein they
knead dowe, or a woman that doth
knead.

Amassadór, m.one that heapeth togi­
ther, one that kneadeth or mouldeth
dowe.

Amassadúra, f. moulding, baking.

Amassár, to mould, to bake.

* Amassíjo, vide Amassadúra. 

* aMatár, to kill, to slaie.

* Amaynádo, m.stricken saile.

* Amaynár las velas, to strike saile.

Ámbar, m.amber.

Ámbargrís, m.ambergreece.

* Ambéres, vide Anvéres, the towne of
Anwerpe.

* Ambicióso, m.ambitious, seeking or
going about honor and preferment.

* Ámbito, a going about, a compassing, a
trifling.

Ambladór, m.an ambler.

Amblár, to amble, to sift meale or lyme.

Ámbos, both.

Ámbos adós, both two, both of them.

Ambrósia, f. a kinde of wormewoode.
Also the meate the Poets fained the
gods did eate.

* Ambrunésa, f. a cherrie.

* Amedrentádo, m.feared, skarred.

* Amedrentadór, m.one that skarreth,
seareth, or putteth in a fright.

Amendrentár, to affraie, to affright, to
feare, to amase.

aMelizinár, to cure, to heale, to giue me­
dicine, or cure vnto.

* Amélla, vide Alméndra. 

Amelonádo, m.softened, mollified.

* aMenáça, aMenáçe, vide aMená­
za. 

* aMenáza, f. threatnings.

* aMenazádo, m.threatned, menaced.

aMenazadór, m.a threatner, a mena­
cer.

aMenazándo, threatning with threates.

aMenazár, to threaten, to menace.

aMenázas, with threates, or menaces.

* Amendróa, vide Alméndra. 

Amenguádo, m.diminished, preiudiced,
lessened, discredited.

* Amenguamiénto, m.a diminishing, a
preiudicing, a making lesse, a discredi­
ting.

Amenguár, Præs. yo Améngo, 1. Præt
yo Amengué, to diminish, to make
lesse, to abate, to preiudice, to discre­
dite.

* Amenidád, f. delightfulnes, pleasant­
nes, cleerenes.

* Améno, m.pleasant, delighfull, com­
fortable.

* Amenissimo, m.most pleasant, most
delightfull, most cleere.

Amentár yo Amiénto, to sling or cast
out of a sling.

aMenúdo, often, thicke, many times togi­
ther.

Améos, the herbe called Ammy, or A­
méos.

Ametaládo, m.made or done with met­
tall.  Also fained, double faced.

* Ametalár, to faine, to beare two faces,
to glose, or cogge.  Also to make or doe
with mettall.

* Amethisto, a stone called Amethist.

* † Améxca, f. vide Ciruélo, a Plum.

* Amidón, vide Almidón. 

* Amiénte, Amiénto, vide Amentár, 
to hurle, to fling.

Amiénto, m.a string of a sling.

Amiesgádo, or Amiezgádo, a straw­
berrie.

Amigá, f. a she friend, a louer, a friend,
a leman, a sweete hart.

Amigáble, louely, friendly, full of curte­
sie, kinde, deere.

* Amigableménte, louingly, kindlie,
curteously.

Amigár, to currie fauour, to get friend­
ship, to win friends, to reconcile and
become friendes.

Amígo, m.a friend, a louer, a parra­
mour.

* Ammiráglio, or Ammirállo, vide 
Almiránte. 

* Amisque, or Amízque, mosse that





groweth on trees, sea mosse, herbe coral.

Amistád, f. friendship, good will, good
fellowship, amitie, friendlines.

* Amíto, m.a raile of linnen that women
weare.  Also a necke-cloth called an
Amite, that priestes put on, when they
saie masse.  Also apparell, or attire.

* Amízque, vide Amísque. 

Ámo, a master, a patron, a he nurse.

* Amó, he hath loued.

* Amodorriádo, m.sicke of the lethar­
gie, or possessed with a giddines in the
head, troubled with the drowsie euill.

* Amodorrído, m.sicke of the lethargy,
or drowsie euill in the head.

* Amohádo lugár, m.a mossie place, or a
dampish lowe moist place.

† Amohatrár, to run in debt, to borrow
of one to paie the other.

* Amohinádo, m.chafed, fretted, cros­
sed, vexed, angred.

* Amojonádo, m.bounded, limited.

† aMojonár, to set boundes, to limit.

* Amoládo, m.sharpned, ground, for­
ged.

* Amoladór, m.a grinder, a forger.

Amoladúras, the drosse of iron.

Amolár yo Amuélo, to grinde, to shar­
pen, to forge.

* aMoldádo, m.put into a mould, or cast
in a moulde.

* aMoldadór, m.one that putteth into a
moulde, or casteth in a moulde.

* aMoldár, to put into a moulde, to cast
into a moulde.

* Amollár, to soften, to slacken as the
coardes or sailes of a ship, &c.

Amollentadúra, f. a softning, a mollify­
ing, asswaging, a calming.

aMollentár, to make soft, to mollifie, to
asswage, to calme, to pacifie.

Amonestación, f. warning, an aduer­
tisement, admonition.

* Amonestádo, m.warned, aduertised, 
admonished.

Amonestadór, m.an admonisher, an ad­
uertiser.

* Amonestamiénto, vide Amonesta­
ción, m.a giuing of warning, an ad­
uertisement.

Amonestár, to warne, to aduertise, to
admonish.

Amónio, an herbe called Amonie.

* aMontádo, m.gotten vp on the moun­
taines, running vp on the mountaines.

* aMontár, to get vp on the mountaines, 
to flie or runne awaie on the moun­
taines.

* aMontón, by heapes, heapingly.

aMontonádo, m.heaped vp.

* aMontonadaménte, by heapes.

* aMontonadór, m.a heaper vp, a ga­
therer togither.

aMontonamiénto, m.a heaping or ga­
thering togither.

aMontonár, to heape vppe, to gather to­
gither, to raise a stacke or mowe of
corne.

aMontónes, by heapes.

Amór, loue, fauour, grace, desire, lust,
affection.

Amór de horteláno, cleaners.

† Amoradúx, m.Marioram.

* Amordazádo, m.bitten, pinched, nip­
ped, taunted, rebuked.

aMordazadór, a biter, a pincher, a snip­
ter, a taunter, a rebuker.

aMordazamiénto, m.a biting with the
teeth, a nipping, a pinching, a checking, a
taunting, a rebuking, a pinch.

aMordazándo, bitingly, tauntinglie.

aMordazár, to bite, to pinch, to taunt, to
rebuke, to checke.

* aMoriscádo, made after the Moores
fashion or manner.

Amorósa, a she louer, a parramour, a fa­
uorite.

Amorosaménte, louingly, amorouslie,
wantonly, curteously.

* Amoróso, m.louing, curteous, gentle,
kinde, amorous, affable.  Also a fa­
uorite, a louer.

* Amórra, a certaine game vsed of chil­
dren one being blindfolde, another
holding vp certaine fingers, the other
telleth how many he holdeth vp.

* Amortajár, to draw towardes death, to
quench, to extinguish.

Amortecér, to swoune, to faint, to fall
in a traunce.

Amortecído, m.swound, fainted, fal­
len in a traunce or swoune.

Amortecimiénto, m.mortification, a
quenching, killing, or extinguishing.

Amortiguár, to mortifie, to quench, to
kill the desires, to put out, or extin­
guish.

aMoscadór, m.a thing or fanne, made to
driue away flies.

* aMostrar yo aMuéstro, to shew, to 
declare.

* aMotinádo, m.made mutinous, fac­
tious.

aMotinadór, m.a factious or mutinous
fellow.

* aMotinár, to make mutinie, to raise a
hurly burly, or disordered rout.

* Amparádo, m.protected, defended.

* Amparadór, m.a protector, a defen­
der, a guider.

Amparár, to protect, to defend, to guid, to
maintaine, to vphold, to couer, to hide,
to saue, to shielde, to countenance.

Ampáro, m.defence, protection, mainte­
nance, a guard.

Ampólla, f. a swelling, a bubble, a viall
glasse, a drinking glasse.

Ampólla de água, a bubble of water, a
water pot.

Ampolléta, a small bubble, a wheale, a 
little viall or glasse.

Ampollárse, to rise in blisters.

* Amuéle, vide Amolár. 

* Amuestre, vide aMostrár. 

* Amúra, f. a coard in a ship called the
great tacke.

* Amydón, or Amidón, vide Almidón, starch.



* † Anacáles, boordes that they set the
bread vpon before it goeth into the o­
uen, or after it is drawne out.

* Anacephaleosis, a recapitulation or
reckoning vp of names.

Ánade, f. a ducke, or drake.

* Ánade de cálle, a tame ducke.

Ánade silvéstre, a wilde ducke.

Anadéar, to wallow like a ducke.

Anadína, Añadíno, a little duck­
ling.

Añadír, vide Añadír, to ad, to annexe,
to ioine, to put togither.

* Anadído, m.added, ioyned, put togi­
ther, annexed.

Anadidúra, f. a ioyning, adding, or put­
ting togither.

Añadón, m.a great ducke.

Anagirýs, Beane trefoyle, an herbe ve­
rie faire to see to, but hauing a stinking
sauour.

Análes, Chronicles, ancient recordes, 
yeerely histories, or chronicles of things
done from yeere to yeere.

Anapélo, Wolfes bane.

* Anathematizádo, pronounced accur­
sed.

* Anathematizamiénto, m.a pro­
nouncing one accursed.

* Anathematizár, to pronounce accur­
sed.

* † Añafíl, or Trompéta, a trumpet.

* Anathomía, f. an anatomie.

* Anathomísta, m.one that draweth out
an anatomie.

* Anatomísta, idem. 

Ánca, the hips, the horse buttocks.

* Ánçar, or Ánsar, m.a goose.

* Ánças, crowne land, let out to farme.

Ançarón, or Ansarón, m.a great goose.

Ançarótes, the gumme of a certaine
tree.

Anchaménte, largely.

* Anchíssimo, m.most large, most broad

Áncho, m.large, broad.





Anchóva, hering frie.

* Anchovéta, small hering frie, Ancho­
ves.

Anchúra, f. breadth, largenesse.

Anciania, f. ancientnes, antiquitie.

Anciáno, m.ancient, old.

Áncla, vide Áncora, an anker of a
ship.

* Ancládo, m.fastened with the anker.

* Ancón, m.the breaking in of the sea on
the land into a creeke.

Áncora, or Áncla, an anker.

* Ancorádo, or Ancládo, ankored, fa­
stened.

* Ancúza, f. a kinde of buglosse.

* Anda cá, come on this way with me.

* Andáda, f. a going away, a parting.  A
hastie bread in Spaine made as a hastie
pudding in England.  Also a daughter
in law.

Andádo, m.gone, walked, passed away.
Also a sonne in law, properly the sonne of
a wife or husband that is dead. in latin
Privignus, and not Gener.

* Andadór, m.a wanderer, a walker.

Andadór pregonéro, a crier, a proclai­
mer.

Andadóra cósa, wandring, gadding.

Andadúra, f. going, walking, a gate, or
manner of walking.

Andámio, m.a scaffold, a gallerie.

* Andánça, f. going forwarde, procee­
dings.

Andáncia, or Andáncio, a walking
place.

Andár, Præs. Ándo, ántlas, ánda, 1.
Præt. Andúve, anduviste, andúvo,
Fut. André, andrás, andrá, Sub.
Præs. Ánde, Imperfect. Anduviéra,
Andría, or Anduviésse, Fut. Andu­
viére, to goe, to walk, to march, to pace,
to proceed, to depart.

* Andár en púras cárnes, to goe naked.

* Andár en cuérpo, to goe without a
cloake.

* Andár a la máno, to goe in readines.

* Andár a gátas, to goe groping in the
darke, or to goe creeping on all fower.

* Andár en córo, to daunce in a round,
to run or goe in a circle.

* Andár arriba, to goe vp aboue.

* Andár a órça, to saile with a side
winde, not directly forward.

* Andár en pópa, to saile with a readie
direct winde.

Andariéga, f. a gadding gossip.

Ándas, or Ándaz, f. a beere for the
dead to carrie them to church, a horslit­
ter, a chaire to carrie one in.

* Ánde, Pásçe, let it goe, let it passe.

* Ánden mis bláncas tócas, let my
white kerchiefes now walke againe, or
let them now be worne againe, and so
cast off all mourning weedes.

* Ánde la loça, f. let dishes walke, let vs
make good cheere.

Andén, m.a walke, or a place, as a gallerie
or such like to walke in.

* Andilla, f. a foote stoole to lift a woman
to horse.

* Andorínba, vide Golondrína, f. 

Andrájo, or Handrájo, m.a ragge, a
cloute.

Andrajóso, m.ragged, torned, tottered.

Andrínas, or Endrínas, blacke plums,
prunes.

* Andrómacha, f. the wife of Hector.

† Anduáres, m.villages.

* Andurriáles, m.a place where men
passe to and fro.

* Andúve, Anduviéra, Anduviésse,
Andúvo, vide Andár. 

* Anegadízas tiérras, f. grounds that
haue been drowned with land fluds.

* Anegádo, m.drowned, ouerflowed.

Anegamiénto, m.drowning, ouerflow­
ing.

Anegár, Præs. yo Anégo,
1. Præt. yo
anegué, to drown, to ouerflowe, to suf­
fer shipwracke.

Anegué, vide Anegár. 

Anéjo, vide Añéjo, m.olde, auncient.

Anéjo víno, old wine.

* Anelár, to breath after, to gape after, to
pant.  Also greedily to thirst after or
couet any thing.

* Anexádo, m.annexed, ioyned to.

* Anexár, to annexe or ioyne to.

Anéxo, annexed, ioyned to.

Anfiteátro, a theater.

Angaríllas, f. a hurdle to drawe any
thing on.

Ángel, m.an angell.

Ángela, a proper name to very many
women in Spaine.

Angelíco, a little angell.

Angélico, angell like.

Angélica, the hearbe Angelica.  Also a
proper name.

* Angelína, f. a proper name of women 
in Spaine.

* Angostádo, m.made narrow, made 
streight.

Angostár, to make narrow or streight.

Angósto, m.narrow, streight, not broad,
not wide.

Angostúra, f. streightnes, narrownes,
strictnes.

Anguílla, f. an eele.

Angulár, placed in the corner, or hauing
many cornes.

* Angúlo, m.the corner of any thing.

† Angúrrias, a kinde of Pompion.

* Angúrria, f. the strangurie, when one
maketh water by drop meale, and that
with great paine.

Angústia, f. sorrow, griefe, vexation, an­
guish, heauines of spirit.

Angustiádo, m.grieued, vexed, perple­
xed, made sorrowfull.

Angustiár, to vexe, to grieue, to make
sorrowfull, to molest, to fret, to carke, to
care, to afflict, to paine.

* Angustióso, m.heauie, sorrowfull, grie­
uous, fretfull, carefull.

* Anhelár, to gape after, to gasp for wind
or breath, greedily to couet or thirst for
any thing.

* Anichiládo, vide Aniquiládo. 

* Anichilár, vide Aniquilár. 

Anidár, to nestle, to make a nest, to lodge,
to dwell.

* Aniéga, Aniégo, Aniégue, vide A­
negár, to drowne.

* Aniéjo, vide Añéjo. 

Anillo, m.a ring.

Anillo de la puérta, a ringle of a doore.

Ánima, the soule, the spirit or life of a
man.

* Animáda, f. a thing that hath life or
soule.

* Animádo, animated, encouraged, hart­
ned.

Animál, a liuing creature, a beast.

Animaléjo, a little creature, a little
beast.

Animáles ceñídos, flies, wormes, and
such like liuing things.

* Animalíco, m.a little liuing crea­
ture.

Animár, to encourage, to harten, to ani­
mate, to put life into, to make valorous.

Aníme, m.a kinde of perfume, or die
withall.

* Ánimo, m.a minde, a courage, a spirit,
a boldnes, a hart.

Animóso, m.couragious, hardie, bold, ad­
uenturous, valorous, stoute.

Animosidád, f. courage, boldnes, stoutnes,
hardines, valour, magnanimitie.

Animosaménte, couragiously, boldly,
stoutly, hardily, valiantly, aduentu­
rouslie.

aNiñadaménte, childishly, foolishly,
fondly.

aNiñádo, childish, become a childe.

* aNiñéza, f. childhood, infancie.

* Ánio, a riuer of Italy.

* Aniquilár, or Anichilár, to disanull,
to annihilate, to make of no force or ef­
fect.

Anís, or Matalahúga, annis, or annis
seede.

* Añadído, m.added, ioyned, annexed.

Añadidúra, f. adding, a conioyning, an
annexing, a putting vnto.

Añadír, to annex, to conioine, to adde, to
put togither.

† Añafil de Móros, a Moorish trumpet.





† Añagáza, or añagáça, a stale, a call
for birdes.

Añál, yeerely.

Añázas, f. faires, marts.

* † Añazéa, f. a matter of delight or
pleasure.

Añejár, to waxe old, to grow in yeeres, to
grow ancient.

Añéjo, old, ancient, ouertaken with yeers,
stale.

Añíl, azure, skie colour.

Añiládo, coloured with azure.

* Añino, of a lambe, or a lambes fleece.

Áño, m.a yeere.

* Dóze áños há, twelue yeeres agoe.

* De áños atrás, in yeeres past.

* Añójo, a calfe a yeere old.

* † Añória, vide Anória. 

Añubládo, m.cloudly, darkesome, bla­
sted.

Añublár, to waxe cloudie, to become mi­
stie, or blasted.

Añublárse el ciélo, the heauen waxing
cloudie.

Añúblo de trigo, the rust of wheate, the
blasting of wheat.

* Añudádo, m.vide Anudádo. 

* Añudadúra, f. vide Anudadúra. 

* Añudár, vide Anudár. 

* Añullación, vide Anullación. 

aNóche, yester night.

Anochecér, to waxe night, to growe
late.

Anocheciéndo, waxing euening, or to­
ward night.

* Anóna, f. a kinde of fruite.

† Anória, f. an engine to drawe water, a
wheele at a well to draw water.

* Anórca, or Nuéza blánca, f. a hearbe
called white Briony.

* Ánsa, vide Ánsar. 

Ánsar, a goose.

* Ansarería, f. a place to keepe geese in.

* Ansaría, f. idem. 

* Ansaríllo, a little goose or goseling.

Ansaríno, a goseling.

Ansarón, a great goose.

* Ansina, euen so.

* Ánsia, Ánsias, or Congóxa, f. sor­
row, griefe, torment, vexation of mind,
disdaine, lothsomnes.

* Ansióso, m.full of griefe, full of vexa­
tion, torment, anguish, care, trouble,
anoyance.

* Ánta, f. a kinde of beast in the Indies,
which hath the skin very thicke, a kinde
of buffe.

Antáño, m.the last yeere.

Antártico, as Polo Antartico, the an­
tarticke circle.

* Ánte, vide Ánta. 

Ánte, or Ántes, before, rather.

Ante-ayer, the other day, the day before
yesterday.

Antecedénte, going before, excelling, an­
tecedent.

Antecessór, m.an ancestor, or foregoer.

Antecedér, to goe before.

* Ante múro, m.a counter-skarfe, a de­
fence for a wall.

Anténa, f. a sayle yard.

* Anténa de caracól, f. the post stan­
ding vpright about which the staires do
winde.

Antenádo, m.a sonne in law, properly the
sonne of a wife or husbande that is dead.

* Ante-Passádo, gone or passed before, an
ancester, a predecessor.

AntePécho, m.a place to leane the
breast one, as at a bay window, or railes
or such like.

antePonér, Præs. antePóngo, antepó­
nes, antepóne, 1. Præt. Antepúse,
antepusíste, antepúso, Fut. Ante­
pondré, drás, drá. Sub. Præs. Ante­
pónga, Imperfec. Antepusiéra, ante­
pondría, or antepusiésse. Fut. Ante­
pusiére, to prefer, to set, place, or put
before.

* antePónga, antePóngo, vide Ante­
ponér. 

* antePuérta, a cloth of Tapistrie, dar­
nicks, or such like to hang before a
doore.

* antePuésto, preferred, put before.

antePúse, antePusiéra, or antePusiésse, 
vide Anteponér 

Anteriór, the former, or foregoing.

Ántesque, before that, rather that.

Ántes, before, rather.

* anteVér, to foresee, to preuent, to pro­
uide for.

* anteVísto, m.foreseene, preuented.

* Ante-yglésia, the churchyarde.

Anticipación, f. preuenting, supplan­
ting.

* Anticipadór, m.a preuenter, a sup­
planter.

Anticipár, to preuent, supplant, to antici­
pate.

* Antíco or Antíquo, ancient, of olde
time past.

* Antídoto, m.a preseruatiue against
poyson.

Antier, the other day, the day before ye­
sterday.

Antifáz, a vaile, a maske, a vizard.

* Antígua, vide Antiguaménte. 

* Antiguállas, f. antiquities, matters or
reliques of old time.

Antiguaménte, of old, anciently.

Antiguamiénto, the abolishing, the ab­
rogating.

Antiguár, to abolish, to abrogate, to leaue
or forsake.

Antiguidád, f. antiquitie, ancientnes.

Antíguo, m.old, ancient.

Antiguór, ancientnes, oldnes.

* Antilla, or Antíllo, vide Autíllo. 

Antipáras, leather cawkers, or buskins
that labourers in Spaine vse to weare
in haruest time to binde vp their corne,
that the beards and eares of corne may
not sticke on them or pricke their legs:
greaues for the legs. also a leather pealt
for labourers in haruest for the same
purpose.

* Antipodes, the antipodes or people
which dwell directly vnder vs.

* Antiquíssimo, m.most ancient, verie
old.

* Antojádo, m.longed for, lusted after,
humorous, fantasticke.

Antojadízo, lustfull, longing, desirous,
humorous.

Antojár, to long for, to lust for, to de­
sire, to seeme to be humorous, or fan­
tasticke.

* Antoxár, idem. 

* Antójo, or Antóxo, m.a lust, a desire,
a longing humour or conceit.  Also spec­
tacles.

Antójos, spectacles, lust, desire, longing,
as a woman with childe.

Antórcha, f. a torche or linke.

* Antorchádo, m.dropped on with a
linke or torch.  Also wreathed or wo­
uen one within another.

* Antóxo, vide Antójo. 

* Ántre, m.vide Ánta. 

Antruéjo, m.shrouetide, the weeke be­
fore lent.

* Antubión, or Antuvión, as Jugár de
Antubión, is when two men falling
at wordes, the one vpon a sodaine be­
fore the other can drawe his weapon,
hurteth, woundeth, or killeth him: or to
come behinde one and strike him.  Also
to vse any manner the like trecherie.
A preuenting.

Antuviár, to preuent, to excell.

Antúvio, m.preuenting, excelling.

* Antýer, the other daie, the daie before
yesterday.

* Anúbis, m.in the AEgyptian toong
signifieth dogge, in whose form they
worship the God Mercurie.

Anúble, or Anúblo, the blasting of
corne, or mil-dewing.

aNudádo, knit togither, tied, made in
knots.

* aNudadór, m.one that tieth, knitteth,
or maketh in knots.

* Anudadúra, f. a twisting or knitting
togither, a tying, a fastning, a knot.

* aNudár, to tie in knots, to knit, to fa­
sten, to linke togither.





* Anulár, or Anullár, to disanull, to
cancell, to make voide, to frustrate.

* Anvéres, Anvérs, or Anbéres, f. the
towne of Anwarpe in the lowe coun­
tries.

* Anunciación, f. the annunciation
day, the Ladies day in Lent.  Also a
shewing, telling, or declaration, a mes­
sage.

* Anunciádo, m.pronounced, declared, 
sent vpon any message, shewed.

* Anunciamiénto, m.an embassage, a
message, a declaring, shewing, or de­
nouncing.

* Anunciár, to declare, tell, pronounce,
shewe, or relate, to sende on an arrant,
message, or embassage.

* Anuncío, m.a message, an embassage, 
sometimes for the popes Nuntio or am­
bassador.

Ánxia, vide Ánsia, greefe, torment.

Anzueládo, m.full of fishes hookes,
hooked, angled, caught.

Anzuélo, m.an angle, a fishooke.



Aocár yo Ahuéco to make hollowe, to
emptie.

* aOjádo, m.bewitched with the eies.

* aOjadór, m.a bewitcher.

* aOjadúra, f. witchcraft, bewitching.

aOjamiénto, m.a bewitching, fore­
speaking, a charming with the lookes.

aOjár, to bewitch with the eie, to charme,
to forespeake.

* Aóra, vide Agóra, at this time, now.

* Aóra póco ha, a little since, a small
time since, euen now.

Aórçaçar, with a quarter winde.

Aótraparte, else where, on the other side,
on the contrarie.

Aosádas, boldly, assuredly, audaciouslie,
I warrant you, I dare say.

* Aósto, or Agósto, m.the moneth of
August.



* aPacentádo, m.fed, nourished.

* aPacentadór, m.a feeder, a nourisher.

aPacentamiénto, m.a feeding, grasing,
eating.

aPacentár, yo aPaciénto, to eate, to
feede, to grase.

* Apaciénte, Apaciénto, vide Apa­
centár. 

* Apagádo, m.quenched, appeased.

* Apagadór, m.one that quencheth, ex­
tinguisheth, or putteth out.

Apagamiénto, m.quenching, extingui­
shing, or putting out.

Apagár, Præs. yo Apágo,
1. Præt. yo
Apagué, to quench, to extinguish, or
put out fire, &c. Somtimes to pacifie, or
to appease.

* Apagué, vide Apagár. 

aPaleádo, m.cudgelled, beaten with a
cudgell, giuen the bastonado.

* aPaleadór, m.a cudgeller, one that
vseth to strike with a bastonado or
cudgell.

aPaleár, to cudgell, to giue the bastona­
do, to beate like a dogge.

* Apañádo, m.taken, snatched, taken vp.

* Apañadór, a catcher, one that snatch­
eth, or taketh vp.

* Apanaguiádo, sustained, fed, main­
tained.

* Apanaguár, to sustaine, feede, or
maintaine.

Apañár, to catch, to snatch, to take vp, to
accommodate, to make fit.

Apaño, m.a taking vp, a snatching vp, a
putting vp, a fitting.

Aparadór, m.a cupboord to set plate on,
a dresser to serue meate on out of the 
kitchin, a case to keepe plate in.

Aparár, or Aparejár, to prouide, to pre­
pare, to puruey, to make prouision, to
dresse or make readie meate.

Aparáto, or Aparéjo, m.preparation,
prouision, purueyance.

* Pár, equall with, like, by, in regard, in
respect, in comparison, iust against, side
by side.

* aPar de si, by him, iust euen with him,
close by him, side by side with him, iust
as far foorth as himselfe.

Aparcéro, m.a partaker, a partner, in
rent, trade, or such like.

* Aparecedór, vide aParescedór, m.
one that commeth in sight or appeereth,
one that maketh a shewe, or a sem­
blance.

* aParecimiénto, m.an appeering, a
comming in sight, a shew or semblance
of a thing.

* aParéd y médio, a wall in the middle
betweene the next wall to vs.

* Aparejádo, m.prepared, prouided, fur­
nished, dispatched, dressed.

* Aparejadór, m.a purueyor, prouider,
furnisher, one that maketh readie.

Aparejár, or Aparár, to make ready, to
prepare, to prouide, to furnish, to di­
spatch, to dresse.

Aparéjo, or Aparáto, m.preparation,
prouision, dressing, furniture for a
house, &c.

* Aparéncia, appeerance, outward shew,
semblance, or likelihood.

* Aparentádo, m.hauing many kins­
folkes.

* Aparentár, to make kindred with one
by mariage.

* aParescedór, m.one that maketh a
shewe or semblance.

* aParescér, to appeere, to make a shewe
or semblance, to come in sight.

* aParescído, m.appeered, seemed, made
semblance.

* aParescimiénto, m.comming in sight, 
appearing, making a shewe.

Apartadaménte, seuerally, distinctly,
each apart, particularly.

* Apartádo, m.seuered a sunder, parted,
diuided, diuorced, put one from ano­
ther, farre a sunder.

Apartamiénto, m.seuering a sunder,
parting, diuiding, diuorcement, segre­
gating, turning another way, going
away, vnloosing.

Apartár, or Apartárse, to diuide, to part
a sunder, to separate, to seuer, to di­
uorce, or leaue quite, to go away, to se­
quester, to vnfasten, to drawe aside,
to turne another way.

* aPárte, f. aside, a farre off, apart. Also
in the name, or on the behalfe.

* Apascentádo, m.fedde, nourished,
cherished, grased as cattle.

* Apascentár, yo Apasciénto, to feede, 
nourish, or cherish, to grase or feed cat­
tell.

* aPassionadaménte, greeuously with
passions of the minde.

aPassionádo, m.grieued, passionate, hu­
morous, vexed, sicke.

aPassionár, to greeue, to vexe, to be sicke,
to be subiect to fits or passions, to bee
humorous.

aPazibilidád, f. quietnes, peaceablenes,
pleasantnes.

aPazíble, peaceable, quiet, pleasant, de­
lightfull, full of solace or pleasure.

aPazibleménte, peaceable, quietly, plea­
santly, ioyously.

* Apaziguádo, m.pacified, appeased,
quieted, resolued, made at one.

* Apaziguadór, m.a peacemaker, an
appeaser, a pacifier, an vmpier.

Apaziguár, to pacifie, to appease, to set at
one, to make friendes, to quiet, to re­
solue.

* Ápe, in the Indian toong signifieth an
absolute captaine among the rest.

aPeamiénto, m.a lighting from horse,
dismounting.

aPeárse, to alight from horsebacke, to
dismount.

* mas aPéchos, more earnestly, more
effectually.

aPedáços, m.peecemeale, by morsels, by
snatches, by mammocks, by slices.

* aPedreádo, m.or aPedrádo, stoned
to death, beaten with stones, spoiled or
hurt with haile.

* aPedreadór, m.a stoner to death, a
thrower of stones.

aPedreár, to stone to death, to sling stones
at, to hurt or spoile with haile.

* aPegádo, m.fastened, sticked to, made
fast, glued.

* aPegamiénto, m.fastening to, sticking





or cleauing to, gluing, ioyning.

aPegár, Præs. yo aPégo,
1. Præt. yo a­
Pegué, to cleaue to, to sticke vnto, to
ioyne togither, to glue.

* aPegué, vide Apegár. 

* Apelación, f. appealing to a higher
iudge or court, a calling before a iudge.

* Apelante, one that appealeth, &c.

Apelár, to appeale.

* Apellidár, to appeale often, to appeale
againe and againe, to call to the watch­
word.  To giue a surname, to call by
name, to call people togither to do any
thing, or for succour or aide.

Apellído, a surname.

Apellído de guerra, a watchword, the
word giuen to the corporals at the set­
ting of the watch.

* aPélo, by a haire, iust, pat, lumpe, euen,
barely, poorely, mincingly.

Apélo ayúso, downe the haire.

* aPélo ariba, vp the haire.

aPénas, hardly, scarcely, with much a­
doe.

* Apeníno, m.a very high mountaine
that runneth along and diuideth Ita­
lie.

* Apercebído, m.prepared, prouided,
warned or pressed for a soldier.

Apercebimiénto, m.preparation, proui­
sion, forewarning, pressing for a soul­
der, readines.

Apercebír yo Apercíbo, to presse for a
souldier, to warne, to prepare, to be rea­
die.

* Apercevído, vide Apercebído. 

* Apercevír, vide Apercebír. 

Apercíba, Apercíbo, vide Apercebír. 

* aPerrochádo, m.well customed in sel­
ling, hauing much custome or customers
in selling or vttering his wares.

* aPerrochár, to bee well customed in
selling of wares, to haue many buyers or
customers for his wares.

* Apersadaménte, vide Apartadaménte. 

* Apertár, vide Apartár. 

Apesarádo, m.sorrowfull, greeued, hea­
uie.

* Apesarár, to make heauie, to grieue.

* Apesgádo, f. vide Apesgamiénto. 

* Apesgádo, m.pressed downe, weighed
downe, thrust downe.

Apesgamiénto, m.pressing downe, wei­
ghing downe, greeuing, aggrauating.

Apesgár, Præs. yo Apésgo, 1. Præt. yo
Apesgué, to presse downe, to ouerbear,
to ouersway, to greeue, to aggrauate.

* Apesgué, vide Apesgár. 

* Apestádo, m.infected with the plague
or pestilence.

* Apestár, to infect with the plague or
pestilence.

Apetescér, to desire, to couet, to request, to
wish, to haue an appetite vnto, to long
for.

Apetíto, m.appetite, desire to meate, co­
ueting for any thing.

* Apiadádo, made tender harted, become
meeke or pitifull.

Apiadár, to pitie, to haue mercie and com­
passion on.

* Apinádo, vide Apiñádo, m.

Apiñádo, close togither, vnited, ioyned in
one.

* Apiñárse, to close togither, to vnite, to
ioyne in one.

* Aphorísma, f. an Aphorisme, or a prin­
ciple in arte.

* Aplazádo, adiourned to a day of hea­
ring a matter.

* Aplaçár, or Aplazár, to adiourne or
appointe a new day of hearing a mat­
ter before a iudge.

Ápio, m. Smallage or water parsley, or
marsh parsley.

* Apíque, as Tan Apíque, so ready, so
at a point, so at hand.

* Apitón, the bud of a flower before it
blossometh.

Apitonádo, m.fierce, hastie, furious, full
of rage.  Also budded out.

Apitonamiénto, m.fiercenes, rage, furi­
ousnes, vnrulines.  Also a budding
out.

* aPlaçádo, m.placed, setled, stayed, or
appointed to appeare or answere by a 
peremptorie day.

* Aplacádo, m.pacified, appeased, plea­
sed, quieted, resolued, reconciled.

Aplacár, Præs. yo Apláco,
1. Præt. yo
Aplaqué, to appease, to pacifie, to re­
concile, to quiet, to resolue.

* Aplaqué, vide Aplacár. 

* Apláuzo, m.an applause, a clapping of
handes in signe of good liking of any
thing done or said.

* Aplazádo, appointed by a day, a day
set downe or appointed.

Aplazár, to appoint or to set downe a day,
to prefixe a day, to agree on a day or
time, to doe a thing.

Aplazér, to please, to like well, to delight
also.

* aPlazér, at pleasure, at ease.

Aplazíble, pleasant, ioyfull, delecta­
ble.

* Aplicación, f. applying of a matter to
the purpose, referring to some thing.

* Aplicadéro, m.that may be applied or
referred.

* Aplicádo, m.applied, referred.

* Aplicadór, m.one that applieth or ma­
keth relation of matters vsing them to
the purpose.

* Aplicár, Præs. yo Aplíco,
1. Præt.
yo Apliqué, to applie his speeches to
some ende, to speake to the purpose, to
haye relation to some other thing.

* Aplique, vide Aplicár. 

aPlomádo, m.heauie, leaded, of the na­
ture of lead, blunt, dull, lumpish, le­
uelled.

* aPlomár, to couer with lead, to solder
with lead, to leuell or measure with a 
plummes or ruler, to throwe or fling
with violence, or to make heauie or 
greeue.

* Apocádo, made little woorth, become
of no value, lessened, vilelie estee­
med.

aPocár, Præs. yo Apóco,
1. Præt. yo
Apoqué, to lessen, to make little of, to
esteeme little woorth, to holde in vile
account, to reckon basely of.

Apócrifo, or Apóchripho, that which 
is not of certaintie and sufficient au­
thoritie.

* Apodadór, m.one that vseth to quip,
nip, or taunt in his speeches.

* Apodádo, m.quipped, nipped, taunted
with speeches, scoffed, reprooued.

Apodamiénto, m.quipping, taunting, 
nipping speech, scoffing sharpely.

Apodár, to quip, to taunt, to vse nipping
wordes, to twit, to reprooue, to rebuke,
to taxe, to estimate.

Apódos, m.quips, taunts, priuie nips,
checks, rebukes, taxations.

* Apoderádo, m.seised, or possessed of, 
enabled.

aPoderár, or Apoderárse, to seise, or
giue possession of, to enable, to deliuer
into his handes or power.

Apoiár, vide Apoyár, to sucke a dugge,
to prop vp, to vndershore.

aPolilládo, m.motheaten, spoiled with
mothes.

aPolillár, to spoile with mothes, to eate or
consume with mothes.

* Apolíno, of, or belonging to Apollo.

Apoplexía, f. a disease called Apoplexie,
which depriueth him that is possesseth
of the vse of all his senses.

* Apoqué, vide Apocár. 

Aporcadúra, making of ridges, or small
beds in a garden.

Aporcár, Præs. yo Apórco, 1. Præt. yo
Aporqué, to make ridges, to make
baulkes, to couer, to burie vnder
ground.

aPorfía, f. a vie, striuingly, endeuoring
who shall do best, or who shall get most,
one enuying another, or, one outbidding
another.

* aPorreádo, m.cudgelled, giuen the ba­
stinado. Also bobbed or boxed with
the fistes.





aPorreadúra, cudgelling, giuing the ba­
stinado.  Also bobbing or boxing with
the fistes.

aPorreár, to beate with a cudgell, to giue
the bastinado.  Also to bobbe or boxe
with the fistes.

* Aporqué, vide Aporcár. 

* Aportádo, m.landed, or arriued on a
coast.

* Aportadéro, a landing place.

* Aportamiénto, m.landing, or arriuing
on a coast.

* Aportár, to arriue or land on a coast.

Aportilládo, m.opened, broken open, vn­
done, vnsealed.

Aportillár, to open, to breake open, to vn­
doe, to vnseale.

aPosentádo, m.lodged as a guest, ap­
pointed where to lie.

aPosentadór, m.a harbinger, a furrier,
one that taketh and appointeth men
where they shall lodge.

aPosentamiénto, m.a lodging place, an
Jnne, a guest-house, a harborough.

aPosentár, yo Aposiénto, to lodge, to
grant lodging, to appoint where to lie,
to take vp his lodging.

Aposénto, or Aposiénto, a lodging, a
chamber.

* Aposénto de náo, the docke where a
ship is builded, or amended.  Also a
cabbin in a ship.

* Aposiénte, Aposiénto, vide Apo­
sentár. 

aposPélo, or Pélo áriba, against the
haire, crossely, vntowardly.

Apósta, of set purpose, wilfully, witting­
ly, perfectly.

* Apostár, to laie a wager.

* Apóstata, m.a miscreant, one that once
being a Christian denied the knowen
truth.

* Apostatár, to become an apostata, to
waxe miscreant, to fall from faith
and true religion which hee professed
before.

Apostéma, f. an impostume, a course of
ill humours gathered to a head.

Apostemación, f. idem. 

Apostemár, to grow to an impostume, to
waxe full of corruption.

Apóstol, m.an apostle, a messenger sent, a
legate or ambassador.

* Apostoládo, m.an apostleship.

* Apostólico, belonging to an apostle.

* Apostólicas letras, letters dimissorie.

* Apostúra, f. handsomnesse, propernesse,
comlines, seemelines.

Apothégma, f. a quicke and wittie say­
ing.

Apoyár, to sucke a dugge, to vnderprop or
vndershore.

* aPreciado, m.prized, valued, estima­
ted.

aPreciadór, m.a prizer, a valuer, or esti­
mater, what things are woorth.

aPreciadúra, f. prizing, rating, valuing,
or estimating what things be woorth.

aPreciár, or estimár, to estimate, va­
lue, or prize what a thing is woorth.

Aprécio, the price, value, or rate what a
thing is woorth.

* Apregonár, to make proclamation.

* Aprehendér, to apprehend, to catch
hold of, to conceiue, to get.

* Aprehendedór, m.an apprehender, one
that conceiueth or catcheth hold of.

* Aprehendído, m.apprehended, con­
ceiued, or caught hold on.

* aPremiádo, m.forced, vrged, compel­
led, surcharged, or recharged, vnder­
propped.

* aPremiadór, m.one that instantly vr­
geth, forceth, compelleth, rechargeth.

aPremiadúra, f. force, compulsion, con­
straint.

* aPremiállos, id est, aPremiárlos, to
force them, to constraine them.

Apremiár, to force, to compell, to vrge, to
constraine, to recharge.

* Aprémio, m.compulsion, constraint,
inforcement.

* Aprendér, to learne, to enterprise, to
vndertake.

* Aprendíz, an apprentise.

* Aprendízes, m.those that learne anie
arte, apprentises.

aPresurádo, m.hastie, posting, feare­
full.

* aPresuradór, m.one that maketh haste.

Apresuradaménte, hastily, in post haste,
in a feare.

* Apresuramiénto, m.posting, making
great haste.

Apresurár, or Apressurár, to make haste,
to hasten, to be in a feare, to bee in a
chase.

* aPrestádo, m.made readie, prepa­
red.

aPrestár, to make readie, to prepare, to
dispatch, to rid.

Apretadaménte, strictly, narrowly,
violently.

* Apretádo, m.straightned, pressed, vr­
ged, bound, forced, pinched.

Apretamiénto, griping, straining, pres­
sing, or pinching, ioyning, or gluing
togiter, binding.

Apretár, yo Apriéto, to bind, to streigh­
ten, to striue, to gripe, to straine, to
presse, to pinch, to glue, to ioine togi­
ther.

* Apretúra, f. binding, streightening,
ioyning, gluing, pressing.

aPriéssa, f. hastily, quickly.

Apriéte, Apriéto, vide Apretár. 

Apriéto, m.streight, a narrow pinch, a
difficultie.

* Apriscádo, m.put in a fold, shed, or
sheepecote.

† Aprísco, m.a sheepehouse, a shed, a
sheepecote, a fold.

* aPrisionádo, m.imprisoned, laied in
the bolts, inthralled, made captiue.

* aPrisionár, to imprison, to inthrall, to
lay in the bolts, to lead captiue.

* Apríso, vide Aprísco, a sheepecote, a
sheepefold.

* Aprobación, vide Aprovación. 

* Aprobár, vide Aprovár. 

* Apróge, or Apróje, vide Allegami­
énto, approching, a drawing nigh.

aPropriación, m.an applying, a parable,
a fitting to the matter, a likening.

* aPropriádo, m.likened, compared, fit­
ted, appropriated.

aPropriár, to appropriate, to liken, to
compare, to speake by parables, to fit.

Ápro, a Boare.

Aprovación, f. allowing, ratifying, ap­
proouing, consenting to, confirming.

* Aprovádo, m.approoued, ratified, al­
lowed, confirmed.

Aprovár, yo Apruévo, to approoue, to
allow, to ratifie, to yeelde or consent
vnto, to confirme.

Aprovechamiénto, m.profiting, com­
moditie, gaine, profite, increase, furthe­
rance, preferment.

* Aprovecimiénto, vide Aprovecha­
miénto. 

Aprovechár, to profite, to gaine, to get
commoditie, to haue preferment, to in­
crease, to be furthered.

Apruébe, Apruéve, Apruévo, vide 
Aprovár. 

aPruéva, f. by proofe, by triall, by experi­
ence, a vie, striuingly, endeuoring who
shall do best, or win most.

* Ápto, m.fit, meete, apt.

Apuésta, a wager, a gage, winning of a
matter.

* Apuésto, m.hansome, comely, neate,
fine, gracious, trimme.

aPuñár, or aPuneár, to buffet, to beate
with fistes, to fight at buffets.  Also to
gripe in the fist.

Apuñeár, idem. 

* Apuntadór, m.one that pointeth out.
Also an ouerseer that looketh and no­
teth who commeth, and who is absent
from an assemblie, where hee ought to
come.

* Apuntalár, to prop vp, to vnderset, to
vphold. Also to make sharpe.

Apuntaládo, propped vp, vnderset, vp­
holden. Also sharpened.





Apuntár, to point out, to note, to assigne.

Apuntillár, to spurne.

* aPúnto, in a readines, readie at hand.

* aPuradaménte, purely, strictly, forci­
blie.

* Apurádo, m.purified, streined, enfor­
ced.

* Apuramiénto, m.purifying, straining,
forcing.

Apurár, to purifie, to straine, to enforce.



* Aquatócho, m.a spout, a pipe that
carrieth water to a Conduit, a squirt
or spout water or such like.

* Aquéda, as tañér aquéda, to ring a
bell, to set the watch in Spaine, in som­
mer at ten of the clocke, in winter at
nine, after which howers, men ought
not to carrie weapons, for officers go
about the streete, and whom they so
finde, they disarme, and commit them
to prison.

Aquedadór, m.one that maketh staie of
a matter, not letting it go forward.

aQuedár, to staie, to stop, to let, to tarrie
or abide.

* Aquejádo, vide Aquexádo. 

* Aquejár, vide Aquexár. 

Aquél, he.

Aquélla, she.

Aquéllo, that.

* Aquéllas, those, f.g.

Aquéllos, they, or those.

* Aquiénde, on this side, neere, the nee­
rest.

Aquésso, this.

Aquésta, this, f.g. or shee.

Aquéste, this.

* Aquésto, or Aquésso, this, or this
thing.

* Aquéstos, these.

aQuexadaménte, hastily, speedilie,
quickly, nimbly, with expedition.

aQuexádo, m.hastened.

Aquexamiénto, m.haste, speede, prick­
king on, making dispatch, hastening
on.

Aquexár, to hasten, to make speede, to
make haste, to vrge forward.

Aquí, heere.

* aQuietádo, m.quieted, pacified.

* aQuietamiénto, m.a quieting, a pa­
cifying.

* aQuietár, to pacifie, to quiet.

Áquila, vide Águila, f. an eagle. 

* Aquilá, there, thither, yonder.

* Aquiléno naríz, a hooke nose.

* Aquilisér, he that carrieth an eagle.

* Aquilón, the north.

* Aquistádo, m.gotten, conquered,
woonne.

* Aquistár, to get, to conquer, to win.



Ára, f. an altar or constellation so cal­
led.

* † Árabe, m.a moore, an Arabian.

* Arábia, a great countrey so called, the
Moores countrey.

* Arabál, vide Arrabál. 

* Aracádas, vide Arracádas. 

* Araçife, vide Arracífe. 

* Aráda, vide Arádo. 

Arádo, a plough, a furrow.  Also broken.
Also flowed, furrowed.

Arádo caméra, a crooked plough.

Aradór, m.a worme in the band.  Also a
ploughman.

* Arádio, m.a plough.

* † Aragán, vide Haragán. 

† Arambél, m.a tottered, or torne cloth.

† Arámbre, f. copper.

* Araián, or Arayan, the herbe mirtle.

* Arancár, vide Arrancár. 

* † Arançél, m.a proclamation in paper
to taxe the prises of victuals.

* † Arandéla, f. rebtoes, supporters for
womens ruffes.

* Arándes, strawberries.

* † Aránha, a crabfish.

Arañá, f. a spider.

* Aráña péce, a fish called a Quauiuer.

* Arañádo, m.scratched, clawed.

* Arañadór, m.one that scratcheth or
claweth.

* Arañadúra, f. scratching, clawing.

* Arañár, to claw, to scratch.

* Arañéta, f. a little spider.

Arañénta cása, a house where are many
spiders.

Arañuélo, m.a snare, a gryn to catch
birds with.

* Aranxuéz, the name of one of the kings
houses in Spaine.

† Aranzél, or Arançél, m.a proclamati­
on in paper, a role of names of officers,
shewing the manner and cause of
their acceptance:  a rate set downe of
the prises of victuals by iustice.

Arár, to plough, to breake vpground.

* Áraris, a riuer in the prouince of Ly­
ons in Fraunce called Soon.

* Arasár, vide Arrasár. 

* Arastrár, vide Arrastrár. 

* Aravál, vide Arravál. 

* Arayár, vide Rayár. 

* A rátos, otherwhile, by turnes, by fits.

* Arávigo, the Moorish speech, or Ara­
bike toong.

* Araygádo, vide Arraygádo. 

* Arayhán, vide Arrayhán, mirtle.

* Arbéja, f. a pease.

* Arbitránte, m.an arbitrator, an vmpier.

Arbitradór, or Árbitro, m.an abitra­
tor, a daiseman, an vmpier.

Arbitrár, to arbitrate, to thinke, to set
downe his opinion.

Arbitráreo, that which is or may be put
to arbytrement

Arbítrio, m.arbitrement, iudgement,
opinion or sentence what hee thinketh
meete to be done.

Árbitro, vide Arbitradór. 

Árbol, m.a tree.

Árbol de paraýso vide Alhéña. 

* Árbol de próa, the foremast.

* Arboládo, m.set vp as a tree, or set vp
as a mast of a ship, or set vp as pikes
when they make a stande.

* Arbolár, or Arvolár, to put on tree, or
to maste a ship. To make a stande as
pikemen.

* Arbolár vandéras, to set banners or
ensignes on ende, to hallow ensignes or
banners.

* Arbolár vn eséña, to beare an ensigne
right vp.

* Arbolár vna píca, to make a stande
with a pike.

Arbolecér, to grow vp to a tree.

* Arboléda, f. a groaue of trees, a coppis
or wood lately cut.

* Arboledéro, a keeper of fruite trees, a
looker to an orchard.

Arbolillo, or Arvolillo, a little tree, a
shrub.

* Arboráda huérta, f. an orchard full
of trees.

* Arborár, vide Arbolár. 

* Árbre, m.vide Árbol. 

Árca, f. a chest, a deske, a binne to keepe
bread in.

* Arcabúco, m.a great thicket or groue
of high trees.

Arcabúz, m.a harquebusse.

* Arcabúz de pósta, a harquebusse.

* Arcabuzázo, m. a blow or stroke with a
harquebusse, a shot with a harquebusse.

* Arcabuzéro, m.a harquebusier.

* Arcabuzería, shot, or shooting of har­
quebusse.

* Arcádas, f. vomiting at sea.

* Arcadéro, m.a chest-maker, a coffer-
maker.

* Arcadór, a bestower in chests.

* Arcaducádo, very much, destitute of
prouision.

* Arcaduçádo, m.directed or conducted
by pipes, leades or trunckes, as water.

* Arcaduçár, to direct or conduct by
pipes, spoutes or canes, as water.

Arcadúz, m.a conduict pipe.

* Arcaduzár, vide Arcaduçár. 

Arcángel, a chiefe Angell, an Archan­
gell.

Árcas, as las Árcas, a mans chest or
breast.

* Arcás, or Arcáz, a great chest or cof­
fer.

Arcedianádgo, m.an archdeaconship.

Arcediáno, m.an archdeacon.





* Arcéro, m.a halbardier, a yeoman of
the gard. An archer.

Archéro, m.an archer, a yeoman of the
guarde.

* Archíbo, the arches court, a treasurie of
euidences, or the chancery.

* Archíbos de poéticas fábulas, a 
treasury of poets fables.

* Archiducádo, m.an arche- dukedome.

* Archipréste, m.a chiefe priest.

* Archipiélago, the maine sea that com­
passeth Grecia about.

* Architécto, or Architéto, m.a chiefe
builder, a chiefe mazon, an architect.

* Architectúra, or Architetúra, skill
to direct men in building. Also buil­
ding of curious houses.

Archívo, or Archíbo, the arches, a trea­
sury of euidences, or of records.

* Arcilla, vide Arzilla. 

* Arcipiélago, vide Archipiélago, the
maine sea.

Arcipreste, vide Archipreste. 

Árco, m.a bow, an arch, a vault.

Árco del cielo, the rainebowe.

* Árco, or Bóveda, a vault.

* Arçón, m.the pummell of a saddle.

Arçopispádo, m.an archbishopricke.

Arçopispo, m.an archbishop.

Árda, vide Hárda, a squirrell.

Ardér, to burne, to blaze, to set on fire, to
flame.

* † Ardíd, m.a stratageme, boldnes, or
hardines.

Ardíd de guérra, a policie, or wittie shift
in war.

* Ardidéza, f. heate, hardines, choler, fu­
rie.

* Ardído, m.burnt, scorched.

Ardiénte, burning, hot, on a fire, fla­
ming.

Ardienteménte, hotly, burningly, fer­
uently.

* Ardíl, vide Ardíd. 

Ardimiénto, m.heat, burning, flaming.

Ardíte, a peece of money woorth three
Marauedies.

* Árdol, vide Árbol. 

Ardór, m.heat, burning, flame, a blase.

* Árduo, m.hard to be done, difficult, not
easie to be compassed.

* Arduydád, hardnes, difficulty.

* Areádo, vide Arreádo. 

* Arebañado, vide Arrebañado. 

* Arebatár, vide Arrebatár. 

* Arebénta buey, a long legged beetle
flie venemous to cattle. Also an herbe.

* Arebóles, vide Arrebóles. 

* Arreboçár, or Arebozár, vide Arre­
bozár. 

* Arebujár, vide Arrebujár. 

Arebuxár, vide Arrebuxár. 

* Arécho, vide Arrécho. 

* Arecífe, vide Arrecífe. 

* Aredádo, vide Arredádo. 

* Aredrádo, vide Arredrádo. 

* Aregostár, vide Arregostár. 

* Aréito, m.a kinde of daunce among the
Indians.

* Arélde, vide Arrélde. 

* Arellanádo, vide Arrellanádo. 

* Aremángo, vide Arremángo. 

* Aremetér, vide Arremetér. 

* Aremetído, vide Arremetído. 

* Aremolinár, vide Arremolinár. 

Aréna, f. sand, grauell.

Arenál, m.a place of sand, a grauelly
place.

* Arencádo, vide Arénque. 

* Arencádo, vide * Arrancádo. 

* Arendádo, vide Arrendádo. 

* Arénga, or Harénga, a long speech, an
oration.

Arenísco, or Arenóso, m.sandie, gra­
uelly, full of sand, or grauell.

* Areña, vide Aráña, a spider.

Arenóso, vide Arenísco, sandie, full of
sand or grauell.

Arénque, m.a hering.

* Arepastár, vide Arrepastár. 

* Arepentír, vide Arrepentír. 

aRespéto, or aRespécto, in respect, in re­
gard.

† Arestín, m.the scratches in a horses pa­
sterne, the scurffe or skall in childrens
heads.

* Areziár, vide Arreziár. 

† Arfil, m.the bishop at chesse play.

Argadíjo, m.the frame of anything.

Argadíllo, m.a reele to reele yarne on.

Argamássa, f. rough cast wals, &c. mix­
ture of sand and lime.

* Árganas, a kinde of hamper made of
hempe in networke wise, to fetch corne
out of the fielde vpon the backe of a
beast.

* Argél, m.a horse with his right foote
white, and no other white about him,
held in Spaine for an vnluckie horse.
Also a citie in Barbary.

* Argentádas, m.siluer bals, bals done
ouer with siluer.

* Argentadór, m.a gilder with sil­
uer.

* Argentádo, m.siluered ouer or done
ouer with siluer.

* Argentár, to siluer ouer, to gilde ouer
with siluer.

* Argentaría, f. gilding.

* Árgo, the first shippe that was made,
wherin Iason and his company went to
steale the golden fleece.

* Árgos, a famous citie in Greece, na­
med of king Árgos, which raigned o­
uer it, dedicated to Venus. Also Argos
with the 100. eies, whom Mercury
lulled asleepe, and cut off his head.

Argólla, f. a ring of yron.

* Argollíca, f. a little ring.

Arguélla, f. a wallet.

* Árguenas, f. budgets, bags.

Arguír, to dispute, to reason, to argue a­
bout a matter.

Argúllo, m.sharpnes, subtle points, witti­
nesse.

Argullóso, m.sharp witted, quicke con­
ceited, subtle.

Argullosaménte, sharpely, wittily, sub­
tilly.

Argumentadór, m.a disputer, a cauiller,
one that loueth well to reason of mat­
ters.

Argumentár, to dispute, to argue, to rea­
son, to cauill.

Arguménto, m.an argument, a reason, a
proofe, the summarie contents of a mat­
ter.

* Aribár, vide Arrivár. 

* Árido, vide Séco. 

* Aríllos, m.stones in raisons. Also ea­
ringes.

Arimár, vide Arrimár. 

* Arinconár, vide Arrinconár. 

* † Ariscádo, m.put into danger, placed
among rockes in a dangerous place.

* † Ariscár, Præs. yo Arisco,
1. Præt. yo
Arisqué, to hazard and put in danger,
to venture.

* † Arísco, danger, hazard.

* Arisgádo, vide Ariscádo. 

* Arisque, vide Ariscár. 

* Arista, f. the beard of the eare of corne,
sometime the eare, a haire.

* Aristocracía, f. an aristocracy, a com­
mon weale gouerned by the nobles, or
better sort.

* Aristológia, f. an hearbe called Hart­
woort or Birthwort.

Aristolóchia, f. an hearbe called Hart­
woort.

Arithmética, f. the art of reckoning with
number and casting readily of summes.

* Arithmético, m.a professor of arith­
metike.

* aRíto, iustly.

* Ariuár, vide Arriuár. 

* Árma, weapon, harneis. Also an a­
larme.

* Arma tocár, to strike vp alarme, to giue
the alarme, to sound the drum.

* vn Árma, an alarme.

Armáda, f. a fleete of ships furnished for
fight.

Armadíjo, a snare or grin to catch
birds.

Armádo, f. armed, well appointed.

Armadúra, f. armor, furniture.

* † Armánça, a snare, trap, or grin.

Armandíjas, f. snares or traps for to





catch birds or beasts with.

Armár, to arme, to furnish with weapon,
&c. to set a snare, to bend, to leuell.

Armár páxaros, or Gaçápos, to set gins
for birdes or conies.

Armár çancadílla, to trip.

Armár engéño, to bend or to leuell any
engine.

Ármas, armes, harnels, weapons, or any
souldier like furniture.

* Aombres de ármas, armed men.

Armário, m.an armorie, a deske.

Armatóste, m.a toy, a snare, a grin, a
racke for a crossebow.

Armazón, m.the grounde worke of any
thing as the timber worke for a house,
the ioints of ship, &c.

* Armazón de navios, the grounde­
worke of ships.

* Armelína, f. a little beast bearing fine
fur, called an Ermine.

Armélla, f. a ring or iron or of other met­
tall.

Arméro, m.an armorer, one that maketh
or selleth armor.

* Armílla, f. a cocklefish.

Armín, the fur of Ermines.

Armíños, the little beastes that carrie the
fur called Ermines.

* Armóles, or Armuélles, an herbe cal­
led Orach, or golden flower.

* Armonía, or Harmonía, harmonie, a
sweete agreement in musicall voices, or
instruments.

Armoniáque góma, a kinde of gumme
called gumme armoniake.

Armuélles, or Armóles, Orach, an herbe
so called.

Arnés, m.harneis to furnish souldiers
with.

* Áro, m.a circle or yron or wood, a hoop
of a barrell.

* Áro de broquél, the circle of yron a­
bout a buckler.

* Aróba, vide Arróba. 

* Arocinádo, vide Arrocinádo. 

* Arodilládo, vide Arrodilládo. 

* Arojár, vide Arrojár, to cast, to
throw.

* Arolládo, vide Arrolládo. 

* Aromadízo, vide Arromadízo. 

* Aronjádo, vide Arronjádo. 

* Aropádo, vide Arropádo. 

* Arostrár, to haue a will or liking to doe
a thing. To turne the face toward.

* Aróva, vide Arróva. 

* Aroxár, vide Arroxár. 

* Arroyár, vide Arroyár. 

* Aroyuélo, vide Arroyuélo. 

* Aróz, vide Arróz. 

* Arqueádo, m.made in the maner of a
bow, arch or vault.

* Arqueár, to make like an arche.

* Arquéro, a bow-maker, or a chestma­
ker.

* Arquerón, vide Arcáz, m.a great
chest or coffer.

Arquéta, vide Arquílla, f. a little chest.

Arquílla, Arquita, or Arquéta, f. a little
chest, a curlew.

* Arquíllo, a little bow, a fidling sticke, a
racket, a spring to catch birdes with.

Arquitetúra, vide Architetúra. f.

* Arquitéto, vide Architéto. 

* Arquitráue, m.a principall beame of
any frame or building.

† Arrabál, the suburbs of a citie, the base
towne, an out street.

† Arracádas, f. eare-rings.

† Arraçífe, a rocke or shelfe in the sea, a
foord.

* † Arraéz, a master of a barke or galli­
ote.

Arrancádo, m.pulled vp, rooted out, loos­
ned, snatched away, shifted away,
grubbed, plucked out, rid from entan­
gling, vnfastened.

* Arrancadór, m.one that plucketh vp by
the rootes, a snatcher or catcher by vi­
olence, one that riddeth from encum­
brance.

Arrancadúra, f. plucking vp by the roots,
snatching or catching by violence, rid­
dance from encumbrances.

Arrancár, Præs. yo arránco,
1. Præt yo
arranqué, to extirpe or plucke vp by
the rootes, to loosen, to deliuer from en­
cumbrance, to grub vp, to shift away,
to snatch or catch by violence.

* Arranque, vide Arrancár. 

* Árras, f. the earnest pennie or money
giuen onward vpon a bargaine.

* arRasádo, m.mowed, reaped, shorne,
shaued, but most properly, striked as a
bushell, or other measure is, smoothed
rased.

arRasadúra, f. striking of a bushell or o­
her measure. Mowing, reaping, clip­
ping of shauing, leuelling, rasing.

Arrasár, to strike as a bushell is striked, to
mowe, to reape, to clip or shaue, to leuel,
to smooth, to rase or blot out.

* Arrastrádo, m.dragged, drawen, ra­
ked, haled, tugged, trailed along the
ground.

Arrastradúra, f. a dragging, a drawing, a
raking, a tugging or drailing along the
ground.

Arrastrár, to drag, to draw, to rake, to
scrape, to pull, to hale, to tug, to traile
along the ground.

* † Arravál, or Arrabál, the suburbes of
a citie.

* Arraygádo, rooted, fastened, or twined
about a thing.

Arraygadúra, taking roote, fastening,
twyning about a thing.

Arraygár, Præs. yo Arraýgo,
1. Præt.
yo arraygué, to take roote, to fasten, to
twyne about a thing, to grow to a stem
or stalke, to spring vp, to settle, to take
hold, to plant, to set.

* Arraygue, vide Arraygár. 

† Arrayhán, a Mirtle tree.

† Arrayhanál, m.a groue of Mirtle
trees.

* † Arrayz, euen, anganst, leuell, iust, full
measure. vnder, beaneth.

* Árraz, the earnest, that one giueth or
taketh in making any bargaine.

* Arreádo, m.arraied, dressed, made rea­
die.

Arreár, to prepare, to make readie, to
dresse.

* Arrebañado, m.gotten or gathered to­
gither.

* Arrebañadór, m.a gatherer togither,
one that layeth on a heape, or pile.

Arrebañadúra, f. gathering togither, a
heape or pile, a hoorde of money, or
of other things.

† Arrebañar, to gather togither, to lay vp
on heapes or piles, to hoord vp money or
other things.

Arrebantár, vide Arrebatár. 

Arrebatadaménte, snatchingly, by cat­
ching, by fits, suddenly.

* Arrebatáda música, sudden musicke
quickely gone.

Arrebatádo, m.catched, snatched, surpri­
sed, taken.

* Arrebatádos plazéres, pleasures had
by fits, which quickely or suddenly
come, and are as soone gone.

* Arrebatadór, m.a catcher, a snatcher,
one that getteth now and then, or that
catcheth suddenly.

* Arrebatadóra, f. a buzzard.

Arrebatamiénto, m.catching, snatching,
getting by fits, getting suddenly, scra­
ping.

Arrebatár, to catch, to snatch, to get by
fits or suddenly, to scrape togither, to
claw, to scratch.

Arrebatína, catching or snatching, a skir­
mish, a sudden fray, boot-haling.

* Arreboçádo, m.muffled, masked, wim­
pled, hidden vnder the cloake.

* † Arreboçárse, Præs. yo Arrebóço,
to muffle, to mask, to wimple or hide the
face.

Arrebóles, red strakes in the skie that
are seene at the rising or setting of the
sunne.

* Arrebozádo, or Arreboçádo, muffled
with his cloake about his eies or face,
wimpled, masked.

* † Arrebozár, to throw his cloake ouer
his face.





* Arrebugiádo, or Arrebujádo, vide 
Arrebuxádo. 

* † Arrebujárse, vide Arrebuxárse. 

* Arrebuxádas schismas, heresies, fa­
ctious schismes, hidden, couered or kept
in hugger mugger.

* Arrebuxádo, m.vide Arreboçádo. 

* Arrebuxamiénto, m.a muffling, a
masking, a wimpling, or a hiding the
face.

* † Arrebuxárse, or Arrebujárse, vide 
Arreboçárse. 

Arrechár, to lift vp, to set vpright: pro­
perly vnderstood of the priuie member.

Arrechadúra, f. standing stiffe, lifting
vp, setting on end.

* Arrécho, set vp on end.

* Arrecífe, vide Arracife, a rocke or
shelfe in the sea, a foord, a coast full of
rockes.

Arredádo, m.vide Arrendádo. 

* Arredrádo, m.separated, put a sun­
der, driuen away, inforced, put awaie
priuily.

Arredrár, to driue away, to separate, to
put a sunder, to remooue priuilie, to in­
force.

Arregostádo, m.tasting, liking of the
taste, hauing tasted.

* Arregostar, to taste for a liking, to like
of the taste.

Arrejáda, f. the plough staffe, or the iron
on a plough-staffe wherewith the
ploughman clenseth the coulter.

† Arrélde, a waight of fower pounds.

* Arrellanádo, m.fasten downe on the 
flat ground.

Arrellanár, to settle in his seate, to sit vp­
on the flat ground.

* Arremangádo, m.trussed vp, tucked
vp, bound vp.

* Arremangamiénto, m.trussing, or
tucking vp, binding vp.

Arremangár, Præs. yo Arremángo, 1.
Præt. yo Arremangué, to trusse, or to
tucke vp, to binde vp.

* Arremángo, m.the lap, a trussing vp
a fierce setting on, an assault.

* Arremangué, vide Arremangár. 

Arremetér, to inuade, to set vpon, to as­
saile.

Arremetída, f. an assault, a sally, a set­
ting vpon men, an inuasion.

* Arremetído, m.assaulted, set vpon,
inuaded.

Arremolinár, to whirle about like a
whirlewinde.

* Arrendádo, m.bridled, curbed, rid­
den with a snaffle, rained vp, let to
hire, taken by the great. Also coun­
terfaited.

Arrendadór, m.one that letteth to hire,
one that hireth or taketh to farme, a
counterfaitor, a rent gatherer.

Arrendamiénto, m.letting, farming, ta­
king by the great, hiring of any thing,
yeelding to.

Arrendár, yo Arriéndo, to bridle, or
raine vp a horse, to curbe, to put on a
snaffle, or let for rent, to hire for rent,
to take by the great. Also to counter­
faite, to yeeld to.

Arréo, m.on a row, a row togither, in or­
der.

* Arréo, m.an ornament, decking, or
trimming vp: trappings, or a copari­
son for a horse.

Arrepastár, to feede, to put to pasture, to
graze, to goe to grasse, or to fodder as
men do cattle in the winter.

Arrepentír, yo Arrepiénto, to repent, to
rue, or be sorrie for some thing past &
done, to be grieued or ashamed for his
fault, to forethinke.

Arrepentído, m.repentant, penitent, sor­
rie for sinnes.

Arrepentimiénto, m.repentance, peni­
tencie, ruth or sorrow for faultes esca­
ped, or matters done and past.

* Arrepiénte, Arrepiénto, vide Arre­
pentír. 

* Arrepintír, vide Arrepentír. 

Arrepiso, penitent, repentant, &c.

† Arrexáque, m.a forke with three
prongs, any toole with three teeth, a
forke to tende or pitche haie with, an
Eele speare, a Troutspeare, a flesh­
hooke, a birde without feete called a
martle, a quarrell of a crossebow.

* Arreziádo, fortified, strengthened,
made strong.

* Arreziár, to strengthen, to make strong,
to waxe strong from sicknes.

* Arezió desde vn rato acá el mál, 
the sicknes a little while since encrea­
sed and waxed vehement.

* Arreziár de doléncia, to recouer his
health againe to grow well againe.

Arriár, to fall backe, as a ship doth when
she letteth go hir cable.

* † Arriáte, a pot of flowers on a wall, a
causey, a pathway.

Arríba, or Arríva, vpwarde, aboue, on
high, aloft.

* Arribál, vide Arrabál, m.the suburbes
of a citie or towne.

* Arribáda, or Arriváda, f. an arriuall,
comming to shoare, or to harborough,
ascending, or mounting vpward.

Arribádo, arriued, landed, come to har­
borow, ascended or mounted vpward.

Arribár, or Arrivár, to arriue, to come
to shoare, or to harborough, to soare vp
as a hauke, to leane or poise vpon, to
ascend, to mount vpward.

* Arriénde, Arriéndo, vide Arren­
dár. 

* Arriéro, vide Harriéro. 

* Arrimádo, m.leaned on, relied or rested
vpon, staied.

* Arrimadór, m.one that leaneth or re­
lieth vpon.

Arrimadúra, f. a leaning against, relying
or resting vpon.

Arrimár, to leane against, to set vp a­
gainst, to rely or rest vpon, to stick vnto.

Arrimo, any thing to leane on, or to relie
vpon.

arRinconádo, m.thrust vp in a corner,
driuen to a narrow pinch, enchanted,
made numme or senselesse.

* arRinconadór, m.a driuer into cor­
ners, a sorcerer, an inchanter.

* arRinconamiénto, m.enchantment,
a driuer into corners.

* Arrinconár, to enchant, to freese, to
make numme, or senselesse: to put or
driue into a corner.

* Arrindár, vide Arrendár. 

Arriscádo, indangered, in hazard or ieo­
pardie, hardie.

* No seas Arriscádo, be not foole har­
die.

† Arriscár, Præs. yo Arisco,
1. Præt.
yo Arrisqué, to indanger, to hazard,
to aduenture, to ieopard.

* Arrisque, vide Arriscár. 

* Arríva, aboue, aloft.

* Arrivádo, arriued, hauing taken lan­
ding, come to a place.

* Arrivár, to arriue, to come to shoare.

† Arróba, or Arróva, a certaine mea­
sure, or a waight of twenty fiue pounds,
of measure eight Açumbres: sixe gal­
lons English.

* Arróba de vino, a vessell of wine hol­
ding sixe gallons.

* Arróba de canéla, twentie fiue pounds
of Synamon, a measure of wine contei­
ning eight Açumbres, or sixe gal­
lons.

Arrobádo, measured by that measure,
or according to that waight.

Arrocinádo cavállo, an ill fauoured
iade.

* Arrodilládo, m.on the knees, knee­
ling.

Arrodilladúra, f. a kneeling on the
knees.

Arrodillár, to kneele on the knees.

Arrogáncia, f. arrogancie, pride, hauti­
nes of stomacke.

Arrogánte, proud, arrogant, insolent, of
a hautie minde.

* Arrojadízas ármas, weapons vsed to
be throwne, as darts, &c.

* Arrojadízo, m.any thing to be cast.

* Arrojádo, m.throwen, flung, hurled,
driuen away, rushed in, ouerflowen





with water.

* Arrojadór, m.one that flingeth, cast­
eth, hurleth.

Arrojár, to throwe, to cast, to fling, to
thrust or presse in, to throw in, to ouer­
flow the bankes as the spring tide, or
high water.

* Arrolladór, m.a rowler, a tumbler, a
wrapper, a tosser to and fro.

Arrollár, to roule, to tumble, to folde, to
wrap, to tosse to and fro.

* Arromadizádo, pained with heauines
of the head, greeued with the falling
downe of the rheume.

* Arromadízo, rheume, heauines of
the head.

* Arronjádo, m.cast, hurled, or dar­
ted.

* Arropádo, heauie headed with Ar­
rópe, id est, new wine, or clothed with
Rópa, id est, a gowne or garment.

Arropár, to cloath, or to make the head
heauie with new wine.

† Arrópa, or Arrópe, newe wine sod­
den to the third part, muste, wine sod­
den for sauce.

Arrópe de moros, syrrup of mulber­
ries.

Arrostrár, to face, to come face to face.

* Arróva, a measure of eight Açúm­
bres, that is six gallons, of weight 25.
pound.

* Arroviñár, to snatch vp sodainely, to
catch vp in haste.

* Arroxár, to make to shine or glister
like gold, to make looke red.

Arroyár, to plow the ground.

Arroyárse el río, to runne along in and
out as a riuer doth.

Arróyo, m.a little riuer, a running brook
of water.

* Arroyuélo, m.a little running brooke.

† Arróz, m.Rice.

* Arrufianádo, m.made or become a
baude.

* Arrufianár, to make or become a
baude.

Arrúga, f. a wrinkle in the face or other
part, a pleite, a fould.

Arrugádo, m.pleited, foulded, wrin­
kled.

Arrugár, to fould, to pleite, to wrinkle.

Arruynádo, m.ruinated, readie to fall,
defaced, laied waste, throwne downe.

Arruynár, to throwe downe, to bring to
ruine, to deface or pull downe, to laye
waste, to destroy.

* Arrulládo, m.lulled a sleepe.

Arrullár el níño, to lull the childe a
sleepe.

Arrullárse la palóma, or Tórtola, to
crie or mourne as stocke-doues and
turtle-doues vse to do.

* Arruviádo, m.made to glister, of the
colour of golde.

* Arruviár, vide Arroxár. 

Arsénico, Orpment, Arsenicke, of the co­
lour of gold.

* Artáfice, vide Artifíce. 

Árte, f. arte, cunning, science.

Artéjo, m.a ioynt of a finger.

* Artemísia, an herbe called Mugwoort,
some say Feuerfew.

Artemísa, idem. 

* Artéra, f. vide Artéro. 

* Artéria, a small sinew, or arterie.

Artéro, cunning, craftie, deceitfull. also
an artificer.

Artésa, f. a kneading trough, or a tub to
mould bread in.  Also a boate hewed
out of a tree, being all in one peece.

Artesáno, m.a handicrafts man.

Artesílla, f. a little bowle, goblet, or stan­
ding cup.

Artesónes, Plaisterers workes that they
make in the seelings of houses. also great
kneading tubs, or troughs to moulde
dough or bread.

* Artichóca, f. or cárdo de comér, an
Artichoke.

Articulár, to set downe articles, to con­
dition, to couenant, to distinguish, to
speake treatably, to point out ioint by
ioint.

Artículo, m.an article, a naturall com­
position of ioints, or bones, a knuckle: an
article of the faith, a little part.

* Artífice, m.a handie crafts man, an
artificer, a workman.

Artificio, m.workmanship, cunning in
the occupation.

* Artificiosaménte, cunningly, worke­
manlike.

Artificióso, m.cunning, one that is his
craftes master, very cunning.

Artificialménte, vide Artificiosa­
ménte. 

* Artilládo, furnished with artillerie.

* Artillár, to furnish with artillerie.

Artilléro, m.a master of the ordinance, or
gunner.

Artillería, f. ordinance, artillerie.

* Artimáda, f. a thing made by arte.

Artimáña, f. deceit, sleight, shifting.

Artísta, m.an Artist, one that studieth
an arte.

* Artótrogo, m.a greedie gut, a glutto­
nous fellow.

* Árua, the fieldes.

* Arúda, f. vide Rúda, an herbe called
Rue.

† Arvéja, f. pease: some saie tares.

* Arufianár, vide Arrufianár. 

* Arugár, vide Arrugár. 

* Arullár, vide Arrullár. 

* Aruviár, vide Arruviár. 

* Árvol, vide Arból. 

* Arvolár, vide Arbolár. 

* Arvoléda, a groue or orchard of fruit
trees.

* Arvoledéro, vide Arboledéro. 

* Arvolíllo, vide Arbolíllo. 

* Aruspicína, diuination by the sacrifi­
cing of beastes.

* Aruynár, vide Arruynár. 

Arzaepiélago, vide Arcipiélago. 

* Árze, vide Ázre. 

Arzilla, f. a kinde of claie, potters clay.

* † Arzén, m.the shoare, or seas side, a
banke to keepe in water.

* Arzión, vide Arzón. 

Arzón, m.the pummell of a saddle, a
crouper.



As, An ace at dice, or at cardes.

Ása, f. the eare or handle of a pitcher, or
such like. occasion, opportunitie.

aSabiéndas, wittingly, with consent and
liking, of set purpose.

* aSáco, by spoiling, boot-halling, by rob­
bing.

* Asadería, vide Assadería. 

* aSaetár, to shoot.

* Asalariádo, m.rewarded with wages, 
salarie, or stipend.

* Asalariár, to rewarde with wages, sti­
pend, or salarie.

* Asaltádo, m.set vpon, assailed.

* Asaltár, to set vpon, to assaile.

* Asálto, m.a setting vpon, an as­
sault.

Asár, vide Assár, to roast.

† Asarabacár, a kinde of nard, or a kinde
of foalefoote, an herbe so called.

* Ascalónia Cebólla, a scalion, or little
onion.

* Ascendéncia, f. an auncestrie, a ge­
nealogie.

Ásco, as aver ásco. loathing, to loath.

Ascoróso, one whose stomacke doth
loath much.

Áscua, f. hot coales.

* Ascuras, vide a Escuras, in the darke
without light.

* aSécas, Barley.

* Asechança, vide Assechánça. 

* Asediár, or Asidiár, to besiege, to laie
siege vnto.

* Asédio, or Assédio, a siege, a situati­
on.

* Asélga, f. an herbe called a Beete.

* Ásele, to take hold on him.

* aSemejánça, f. to the likelihood, to the
likenes, in comparison of.

* Ásen, they lay hold on, they take hold
on.

* Asendereádo, m.troaden as a pathe.

Asendrádo, m.idem. 

* Asentár, to set downe.

* Asénsio, Wormewood.





* Aserravélas, or Açerravélas, coards
in a ship, called marklines.

* Aserrár, yo Assiéro, to saw or cut with
a saw.

* Asessór, an assistant, one that sitteth on
the bench, to be assistant in iustice and
iudgements.

* Asestádo, m.aimed at, leueled at.

* Asestár, to ayme at, to leuell at.

Ásga, f. oportunitie, catching hold on.

Asgár, to flie or fasten vpon, to catch hold
on.

* Asiál, m.a kinde of pincers to hold a
horse with by the nose while he is a shoo­
ing or letting blood.

* Asidéro, m.the eare or handle of a pot,
cup, or such like.

* Asidiár, to besiege, to lay siege, to belea­
guer.

* Asídio, vide Asédio, or Assédio, a
siege, a besieging.

Asido, m.cleauing or sticking to.

* Asiente, Asiénto, vide Assentár, to
set downe.

* Asiénto, m.a seate, or situation, quiet­
nes or reposednes of minde, setling at
the bottome, the dregs that settle to the
bottome.

* Asierre, Assiéro, vide Asserár. 

* Asignár, to appoint or assigne, to seale or
signe a writing, to make a crosse or signe

Asilla, m.opportunitie, occasion. A little
handle of any thing to take holde on.
Also the throate.

Asión, vide Aciónes. 

Asír, to take hold on, to sticke to, to cleaue
to, to but.

* Asistendo, ayding, helping, assisting.

* Asistir, to ayde, to assist or helpe.

Ásma, shortnes of breath, swouning or a
qualme in the stomacke, extasie or a
passion of the minde, greefe, annoy,
vexation.

Asmár, to esteeme, to imagine, to thinke, to
estimate. Also to be short-winded.

Asmático, one that is troubled with
shortnes of breath, or with an extasie or
swouning.

Ásna, Asno, a shee asse, a he asse.

Asnál, m.pertaining to an asse.

Asnarízo, m.a keeper or driuer of asses.
Also the place where asses stand, or are
shut vp.

* Asnejonázo, m.a great asse, a block-
headed fellow.

Asnéro, m.a keeper of asses.

Asníco, vide Asnillo, a little asse.

* Asnillo, vide Asníco, idem. 

Ásno, an asse, a bearing beast.

Asno campés, a wilde asse.

* Asolado, m.brought to the ground, spoi­
led, subuerted.

* Asolár, to ruinate, bring to the ground,
to subuert, spoile or consume.

* aSalas, alone, by himselfe, without any
company.

* Asoldadár, to name and appoint one
out for a soldier.

* Asomár, to apeere vp.

* Asombrar, vide Asombrár. 

* Asonáda, an alarme, or raising vp of
people by ringing of bels.

† Áspa f. a reele for thread, or for yarne.

* Áspa de molíno, a winde-mill saile.

Aspádo, m.reeled, wound in bals.

Aspár, to reele thread or yarne, to turne
about as the sailes of a winde-mill doe,
to roule or winde in bals.

* Aspécto, m.an aspect, a looking on, re­
gard, countenance, sight, prospect, physi­
ognomie.

Aspeluzár, vide Espeluzár, to haue the
haire stand stiffe with feare, to haue
the haire stand vpright.

* Asperaménte, sharpely, eagerly, to make rough,
to make eager.

Asperéza, f. sharpnes, roughnes, eagernes,
fiercenes, straightnes, bitternes.

Asperéza, or Amargúra, bitternes.

Áspero, m.sharpe, eager, stearne, fierce,
cruell, bitter, streight, craggie, rug­
ged.

Áspero de pélo, rough haired, shagd
haired.

Áspero, or Fragóso, craggie like rockie
mountaines, wilde, rugged.

* Asperón, m.a whetstone to make
kniues, or such like, sharpe. Also the
nose or snoute of a ship or galley.

* Áspide, a kind of little serpent in A­
fricke very venemous, an Aspicke.

* Aspirár, to aspire, to couet, to attaine
vnto, to seeke for, to get promotion.

* Aspréza, vide Asperéza, a streight
pinch, sharpnes, &c.

* Ásquas, f. liue coales after they haue
done flaming, burning coales.

Asqueróso, loathsome, horrible, irke­
some.

* Ásre, cypres wood.

* Ássa, as dar Assa, to giue a handfast, to
giue or minister occasion.

* Assadería, a roasting place, a kitchin.

Assadéro, m.a spit to roast meat on. Also
one that turneth the spit.

* Assaderíllo, m.a little spit.

Assádo, m.roasted.

* Assadón, vide Açadón, m.

* Assadór, m.a spit to roast meate.

Assadúra, the garbage or guts. Also a
liuering pudding, or a sawsedge.

assaetádo, shot.

* Assaetadór, one that shooteth in a bow, 
or with a dart.

* assaetár, to shoote with a bow, to dart,
to hit with a thunderbolt.

* Assaltádo, m.assaulted, set vpon.

* Assaltár, to assault, to set vpon.

* Assálto, vide Asálto. 

Assár, to roaste.

Assarabacar, vide Asarabacár. 

Assáz, enough.

Asseádo, m.neate, fine, handsome, curi­
ous.

* Asseár, to make neate, fine, handsome,
curious.

* Assechádo, laied in waite for, wat­
ched.

Assechadór, m.one that lieth in waite, a
skoute that goeth vpon discouerie.

Assechadóra cósa, f. a deceitfull matter,
a matter fetched about by a wile.

Assechánça, f. an ambush, a lying in
wait, a plot to intrap folke.

Assechándo tomár, to take by an am­
bush, to intrap by a wile.

* Assechanza, vide Assechánça. 

Assechár, to lie in waite, to lay an am­
bush, to intrap.

* Assediár, vide Asediár, to besiege, to
laie siege to.

* Assédio, vide Asédio, m.siege, a be­
sieging.

* Assegundár, to make second or next to
one, to second.

* Assegurádo, m.assured, put in securi­
tie.

* Asseguradór, m.one that doth war­
rant, one that putteth in securitie.

* Asseguránça, f. assurance.

* Assegurár, to put in securitie, to saue
harmeles, to warrant.

* Asséncio, or Assénsio, wormewood.

Assenderádo, or Assendereádo, rare,
excellent.

* Assentádo, m.seated, setled, staied.

Assentadór de real, m.a camp-master, a
quarter-master.

Assentamiénto, m.placing, setling, pit­
ching of a campe, sitting.

Assentár, yo Assiénto, to place, to settle,
to sit, to sit downe, to sincke to the bot­
tome.

Assentárse en cuclíllas, to sit rucking or
cowring downe on the taile.

Assentár el reál, to lodge the campe, to ap­
point euerie company their quarter.

* Asséo, m.comelines, fines, neatnes, hand­
somenes, gallauntnes.

* Asserádo, m.sawed with a saw.

* Asserdadór, vide Asserradór. 

Asserradór, a sawyer.

Asserradúras, sawdust.

Asserrár yo Assiérro, to sawe, to saw in
sunder.

* Asservádo, m.kept, preserued, wat­
ched.





Asseruár, to keepe, to watch, to obserue,
to marke or looke vnto.

Assessór, m.an associate on the bench, one
that sitteth with other.

Assessório, idem. 

* Assestádo, m.appointed, aymed, prefi­
xed, vnderpropped, set against.

* Assestadór, m.one that aymeth, leueleth
or appointeth, prefixeth, proppeth or
setteth against.

Assestadúra, f. ayming at, prefixing.

Assestár, yo Assiésto, to appoint, to pre­
fixe, to aime, to vnderprop, to set a­
gainst, to cauill at.

Assestár tiro, to ayme a shoot.

Assí, so, thus.

Assi como, euen as, like as, so as.

* Assido, m.taken hold on, fastened, clin­
ched, griped.

* Assidéro, m.a thing to be taken hold on,
a stay, a holdfast, a thing to gripe or
graple on. A handle, an occasion, oppor­
tunitie.

Assi mésmo, euen so, in like sort. Also
eke, eftsoones, moreouer, ouer and be­
sides, eyen the very same.

* Assi que, then, therefore, so that, in such
sort as.

* Assiente, Assiénto, vide Assentár. 

Assiénto, m.a seat, a chaire, situation, the
dregs.

Assiénto hazér, to sinke downeward, to
settle about the bottome.

Assiénto de edificio, the situation of a 
house.

* Assierre, Assiérro, vide Asserrár. 

* Assieste, Assiésto, vide Assestár. 

Assignacíon, f. appointing, assignement.

* Assignádo, m.appointed, assigned.

Assignár, to appoint, to assigne, to set
downe.

* Assílla, a little handle to hold by.

* Assír, vide Asír. 

Assisténte, an assistant, a helper, an ay­
der.

Assolación, f. setting against the sunne, 
making waste or desolate.

Assoládo, m.set against the sunne, deso­
late, ruinated or brought to the ground.

Assoladúra, f. making waste, wasting,
laying desolate.

* Assolamiénto, m.vide Assoladúra. 

* Assolár yo Assuélo to make desolate,
to spoile, to set against the sunne, to lay
waste.

* Assolcár, to make furrowes as a plough
in the ground, to lay out ridges, to cut
as a ship in the sea.

Assoleár, to dry against the sunne, to lay
in the sunne, to bleach clothes.

Assoltár yo Assuélto, to loosen, to rid out
of bands, to discharge.

Assolución, f. absolution, acquiting, dis­
charge, letting loose, setting at libertie,
remission, pardon.

Assoluér, yo Assuéluo, to absolue, to ac­
quite, to discharge, to let loose, to rid
out of doubt, to forgiue.

* Assolutaménte, absolutely, perfectly,
cleerely.

Assomádo, m.appeared vp. Also giddie­
headed, almost drunke.

Assomár, to peere vp, to looke vp, to ap­
peare, to lift vp the head. Also to bee
giddie headed, almost drunke.

Assombrádo, m.shadowed, afraid, asto­
nied.

* Assombradór, m.one that skarreth,
frayeth, maketh astonied.

Assombrár, or hazer sómbra, to sha­
dow, or yeeld shadow.

* Assonádas, f. by soundes, by noises, by 
tunes, by voices.

Assonadór, m.a tuner, one that setteth
tunes.

assonár, yo assuéno, to tune or set a
tune, to sound, to sing with.

* Assordár, to make deafe.

aSsosegádo, m.pacified, appeased, quie­
ted.

aSsosegár, Præs. yo aSsossiégo, 1. Præt.
yo aSsossegué, to appease, to pacifie, to
quiet or make calme.

* asSossiéga, asSossiégo, vide asSosse­
gár. 

* Assuéle, Assuélo, vide Assolár. 

* Assuelva, Assuélvo, vide Assolvér. 

Assuélto, absolued, pardoned, acquited.

* Assuene, Assuéno, vide Assonár. 

Assulcádo, diuided by furrowes, layde
out in ridges.

Assulcár, Præs. yo Assúlco, 1. Præt. yo
Assulqué, to make furrowes, to lay out
in ridges.

* Assulque, vide Assulcár. 

* Assunción, taking or getting vp, moun­
ting.

Ásta, the stafe of a launce, a speare, a
launce, a pike, a staffe.

Astenérse, vide Abstenérse. 

† Astíl, m.a stalke of any herbe. The haft
or handle of a spade, pikaxe or such
like.

† Astílla, f. a stub, a square peece of tim­
ber called a quarter, a stalke, a raf­
ter, a stake, a pile, a chippe, a lath, a
stump, a stocke, a wharle for a spindle, a
shiue, a splinter.

† Astilládo, set on a staffe, fastened on,
patched togither, splintered.

* Astíllas, by chip meale, by splinters, by
little peeces.

† Astiléjo, m.a constellation of stars, cal­
led the Orion.

Astilléro, m.a docke to build ships on.

* Astinéncia, f. abstayning or forbearing
of meate, or any other thing.

* Astinénte, one that forbeareth much
eating and drinking, a temperate man,
or one that forbeareth by vertue from
doing violence or wrong.

* Astragár, Præs. yo Astrágo, 1. Præt.
yo Astragué, to spoile, to destroy, to
marre.

* Astrague, vide Astragár. 

* Ástro, a celestiall signe compact of ma­
ny starres.

* Astrolábio, m.an instrument of Astro­
nomers, called an Astrolabe, by which
the motion of the stars is gathered.

Astrologál, belonging to Astronomy.

Astrología, f. experience and reading of 
Astronomy.

Astrólogo, m.one that can reason of the
reuolutions of the heauens, the course of
the Planets, the constellations, &c.

* Astronomía, f. arte or skill in Astrono­
mie. Also an herbe called Aristolo­
chia longa.

Astróso, m.vnfortunate, vnluckie, borne
in an yll howre.

* Astrosaménte, vnfortunately, vnluc­
kily.

Astúcia, f. craft, deceit, subtiltie.

* Astúria, a prouince in Spaine so called,
full of mountaines.

Astuta, or Astutaménte, craftily, cun­
ningly, slily, deceitfully.

Astúto, m.craftie, deceitfull, cunning, wa­
rie, slie, subtle, wily.

* Asýlo, m.a sanctuarie or place or re­
fuge whence malefactors could not bee
fetched to be punished.


A T
* Atabaýba, f. an Apothecary drug so
called.

† Atabál, a drum. Also a round instru­
ment like a kettle without a bayle, v­
sed in war in times past, and yet among
the Spaniards vsed at feasts.

* † Atabaléjo, m.a little drum.

Atabaléra, f. a she player on a taber.

† Atabeléro, a drummer, a taberer.

* Atáca, vide Hatáca, f. a cookes great
spoone.

* Atacádo, m.tyed, bound, trussed vp.

* Atacádo de las cortinas de murálle, 
fastened to the curtaines of the wall.

Atacadúra, f. tying, binding, trussing vp.

Atacár, Præs. yo Atáco, 1. Præt. yo
Ataqué, to tie, to binde, to fasten, to
trusse vp. To ram powder into a peece.

Atacár las calças, to trusse vp his hosen.

Atacár el al cabúz, to ram powder into a
harquebusse with the skowring sticke.





* Atacár la póluora con la baquéta, 
idem. 

* Atadégna, f. a kinde of hearbe called
Fleabane.

* Atadíllo, m.any small matter tyed or
wrapped vp togither.

Atádo, m.bound, tyed, wrapped vp, clas­
ped, imbraced, ouercome, wound or com­
passed about as Iuie about a tree.

* Atadór, m.one that bindeth or tyeth.
Also the thing that bindeth or tyeth.

Atadúra, f. a band, a tying, a clasping, a
thong, a latchet.

* Atáfea. 

Atahárre, m.a crouper for a mule or asse,
to keepe that the saddle or pannell slide
not forward.

† Atahóna, f. an asse or horsemill. A
bridewell.

* † Atahóna de múlos, a horse- mill.

Atahórna páxaro, a kinde of foule that
liueth by pray.  Some thinke it to be a
kinde of Eagle; other, a kinde of Faul­
con; other, a Ringtayle.

Atajádo, m.cut off, shut off from his pur­
pose.

Atajadór, one that cutteth off or stoppeth
the way, a skoute, a spie, a boot-haler or
stealer of cattle.

Atajár, to discouer, to forrage or spoile, to
cut off or stop of his purpose, to make
short, to make a weare in a riuer.

Atajár camíno, to stop the way. Also to
goe the shortest way or cut.

Atajár enemígos, to cut off enemies by
getting betweene them and their home.

Atajár descubriendo tiérra, to discouer
land at sea.

Atajár pleyto, to giue ouer law quickly,
to withdraw his plea.

* Atajasolázes, a cutting or cutter off of
pleasure or mirth.

† Ataifór, m.a cupboord. Also a tressle,
or three footed stoole.

Atájo, a cut, a slice, in a iourney or voy­
age the cut or shortest way, a turne­
pike in a way: a weare in a riuer: a
stile in a hedge, a gate. A flocke or heard
of cattle.

* Atájo de ganádo, a flocke of sheepe or
a pen for sheepe or cattle.

Atájo de pleýto, ending of sute in law,
letting the action fall.

* Ataladrádo, m.boared thorough.

Ataladrár, to boare thorough.

† Ataláya, f. a watch-tower, a beakon, a
watch aboord a ship.

† Atalayamiénto, m.watching at a bea­
kon, a watching a shipboord.

† Atalayár, to watch at a towre, at a
beakon, &c. or a ship-boord.

* Atalayadór, m.a watchman that wat­
cheth at a beakon, at a towre, &c. or a
shipboord to discouer.

* Atalayéro, m.idem. 

† Atambór, m.a drummer, a taborer. Al­
so the drum it selfe.

* Atamiénto, m.a band, a thing to tie
withall.

Atañér, to belong to, attaine or pertaine.

† Atanór, m.a conduict pipe, the cocke of
a conduict, any trough or pipe that ca­
rieth water in the ground.

† Atanquía, f. a little paire of pincers to
plucke haire off withall, a plaister to
take away haire.

* aTánto, vntill, whilest, euen, so farre
as.

* Atapádo, m. stopped, couered.

* Atapadúra, f. a couer, a stoppell, a stop­
ping of anything.

Atapár, to stop, to couer.

* Ataque, vide Atacár. 

Atár, to binde, to wrap, to imbrace,
to ouercome, to winde or compasse a­
bout, as Iuie about a tree.

Ataraçána, f. a docke where shippes are
made or amended. A storehouse for
munition, a place of exercise.

* Ataraçanál, idem. 

* Atarse, to be bound or tyed.

* Átarce, Átarse, or Tamariz, the Ta­
mariske tree.

* Atarragádo, m.stucke fast as in the
mire or clay, grauelled or stalled that
cannot get out.

* † Atarragár, Præs. yo Atarrágo, 1.
Præt. yo Attarragué, to sticke fast as
in the mire or clay, to be grauelled, not
able to get out.

Atarragué, vide Atarragár. 

* † Atarráya, f. a fishing net, a fowling
net, a hay for conies.

* Átarse, vide Átarce. 

Atascádo, m. sticking in the mire.

* Atascár, to sticke in the mire.

* Atavál, vide Atabál, a drum.

* Atavaléro, v. Atabaléro, a drummer.

† Ataúd, m.a coffin, a beere for dead
men, a tombe.

* Ataviataménte, fitly, finely, trimlie.

Ataviádo, m.fitted, trimmed, attired,
made handsome.

Ataviár, to make fit, to decke, to make
handsome, to apparell.

* Atavío, m.handsomnes, trimnes, come­
lines.

Atauxía, f. damasking of a knife, dagger,
sword, or such like, or engrauing in
stone or wood.

* Atayfór, vide Ataifór. 

* Atemorizádo, m.skarred, made a­
fraide, entangled much with busines,
amazed.

Atemorizár, to skar, to make afraide, to
trouble much with busines, to neigh as
horse, to rouse, to astonish, to daunt, to
fright, to mate.

aTenazádas, with pluckes of pincers.

aTenazár, to plucke with pincers.

Atención, f. heedfulnes, marking, taking
heed, accomplishment, applying.

Atender, yo Atiéndo, to attend, to
marke, or giue heed vnto, to sollicite, to
apply.

aTenérse en voto a ótro, to giue his
consent with other.

* Atentádo, m.one that goeth by trying,
feeling, assaying, or first prouing.

* Atentaménte, attentiuely, harkening
vnto with attention.

Atentár, yo Atiénto, to attempt, to as­
say, to touch, to feele, to groape.

* aTentár a escuras, to groape, or feele in
the darke.

Aténto, m.heedfull, attentiue, marking,
diligent, applied.

Aterecérse, to waxe stiffe with cold.

Aterecimiénto, m.stifnes with cold.

Aterído, m.stiffe, starke, idle, slothfull,
retchles, negligent, lazie.

Aterírse, vide Aterecérse. 

* Aternía, I would hold with, or he would
hold with.

Aterrár, yo Atiérro, to suppresse, to cast,
or throw to the ground, to fell, to hum­
ble, to dam or fill vp with earth.

* Aterréro, m.a butte to shoote at. Some­
time it signifieth, at the market place,
or in the court.

* Atenta la cáusa, heeding the matter.

* Atesorádo, or Atezorádo, m.hoorded
vp, heaped vp.

* Atesoradór, or Atezoradór, m.one
that hoordeth vp, or gathereth store of
goods.

Atesorár or Atezorár, to hoord or lay
vp, to gather riches apace, to heape vp.

Atestádo, m.filled, stuffed full, farced.

Atestár, yo Atiésto, to fill, to stuffe full,
to farce.

* Atezorádo, vide Atesorádo. 

* Atezoradór, vide Atesoradór. 

* Atezorár, vide Atesorár. 

Athanásia, f. an herbe called Tansie.

* Athléta Tusca, a woman champion in
Tuscany, in Italy famous for her deeds,
whom Celestine exceeded in her arte.

* Atiçár, or Atizár, to kindle.

aTiémpo, in good time, in due season.

* Atiéndo, Atiando, vide Atendér. 

* Atiente, Atiento, vide Atentár. 

aTiénto, by feeling, by guesse, by gro­
ping, by triall.

* aTierre, aTierro, vide aTerrár. 

* aTieste, aTiesto, vide Atestár. 

* Atiladúra, f. the filing, refining, or puri­
fieng of any thing.

* Atilár, to file, refine or make pure or





neat anything.

Atinár, to guess, to coniecture, to sup­
pose.

* Atincadúra, f. borrace or sodder for
gold, &c.

Atincár, vide Atincadúra. 

* Atiriciádo, m.quaking or quiuering,
pale, wan.

* Atiriciár, to quiuer, to quake. To be
pale or wan.

Atizadór, m.one that kindleth fire, one
that prouoketh.

† Atizár, or Atiçár, to kindle fire, to stir
vp, to prouoke.

† Atócha, f. a kind of shrub vsed to make
frailes with.

Atochádo, m.foolish, frantike, dull, be­
nummed, deafe.

Atolladál, or lamedál, a mirie place,
a puddle, a durtie plot.

Atolladéro, idem. m. 

* Atolládo, m.fast in the mire.

Atollár, to sticke in the mire, to plucke a­
way, to disioyne.

Átomos, m.moates or haires in the
sunne.

* Atonárse, to be astonied or amazed, to 
be dismayed.

* Atonádo, or Espantádo, astonied, a­
mazed.

* Atoníto, m.astonished, amazed.

* Atontádo, m.made foolish, frantike, or
out of his wits.

Atorçonáda béstia, a beast the hath the
griping in the belly.

Atormelcér, to waxe heauie, dull, or vn­
wilsome, to be vnlustie, senselesse, or a­
stonied.

Atormecído, astonied, heauie, dull, vn­
lustie, hauing neither life nor soule.

Atormescimiénto, m.dulnes, heauines,
astonishment.

Atordido, vide Aturdído, astonied, a­
mazed.

* Atordír, vide Aturdír. 

Atormentádo, m.tormented, racked
grieuously handled.

Atormentadór, m.a tormentor, an exe­
cutioner of punishment, a hangman.

aTormentár, yo aTormiénto, to tor­
ment, to racke, to handle grieuously.

* aTormiénte, aTormiénto, vide a­
Tormentár. 

Atossigádo, m.poysoned, hauing taken in­
toxication.

* Atossigár, yo Atossígo, 1. Præt. yo
Atossigué, to poyson, to giue intoxica­
tion to.

* Atossigué, vide Atossigár. 

Atraér, Præs. yo Atraýgo, atráes, a­
tráe, 1. Præt. Atrúxe, or Atráxe, a­
truxíste, atrúxo. Fut. Atraeré, atrae­
rás, atraerá. Sub. Præs. Atráyga, Im­
perfect, Atruxéra, atraería, or atru­
xésse, Fut. Atruxiére, to draw, to get
to, to allure.

* Atrahimiénto, vide Atraymiénto. 

Atrahillár, to drawe in a slip, or in a
leash.

* Atraimiénto, or Atraymiénto, dra­
wing to.

* Atraillár, or Atrayllár, to draw in a
slip or in a leash.

* Atrailládo, or Atraylládo, drawen in
a slip or leash.

† Atramúzes, or Altramúzes, a kinde
of pulse called Lupines.

Atrancár, Præs. yo Atránco,
1. Præt. 
yo Atranqué, to barre or make fast
the doore. To stride a wide steppe, to
stride or step ouer a ditch, or such like.

Atrancár la puerta, to bar, or make fast
the doore or gate.

* Atrangár, vide Atrancár. 

* Atranque, vide Atrancár. 

Atras, behinde, backward.

* de Atras, of former times, behind, back­
ward.

Atras mano, out of the way, not directly
in ones course.

Atratívo, m.attractiue, drawing, allu­
ring.

Atravesádo, or Atravessádo, cros­
sed.

Atravesár. or Atravessár, yo Atraviés­
so, to crosse, to ouerthwart, to tra­
uerse.

* aTravísse, aTraviésso, vide Atraves­
sár. 

* aTraýdo, or Atraído, drawen to.

* Atrayga, Atraygo, vide Atraér. 

Atrayllár, to drawe in a slip or leash, to
couple vp.

* Atraylládo, coupled vp, or drawen in a
slip.

Atreguádo lóco, a frantike foole, one
that is mad by fits.

Atrevérse, to be bold, to be hardie.

* Atrevidaménte, boldly, hardily, auda­
ciously.

Atrevído, m.bold, hardie, audacious.

Atrevimiénto, m.boldnes, hardines, au­
daciousnes.

† Atriáca, f. Treacle.

† Atriaquéro, a maker or seller of Trea­
cle, a Quacke saluer that runneth from
market to market to sell salues, waters,
&c.

Atribuýr, to attribute, to impute, to lay to,
to arrogate.

Atribuládo, m.troubled, vexed, gree­
ued.

Atribulár, to trouble, to vexe, to grieue.

* Atrición, f. a renting, or tearing con­
trition.

* Atrincheár, to make trenches for de­
fence.

* Atrincherádo, m.placed among tren­
ches for defence.

* Atrochádo, m. a foole, a noddie, a diz­
zard, a giddie-head.

* Atróche, y móche, vnaduisedly, rash­
ly, without consideration.

* Atrocissimo, most fierce, most cruell.

Atronár, yo Atrunéno, to thunder, to
skar or make afraide with thunder, to
play the foole, to become an idiot or
dizzard, to stagger.

Atronádo, m.made afraid with thunder,
become an idiot or dizzard, made to
stagger.

Atronamiénto, m.making afraide with
thunder, astonishing, thundering, be­
comming a foole.

* Atronerádo, m.made with many loop­
holes to shoot out at.

* Atropelládo, m.troden vnder foote.

* Atropellár, to tread vnder foote.

* Átropos, one of the three destinies of
mans life, signifying, not to be changed:
shee is said to cut off the thread of mans
life, when Clotho and Lachesis haue
spun and drawen it to the length.

* Atróz, cruell, fierce, heynous.

* aTruéna, aTruéno, vide Atronár. 

* aTrúxe, aTruxéra, aTruxesse, vide 
Atraér. 

Atruendo, vide Estruendo, a great
noise.

* Attar las velas, or Hiçar las velas, to
hoise saile.

* Atténto, vide Aténto. 

* Attizár, vide Atizár, to kindle.

* Attónito, vide Atónito. 

aTuérto, by wrong, wrongfully, vniust­
lie.

* Atusádo, m.suddenly, in a rage or cho­
ler.

Atufár, to be quickly in a rage, to be sud­
denly in a chaffe, to be cholericke by
and by.

* Atujádo, m.fit, meete, apt, handsome.

† Atún, m.a fish called a Tunny.

* Atunéro, m.a fishmonger, a seller of
Tunneyes.

Aturdído, m.astonished, dull, giddie, diz­
zie, mad, foolish, frantike, rauing in the
head.

Aturdír, to astonish, to become or
make giddie, dull, or dizzie in the
head.

* Atusádo, m.cut very low or bare with
sheares.

* Atusár, to cut very lowe or bare with
sheares. To croppe or browse as cattell
doth.

* Atutía, f. an Apothecarie drug.






A V
Avaliádo, m.valued, esteemed.

* Avaliadór, m.one that valueth or estee­
meth, deemeth or priseth.

* Avaliár, to value, esteeme, deeme or
prise.

* Avallár, vide Aballár. 

Avalórios, garinshings with bugles, or a
pedegree of ancesters.

* Avanderádo, or Abanderádo. 

* Avandéro, vide Abandéro. 

* Avandór, m.a fanne for to fanne
corne.

* Avanguárdia, f. the vauntgard.

Avanícos, m.fans for women to carrie in
their hands.

Avaraménte, couetously, greedily.

* Avaratár, vide Abaratár, to barter, to
exchange. Also to make good cheap or of
low price.

Avarícia, f. couetousnes, greedines.

* Avaricióso, couetous, gripple on world­
ly goods.

Avariénto, m.a greedie cormorant, a co­
uetous wretch.

* Avarrísco, vide Abarrísco, wholy, al­
togither.

* Aváro, couetous, miserable, hard.

* Avarrár, vide Abarrár. 

Avarráz, Havvaráz, vide Abarráz, an
hearbe called Staues-acre, or Louse­
bane.

* Avasalládo, m.make a subiect or vas­
sall.

* Áucto, vide Áuto. 

* Auctorizádo, m.warranted by autho­
ritie, countenanced.

* Audádo, vide Andádo, m.

* Audáz, Audás, or Audáx, hardie,
bold, audacious.

Audiencia, f. hearing, audience, a place
where matters are heard, a court kept.

Audiéncia de ruéguo, the court of re­
quests.

* Auditívo, to be heard.

Auditór, a hearer.

Auditório, m.an auditorie, a place where
folke are heard.

Áve, f. a birde.

* Avecíca, f. a little bird.

* Avecilla, idem. 

Ávefeniz, a bird called a Phenix, wher­
of there is neuer but one in Arabia.

* Avéja, f. a Bee.

* Avejarúco, or Avejerúco, vide Abe­
jerúco, a Wood-wall, or Wit-wall, a
bird so called.

* Avejéra, vide Torongíl, Balme gen­
tle the hearb.

* Avejón, vide Abejón. 

Avellacár, to make vile, to reuile, to dis­
grace, to set at naught.

Avellána, f. a hazell nut.

Avellána de la India, Mirobalane.

* Avellanál, m.a place where Hazell nuts
grow.

Avellanédo, a groue of Hazels.

Avelláno, m.a Hazell tree.

* Avéllo, id est, Avér lo, to haue it.

Avéna, f. Oates.

Avéna vána, wild Oates.

* Avéna montesína, idem. 

Avenádo, sodden with oates, mad, brain­
sicke.

Avenedízo, or Advenedízo, a stran­
ger, one that commeth as a stranger.

Avenéncia, or Avenimiénto, agree­
ment, composition. Also a cane with
which they take out wine of the vessell
to taste.

Avenída, f. a flood, an inundation, a
great fall of waters.

* Avenimiénto, m.vide Avenéncia. 

aVenír, Præs. Avéngo, aviénes, avié­
ne, 1. Præt. Avíne, aviníste, avíno.
Fut. Aviendré, aviendrás, avien­
drá. Sub. Præs. Avénga, Imperfect.
aveniésse, avendría, aveniéra.
Fut.
aviniére, to come togither, to agree, to
be friends.

Avenír el río, to ouerflow, as a riuer
doth.

Aveñólas, the eie-lids.

aVentadéro, m.a fanne.

* Aventadór, m.one that fanneth or ma­
keth winde, or one that runneth head­
long into a matter.

Aventajádo, m.excellent, surpassing, o­
uer and aboue.

Aventajár, to excell, to get advantage, to
surpasse, to gaine, to haue the better.

Aventamiénto, running on headlong,
tumbling downe. A making or blow­
ing of wind.

Aventár, yo Aviénto, to fanne, to make
winde, to run headlong.

Aventárse el ganádo, to run headlong
as a flocke of sheepe doe when they are
skarred.

Aventár pán, to fan or winnow corne.

Aventúra, f. aduenture, chance, hap, for­
tune.

* Aventurádo, m.fortunate, happie, luc­
kie.

Aventurárse, to adventure, to hazard, to
put in tryall.

* Aventuréro, m.an aduenturer, a ven­
turous fellow, a hardie man, one that
putteth all vpon haphazard.

Avér, Præs. Hé, ás, a.
1. Præt. úve, uvi­
ste, úvo, Fut. auré, aurás, aurá. Sub.
Præs. áya. Imperfect. uviéra, auría, or
uviésse. Fut. uviére, to haue.

Avéres, or Havéres, goods, wealth, sub­
stance.

* Avérias, vide Avéres. 

* Avergonçado, m.ashamed. Also in
Spaine one that is publikly punished for
some offence (as petie Larceny) riding
on an asse thorow the streets, and a crier
manifesting his fault.

* Avergonçar, to shame, to make asha­
med, to be ashamed.

Averigación, f. verifying, ratifying,
auouching of a thing to be so.

* Averiguación, idem. 

* aVeriguádo, m.auouched, verified, con­
firmed, ratified.

* Averiguadór, m.one that approueth,
verifieth, ratifieth, or confirmeth.

Averiguamiénto, m.verifying, ratify­
ing approouing or confirming.

Averiguár, or Aberiguár, to verifie, ap­
prooue, ratifie, confirme or auouch.

* Averitádor, vide Averiguadór. 

* Avérno, m.a lake in Campania dedica­
ted to the god of hell, where is thought
to be the entry into hell.

* Avertúra, vide Abertúra, f.

* Avestrúz, a bird called an Eastrich.

* Avéto, vide Abéto, the Fir- tree.

* Avezádo, accustomed, enured, vsu­
all.

* Avezár, to vse, to accustome, to enure.

aVézes, sometimes, other-whiles, by
turnes.

Avezílla, f. a little birde.

* Avezinár, to be neere neighbour vnto,
to dwell hard by.

* Avezindádo, dwelling hard by.

Avezindárse, to dwell neere by, to be a
neere neighbour.

Augmentádo, vide Aumentádo. 

Augmentár, vide Aumentár, to in­
crease.

* Augústa, f. an Empresse.

* Avia, I had, or he had, vide Avér.

* Ávia, f. a riuer in Spaine.

* Aviádo, m.one dispatched and readie to
take his iourney onward on his way.

* Aviamiénto, m.a setting forwarde on
the way or iourney.

* Aviár, to set forward on the way, to be
in readines to iourney.

* Aviciádo, m.made vitious.

* Aviciárse, to become vitious, or wic­
ked.

* ávidas óndas, or águas, couetous or
insatiable waters.

* Ávido, couetous, greedy, desirous, vnsa­
satiable.

* aVído, as Hé avído, I had, I haue
had.

* Auyentádo, vide Ahuyentádo, fled
away, run away, gone.

Aviénte, Aviénto, vide Aventár. 

* Aviertaménte, vide Abiertaménte. 





Aviérto, open, manifest, vide Abiér­
to.

Aviésso, m.crosse, contrarie, froward, vn­
toward.

* Ávila, f. a towne by Toledo in Spaine.

Avilentéza, f. oppotunitie, fitnes, conue­
nient season.

* Avilitár, vide Abilitár. 

* Aviltár, or Abiltár. 

Aviltéza, f. vilenesse, basenesse, meane­
nesse.

* Avinádo, m.made or done with wine.

Avinagrádo, m.made sharpe, as with vi­
negar.

* Avinár, to doe or make with wine, to
mingle with wine.

* Avisadaménte, aduisedly, warily.

Avisádo, m.aduised, warned, admoni­
shed.

Avisár, to aduise, warne, admonish, or ex­
hort.

Avíso, m.a warning, admonition, exhor­
tation, or aduise giuen. Also an in­
telligence.

* Avitár, vide Abitár. 

* Avituallár, to furnish with victu­
als.

* aVivádo, or aBivádo, made aliue,
quickned, reuiued, cheered.

* Avivár, or aBivár, to quicken or make
aliue, to cheere, to reuiue.

* † Aulága, f. an herbe with many pric­
les.

* † Alguaquída, a match of brimstone to
kindle a candle. Sometime sulphur,
brimstone.

* † Aulaquída, vide Alguaquída, f. 
sulphur or brimstone. A match of
brimstone to light a candle.

Aulladór, m.one that howleth or yel­
leth.

Aullár, or Ahullár, to howle, yell, or crie
out.

* Aumentádo, or Augmentádo, in­
creased, growen greater.

* Aumentadór, or Augmentadór, m.
one that increaseth, enlargeth, or ma­
keth greater.

Aumentár, or Augmentár, to increase,
inlarge, or make greater.

Auménto, m.increase, enlargement, that
which is ouer and aboue.

Aun, yet, notwithstanding, hitherto, thus
far, as yet.

Aunque, although, howbeit, notwithstan­
ding that.

* Avovádo, vide Abobádo. 

* Avogacía, f. the office of a Counseller
at law.

* Avogación, f. pleading as a counseller
at law.

* Avogádo, m.a counseller at law.

Avogamiénto, vide Avogación. 

* Avogár, Præs. yo Avógo,
1. Præt. yo
Avogué, to plead as a counseller at law

* Avortár, vide Abortár, to bring forth
yoong before due time.

* Avortón, vide Abortón. 

Aura, or Haurá, he or it shall haue, vide 
Avér.

* Aúreo, m.golden, that which is of gold.

* Auría, should haue, vide Avér.

* Lámbas de áuria, the proper name of a
duke of Génoa in Italy.

* Auróra, vide Álva 

* Auséncia, f. absence.

Ausentárse, to be absent, to be away.

Ausénte, or Absénte, absent, or out of the
way.

* Ausónia, f. the name of a citie.

* Austéro, m.seuere, hard, rigorous.

* Austriál, or Austríno, southerly.

* Austríno, m.idem. 

* Áustro, vide Vendavál. 

Auténtico, m.authentike, approoued by
good authoritie.

Autíllo, m.an owle.

* Áuto, an act in a Comedie, a deed.

Autór, m.an Author, the inventor or set­
ter forth of some worke.

Autoridád, f. authoritie.

* Autorizádo, f. allowed by authoritie.

* Autorizánte, one bearing authoritie.

Autorizár, to set in authority.

* Avurtáda, vide Avutárda. 

* Avurtár, vide Avortár. 

* Avutárda, vide Abutárda. 

* Auxiliário, m.that commeth to helpe,
aide, or reskue.

* Auxíllo, m.aide, reskue, releefe.

* Auzúba, f. a kind of fruit in the Indies
heere vnknowen.


A X
† Axaquéca, f. a kinde of paine in the
head.

* † Axaquecóso. m.one that is troubled
with such paine in the head.

* Axaquéra, vide Axaquéca. 

Axadréa, Segurélla, or Sagorída, an
herbe called winter sauorie. Some say it
is Marierom.

* † Axaráve, a purgation.

† Axedréz, chesse to play at, chesse-play.

* † Axénxio, or Asséncio, Wormewood,
an herbe commonly knowen.

† Axenúz, an herbe called Nigella Ro­
mana, or Gith, or Saint Katherines
flowre.

† Axí, red pepper.

* Axíe, vide Axí. 

* † Aximénez, a sunnie place.

† Aximézes, iutties in a house.

† Axórcas, f. bracelets to weare on the
armes for ornament.

Axórcas de pies, fetters or giues to shac­
kle the legs of prisoners with. Somtimes
garters.

† Axuár, all manner of houshold stuffe,
any furniture for a house.


A Y
Ay, there, at that place.

Ay, monosillabum, there is, there are.

* Ay, of sorrowing, or pitifull complay­
ning, as woe, out alas.

* Ay triste de mi, out alas, what a
wretch am I?

Áya, f. a nurse, a schoolemistresse.

* Aya, as Que Dios aya, whom God
haue mercie on.

* † Ayantár, a dinner, to dine.

* Ayantár como pérro, to dine without
drinke.

* Ayantár de gorrión, a short dinner, a
poore pittance.

* Aydúda, or Cristél, a clister.

Ayer, yesterday.

Ayer tárde, yestereuening.

áyme, alas.

Aýna, vide Présto, quickly, readily, spee­
dily.

* Áyo, m.a tutor, a schoolemaster.

* Ay, onde estás, ho, where art thou?

* Ayradaménte, angrily, in a rage, in
anger.

Ayrádo, m.angrie, vexed, in a chafe.

Ayramiénto, m.anger, vexation, wrath,
disdaine.

Ayrárse, to be angrie, to be in a chafe, to
be vexed, to be in a rage.

Áyre, the aire. Also pleasantnes, beautie,
comelines, gratiousnes.

Ayróso, m.pleasant, beautifull, comely,
gratious.

* Aysládo, m.enuironned, or compassed
about with waters, made as an Jland.

Ayslár, to compasse all about with waters,
to make like an Iland.

Aýssa, the crie that mariners vse when
they hoise vp anker, or lift any bur­
then togither.

Ayúda, helpe, succour, releefe, a clister, a
purgation. Also subsidies to a Prince.

* Pérro de ayúda, a dog that helpeth or
taketh part with his master, a great
mastiffe dog.

Ayudadór, m.a helper.

Ayudádo, helped, releeued, succoured.

* Ayudánte, an assistant.

Ayudár, to helpe, releeue, or succour.

* Ayudatór, vide Ayudadór. 

* Ayuna, fasting.

* en Ayunas, fasting, before one hath eate
any thing.





Ayunár, to fast.

* Ayúnque, m.an anuile, vpon which
smithes worke their yron.

* Ayuntadaménte, fitly, conueniently, to
the purpose.

* Ayuntádo, m.ioyned, coupled, tyed.

* Ayuntadór, m.one that coupleth, ioy­
neth or tieth togither.

Ayuntamiénto, m.coupling, ioyning,
buckling. A court of Aldermen.

Ayuntár, to ioyne, to couple, to buckle to­
gither.

* Ayúso, below, beneath.

* Dios en Ayúso, next vnder God.


A Z
* † Azaár, flowers of Orenges.

* † Azabáche, m.Ieat.

Azáche, silke.

* Azábra, vide Hazábra. 

* † Azadón, m.a spade, a pikeaxe, a mat­
tocke.

* Azafrán, Saffron.

* Azafranádo, m.done or dressed with
Saffron.

† Azagáya, f. a iauelin, a Moores wea­
pon.

† Azahár, vide Azaár. 

† Azaléja, f. a towell.

* Azambulhéyro, vide Azebúche. 

† Azár, an ill token, an euill signe, a pricke
or note in a die, a hucklebone.

Azár en el dádo, a game at dice called
Hazard.

† Azarcón, red led.

* Azarcón vaso, a kinde of vessell.

Azaróte, Sarcocoll, a kinde of gum.

† Azaváche, ieat, or the Agat stone.

† Azcóna, a kinde of dart.

† Azébo, m.the Holme or Huluer tree.

† Azebuchál, m.a groue of Oliue trees.

† Azebúche, or Azambulhéyro, a
wilde Oliue tree.

Azebúste, idem. 

† Azéche, a kinde of blacke minerall.

* Azéda cosa, f. an eager or sharpe
thing.

* Azéda, vide Azedéra. 

† Azedár, or Azedárse, to waxe sharpe,
sower, or eager.

Azedéra yerva, Sorrell.

† Azedía, f. sharpnes, sowrenes, hartbur­
ning.

Azedía pece, a fish called a soale.

† Azédo, m.sower, sharpe, eager.

* † Azedrílla, or Romáza, a kinde of 
sorrell.

† Azedúra, f. sowrenes, sharpnes, eager­
nes, tartnes.

† Azéite, or Azéyte, m.Oyle.

† Azeitéra, or Azeytéra, f. an oyle cruse,
a little oyle bottle.

† Azémila, f. a great mule.

† Azemilár, belonging to a mule.

† Azemiléro, m.a mulestor.

* † Azerádo, m.steeled, made with
steele.

† Azerár, to make with steele, to steele.

† Azéro, m.steele.

* Azetuni, a darke sad greene of the co­
lour of an oliue.

* Azevár, sea housleeke, an herbe.

† Azéyte, or Azéite Oyle.

† Azeytéra, or Cangilón, an oyle cruse,
a little oyle bottle, a vessell of oyle.

† Azeytéro, m.a seller or maker of oyle.

* Azeytóso, oylie, full of oyle.

† Azeytúna, an oliue berrie, an oliue.

Azeytúna en cortido, an oliue in sy­
rupe.

* Azeytunádo colór, oliue colour.

† Azeytúno, an oliue tree.

* Azía, vide Hazía. 

† Aziago, m.vnfortunate, vnluckie, vn­
happie.

* † Aziál, m.a bit of a bridle to put in a
horses mouth.

* † Aziár, idem. 

* † Azíbar, or Açíbar, m.a iuice of an
herbe to purge choler with, called Aloe.

† Azicátes, ginnet spurres, which haue a
long gag or pricke of yron or steele, in
place and steed of a rowell.

† Azíge, m.a kinde of earth whereof they
make inke.

* Azír, vide Asír, To take hold on.

* Azívar, vide Azíbar. 

* † Azoféifa, a fruit called of the Apo­
thecaries Iuiuba.

* † Azogádo, one that is ouercome by the
sauor of quickesiluer: by metaphor it
signifieth a fearfull silly wretch.

† Azógue, m.Quickesiluer.

† Ázre, vide Árze, a maple.

* Azúar, vide Açúcar. 

* † Azúcar, f. Sugar.

* Azúcar de conserua, comfets.

* Azucéna, white lillie.

* † Azuéla, f. a little axe, or hatchet, a
coopers ads, an axe.

* Azufrádo, m.done with Brimstone.

* Azufrár, vide Açufrár. 

* † Azúfre, vide Açufre, m.Brimstone.

Azúl, blew, azure.

* Azúl claro, a bright blew.

* † Azuláque, a certaine morter or Ce­
ment, with which they ioine canes togi­
ther.

Azuléjo, a painted tile or pauing bricke
that is of diuers colours, blew colour.

Azúmbar, red storax, Spikenard.

* Azumbído, a buzzing or humming.

* Azumbrár, to measure with the mea­
sure Azumbre, vide Azúmbre.

* Azúmbre, vide Açúmbre. 


B.

* BAaráz, a kinde of roote which shi­
ned in the night as fire, and they
cured therewith those that were posses­
sed with diuels, beside other vertues it
hath.

* Babadéro, m.a bib for a childe to keepe
that he driuell not his clothes.

* Babeár, to driuell.

* Babéra, vide Bavéra. 

* † Babúja, a bubble, a bossed naile, a stud,
a brooch, a bullion.

* Babór, vide Babórda. 

* Babórda, starbord side, or the lefte side
of a ship.

* Babovini, penthouses, to keepe the water
of a ship.

* Báça, f. a towne in Spaine.

* Báca, vide váca. 

Bacaláos, a kind of new-land fish.

* Baçán, a towne in Spaine.

Bachára, f. an herbe with the flowers, cal­
led our Ladies gloues.

Bachillér, m.a batcheler of arte.

* Bachillería, batchelership, the taking
the first degree in schooles.

† Bacía, f. a barbers basen. Also any ba­
sen of earth, pewter, tinne, siluer, or a­
ny other mettall made of the fashion of
a barbers basen.

* Bacillár, to stagger, to wauer in thought,
to be inconstant.

† Bacín, m.a basen. Also a trey, a boll, a
pan, pot, or vessell for a close-stoole.

Bacín, or Servidór, a pot for a close stoole.

Bacinéte, a basnet, or little bason.

* Bacinílla, idem. 

Báço, m.the spleene, the milt. Also broune
coloured.

Báço, or négro, browne, swart colou­
red.

* Báctros, a people bordering vpon the
East Indies.

* Báculo, m.a tipstaffe, such as is carried
before a bishop. Also a staffe that olde
men leane on, and walke with.

Badajáda, f. a clapper of a bell: by me­
taphor doltishnes, blockishnes.

Badajádas de campána, iangling of
bels.

Badájo, m.a clapper of a bell, by metaphor
a dolt, an Asse-head.

* † Badána, f. sheepes leather dressed like
to goates leather.

* Badéa, f. a kind of Melon, a galley, an
eele poute.

† Badéha, idem. 

* † Badíl, m.a long wooden instrument
wherewith they beate morter. Also a
fire-shouell.





† Badil de hogar. a fire-shouell.

* baéça, f. a citie in Spaine.

Báfo, vide Báho. 

Bagáje, or Vagáje, m.lumber, trash,
trumpery.

Bága de laurél, the bay berrie.

* Bagél, or Vagél, m.a vessell, a boate, a
skiffe.

† Baharí, m.a kind of hauke.

Baheár, to reeke, to fume, to smoake, to
euaporate, to exhale, to vent.

† Báho, or Báfo, vapour, smoake, reeke
breathing.

Baia, or Baiha, vide Báya, a bay, a
creeke.

* Bajél, Bagél, or Vagél, m.a vessell, a
boate, a skiffe.

Bajéles, vessells, boates, skiffes.

* Bailadéra, or Dançadóra, a woman
dauncer.

* Bailadór, a dauncer.

* Bailár, to daunce.

* Báile, m.A daunce.

* Baio, vide Báyo, for bay colour, or bay­
ard, ahorse.

* Bájo, vide Báxo, low, base.

Bájo de vientre, the pawnch, the lower
part of the belly.

Bála, a bullet.

* Bála de viénto, a handball or football
blowen full of winde.

* Bála de lienço, a roll of linnen wrap­
ped or rolled vp togither.

Baladrón, m.a prater, a cogging compa­
nion.

Baladroneár, to prate, to cogge.

Balagos, hey- cocks. Also sheaues of corne.

* Balahústes, turned postes.

Balánça, f. a ballance.

* Balançár, to ballance or weigh.

* Balançário, a weigher.

Balánce, the weighing downe of the ba­
lance, or any other thing in the like ma­
ner.

* Balancía, f. a fruit like a melon.

* Balándo, bleating as sheepe.

Balár, to bleate as a sheepe.

* Baláx, a pretious stone.

* Balázo, m.the stroake of a bullet, the shot
of a bullet.

* Balbuciénte, stuttering.

Balcón, m.a bay window.

Baldádo, m.of free cost.

* Bálde, a bucket to draw water with.

* Bálde, as en balde, free cost, without
any paying for.

* Baldía, voidnes, vastnes.

Baldío, any thing voide, emptie, vacant,
and is not imployed.

Baldón, m.a scoffe, a taunt.

* Baldonádo, scoffed at, taunted.

* Baldonadór, a scoffer, a taunter.

Baldonár, to scoffe, to reproch.

Baldrés, m.white leather, a sheeps skin.

* Baldroneár, vide Baladroneár. 

* Baldrógas, an herbe called Purstane.

* Baléncia, vide Valéncia. 

* Baléna, vide Valéna. 

* Baleróso, vide Valeróso. 

* Balésta, vide Ballesta. 

* Baléstero, a shooter in a crossebow. Also
a crossebow maker.

* Bália, vide Áma. 

* Balía, vide Valía, the value of a
thing.

Balído, bleating of sheepe.

* Baliénte, vide Valiénte. 

Balíja, a wallet, a male, a cloakebag or
portmantew.

* Balista, a crossebow, which in times past
was much vsed in war.

Balitádo, bleating.

Balitár, to bleat as a fawne or a sheepe.

* Baliza, vide Valiza. 

* Balladár, a valley, a bulwarke, a ram­
pier.

* Bálle, or Válle, m.a valley.

* Balléna, a whale fish.

Ballésta, vide Vallésta, a crosse- bow.

Ballestár, to shoote in a crosse-bow.

* Ballestázo, m.a shot or blow with a
crossebow.

Ballestéro, vide Vallestéro, a crosse-bow
maker, a crosse-bow man that shooteth
in a crosse-bow.

* Ballíco, vide Vallíco. 

* Ballóta, vide Bellóta an Acorne

* Balón, vide Valón, a Wallon or Bur­
gonian, a man of that countrey.

* Balónes calçónes, great gascoigne, or
Spanish hose.

* Balór, vide Valór. 

Bálsa, f. a boate, a poole of water.

* Balsamár, to dresse or make with
Baulme.

Bálsamo, Baulme.

* Baltéo, m.a kinde of cloth or garment.

Baltruéto, m.a gadding fellow, a roguing
fellow.

Baluárte, m.a bulwarke.

* Balúme, m.a volume of a booke.

Balúmen, m.a volume.

* Bámba, a dizzard or naturall foole.

* Bambaleár, to rowle vp and downe, to
waue vp and downe.

Bambaneándo, staggering.

Bambaneár, to stagger, to wauer or wag
vp and downe.

† Bancál, m.a carpet or cloth for a bench.

* Bancaróta, m.a banckrupt.

† Bánco, or Vánco, a stoole, a bench, a
shelfe in the sea. Also a money changer,
a banker.

* † Bánco en la mar, a shelfe in the
sea.

* Bánda, vide Vanda. 

* Bandeár, to bandie, to follow a faction,
to helpe a side, to become factious.

* Bandéo, m.releefe, helpe to strengthen
his side or faction.

* Bandéra, f. an ensigne, a banner, strea­
mer or standard, a flag on a ships top.

* Banderádo, m.an ensignes seruant to
carie his banner or ensigne.

* Banderilla, f. a little banner, ensigne or
standart, or a little flag on a ships top.

* Banderizo, one that leaneth to a faction.

* Bandéro, idem. 

* Banderóla, f. a litle flag, a litle banner
or ensigne.

* Bandído, m.banished.

* Bándo, m.a faction.

* Bandoléro, m.a factious seditious per­
son, one that followeth a faction.

* Bandújo, a farsing of any meate, a pud­
ding.

* Bandúrria, f. a bandore, a gittarne.

Bandúzo, m.a pudding.

* Banquárdia, vide Vanguárdia. 

Bañádo, bathed.

Bañadór, m.a bather, a bath- keeper.

Bañár, or Vañár, to bath.

* Báño mugeríl, the stewes, or bath for
women.

* Banostéro, m.vide Bastonéro, one that
with a staffe maketh roome, a whif­
ler.

Banquéro, m.a money changer, an ex­
changer.

* Banquéte, vide Vanquéte, a ban­
quet.

* Banquíllo, m.a foot-stoole.

* Báo de navío, pieces or ioyces, vpon
which the cradle in a ship standeth.

* Baporóso, vide Vaporóso, smoakie,
vaporous.

* Baptísmo, m.baptisme.

Báque, a fall, a losse.

* Dar el báque, to giue one a fall.

* Baquéro, vide Vaquéro, a cowheard.

* Baquéta, a little cow, a gunsticke.

Baquilla, a litle cow, a kind of beetle with
hornes.

* Bára, vide Vára. 

Baráça, f. a broyle, let, trouble.

Barahunda, f. a tumult, a turmoile.

* Barahustár, to rush in among weapons
and to cast them this way and that, to
crosse launces, to crosse one with ano­
ther.

* Barahusteár, vide Barahustár. 

Barahústes, vide Balahústes, turned
postes like pillers to support galleries or
such like.

† Barája, a brabble, a packe of cardes, a
paire of playing cardes.





* Barajadór, m.a packer of cardes, a
shuster of cardes.

† Barajár, or Varajár, to packe cardes, to
shuffle cardes.

* Barál, vide Varál. 

* Baránda, vide Varánda. 

* Barár, vide Varár. 

Baratár, to sell cheape, to deceiue.

Baratíja, f. pedlerie ware.

Baráto, good cheape.

Baratón, one that selleth good cheape, a
broker.

* Barátro, a deepe pit in Athens where­
into condemned men were cast.  It is ta­
ken for hell.

Baráza, vide Baráça, f. a let, a stop.

Bárba, vide Bárva, f. the chin, the bearde.

* Bárba cabrúna, an herbe called goates
beard, or go to bed at noone.

* Barbacána, f. a yarde about a house, a
barricado made of barrels filled with
earth, &c. to defend soldiers with. Al­
so graie bearded.

Barbádo, or Barvádo, m.bearded.

* Barbaraménte, barbarously.

Barbaría, f. or Barbariedád, barbarous­
nesse.

Bárbaro, barbarous.

* Barbaróxa, a famous pyrate among the
Moores which had a red beard, there­
fore called Barbarúxa. Also the figure
of a great beard painted on cruses to
drinke in the Spaniards call it Barba
roxa.

* Barbas de gállo, cockes bearde, or the
two laps of flesh hanging downe vnder
the cockes bull.

Barbechar, to breake vp, to eare, till, or
fallow the ground.

* Barbécho, plowed ground.

* Barbecilla, vide Barbezilla, f. a little 
beard.

Barbéro, m.a barber.

* Barbéta, f. a rope with which they let
downe the boate. 

* Barbezilla, a cockes bearde, or a little
beard.

* Barbílla, the chinne.

* Barbiponiénte, one that beginneth to
haue a beard.

Bárbo, or Bárvo de la mar, a fish called 
a Mullet.

* Barbóte, the armour for the chinne.

* Barbúdo, m.hauing a great thicke
beard.

* Barbúllas, vide Barbollónes. 

Barbullár, to deceiue, to coosen, to boile or
bubble vp as a pot.

Bárca, f. a great boate, a barke, a skiffe, a
horseboate.

* Barcáje, passage money, or barcage, a
kinde of toll paid for euery thing that
is transported ouer the water.

* Barcelóna, the chiefe citie and Vni­
uersitie in the prouince of Cataluña
in Spaine.

* Bárco, m.a small boate, a wherrie.

* Bárda de cavallo, the arming of a
great horse.

* Bardádos cavállos, barded horses,
great horses for seruice.

* Bardájo, m.A Ganimedes, a boye to
bugger.

* Bardána, f. the great burre, or clot
burre.

Bardár, to laie iouyces with strawe on a
mudde wall to keepe it drie.

* Bárde sus paredes, &c. let him laie
iouyces and strawe of his owne wall
first, &c.

Bardáxo, vide Bardájo. 

* Barílla, vide Varílla. 

Barjuléta, f. a pocket, a little wallet.

* Barloár, to board a ship, to rush and
iustle one ship against another.

* Barloventeár, and Barlonteár, to goe
aboue the winde, to take the wind. Al­
so to saile vp and downe with a side
winde.

Barníz, m.vernish.

Barnizádo, vernished.

* Barnizár, to vernish.

* Barón, m.a Baron, a Lord. Also a man.

* Baronia, f. a Baronie.

* Baronil, manlike.

Barquéro, m.a bargeman, a pilot, a fer­
riman.

* Barquéta, a pinnasse, a little flie-boat,
a scouting boate, a light barge.

* Barquílla, a boate, a small barke.

* ducado de la Barquílla, a ducat with 
the signe of the barke in it, a kinde of
money so stamped.

Barquíño, m.bellowes, a little barke. Al­
so a kinde of banquetting stuffe.

Bárra, a barre of a doore, an iron barre, a
shelfe in the sea. Also the grosse spunne
threds in cloth.

* Barráca, f. a tent made of a saile of a
ship. Also a souldiers cabbin or such
like in the fielde.

* Barrachél, m.a corporall, or a prouost
marshall in a campe.

* Barrachél, or prevóste, a prouost
marshall in a campe.

* Barráco. a tame boare. Also a peece of
ordinance vsed in warre.

Barragán, m.a great stout fellow.

Barragána, f. a great ramping wench, a
roile.

Barraganáda, vide Barragána. 

* Barraganéte, a peece of woode on the
side of ships, to fasten coardes.

* Barrájo, contention, strife, a packe of
cordes.

* Barrán, a countrie clownish fellowe, a
rude rusticall fellow.

* Barránca, vide Barránco. 

Barránco, a banke of earth, a breach of
earth, the earth betweene two hils, a
dunghill, a pit, atrench, a breach in
the earth, a deepe.

* Barrancóso, rugged, vneeuen, full of
hils and valleies.

* Barraquílla, a little cabbin for a soul­
dier in the fielde, a little tent made of a
saile of a ship.

* Barraquíllo, m.a peece of ordinance v­
sed in warre. Also a little boare.

* Bárras, barres of iron, barres in blase­
ning of coate-armes, barres or sowes of
siluer, leade, or such like mettall.

* Bárras, as juego de bárras, a play with
two bowles and a little round hoope of
iron or syluer, with two battle-dores to
beate in the boules through the ring.

* Barreádos, m.made with barres of
iron.

* Barreár, to set barres of iron on a thing.

Barredéra réd, a dragnet, a drawing net

* Barredéra véla, f. a saile that hangeth
so low in a ship that as it were swee­
peth the hatches, the lowest saile in a
ship.

Barredéro, m.a sweeper, a brusher, a
whipper, a scourger, a scauenger, a
swabber in a ship.

Barredéro de hórno, a sweeper of an
ouen, a mawkin to make cleane an ouen
with.

* Barredór, m.a sweeper, a brusher, a
swabber in a ship.

* Barredór de chimeneás, a chimney sweeper.

Barredúras, f. dust and filth that is
swept.

† Barréna, f. a wimble, an auger, a pear­
cer.

† Barrenár, to boare thorough.

Barréno, m.a hoale boared.

* Barrendéro, vide Barredéro. 

Barreña, or Bacín, a great earthen
pan.

Barrér, to sweepe, to brush.

Barréra, f. a barrier, a clay pit, a scaffold to
stand and behold bull baiting, &c. the
front of a wall.

* Barréra sin salída, railes or scaffoldes
made without any place to get out,
closed round about.

* Barréta, f. a little barre of iron or such
like.

* Barri, vide Barríl. 

Barriál, m.a plot of clay.

Barrído, m.swept, made cleane.

* Barriénto, m.full of claie.

Barríga, f. the paunch, the bellie, the
wombe, the priuie parts, the arsegut, a





watering trough.

Barrigúdo, m.gorbellied, a grand paunch.

Barríl, m.a barrell.

* Barriléjo, m.a smal barrel or little ves­
sell, a firkin to salt fish in.

* Barriléro, m.a maker or barels, a seller
of barels.

Bárrio, m.a streete, a warde.

† Bárro, m.claie, a wheale, a pimple in the
face. Also morter.

* Bárros de róstro, wheales or pimples
in the face.

Barróso, clayish, full of claie, he that hath
a face full of pimples.

* Barruntádo, m.suspected.

† Barruntár, to winde at, to suspect.

† Barrúnte, suspicion.

Barrúnto, idem. 

Bárva, f. the chin, the beard.

* Barvacána, or Barbacána, a yard a­
bout a howse, a Barricado made of
barrels full of earth, &c. Also a hoary
beard.

Bárva, de arón, an herbe called cockoe­
pint.

Bárva de cabron, an herbe called goates
beard.

Barvádo, vide Barbádo, one that hath a
beard.

Barvár, to haue a beard springing.

* Barvaróxa, vide Barbaróxa. 

* Bárvas, the beard, the chin.

* Bárvas de gállo, two lappes of the fleshie
matter hanging downe vnder the cocks
bill, called cock-beard.

Barvásco yérva, an herb called Mullein,
Woolblade, Lungwoort, Torch-herb, or
big-Taper. Cowslip.

Barvechár alçándo, to break vp the
ground.

Barvechár venándo, to twifallow, or 
plough ouer ground the second time.

† Barvechár terciándo, to thrifallow, or
plough ouer ground the third time.

† Barvécho, m.plowed ground, a fallo­
wed field.

† Barvechazón, the time of ploughing,
fallowing, &c.

Barvería, f. a barbers shop.

Barvéro, m.a barber.

* Barvéta, vide Barbéta. 

* Barvezílla, f. a little beard.

* Barvílla, the chin.

* Barviponiénte, vide Barbiponíente. 

* Bárvo, vide Bárbo. 

* Bárvo de la már vide Bárbo de la
már. 

Barvúdo, m.he that hath a long or thicke
beard.

* Barvúllas, vide Barbúllas. 

* Barvúta, vide Barbúta. 

* Baruntádo, m.suspected, winded out.

* Baruntár, to winde out, to suspect.

Bása de colúna, the foote of a pillar.

* Básca, or Vásca, f. annoy, griefe, tor­
ment, vexation, loathsomnes, dismay,
swouning, an extasie or shortnes of
winde. Also throngs, pangs.

* Bascóso, one short winded, one annoy­
ed, vexed, panged with pangs or
throngs.

* Basíja, or Vasíja, any kinde of pot or
vessell.

Basilísco, a serpent called a Basilike or
Cocatrice.

* Basíllo, vide Vasíllo. 

Basquíña, or Vasquíña, a womans peti­
coate, a kirtle.

* Básta, it sufficeth, it is enough, no more
words. There needs no more.

Bastáge, Bastáje, or Ganapán, a por­
ter.

* Bastaménte, grossely, coursely.

Bastánte, sufficient.

Bastanteménte, sufficiently, enough.

Bastár, to suffice, to satisfie, to be enough.

* Básta lo dicho, there is spoken suffici­
ent.

Bastardía, f. bastardie.

Bastárdo, m.a bastard, one vnlawfully
begotten.

* Bastárdo, or Platafórma, a platforme
in fortification.

* Bastecedór, a purueyor.

Bastecér, or Bastescér, to furnish suffici­
ently.

* Bastescído, or Bastecído, m.furnished
sufficiently.

Bastída, f. a tower, a fort.

Bastimiénto, m.fortification, victuall,
furniture.

Básto, m.thicke, course, grosse.

Bastón, m.a club, a staffe.

* Bastonéro, m.an officer that carrieth a
staffe to part and make roome among
the people, a whifler.

* Bastonázo, m.a stroke with a staffe.
Also a great staffe.

* Batadór, m.a washing beetle.

† Batálla, f. a troup, a company of soldiers,
a battle, an armie.

Batallár, to fight in battle.

Batallólas, f. the space in a galley be­
tweene the oares for souldiers to stand
in.

* Batallón, a petie battle or armie, a
great squadron appointed to fight, so
called by the Switzers and Italians, be­
ing after the Greeke Phalanges, or the
Romane legions, or betweene sixe and
eight thousand souldiers.

Batán de páños, a mill or place to full
cloth in.

Batanádo, m.fulled.

Batanár páños, to full clothes, to beate
clothes as washers do.

* Batanéro, m.a fuller of clothes.

* Batáta, f. a roote.

Batél, or Vatél, m.a ship boate, a skiffe.

* Batéos, m.baptisme.

* Batería, or Vatería, beating, battery.

* Batidór, m.a beater, a thresher.

* Batído, m.beaten, threshed, knocked.

Batiénte de puerta, the iawnes or
cheekes of a doore, the side posts of a
doore.

Batihója, a gold-beater.

Batir, to beat, to strike, to thresh corne.

Batír hója, to beat gold, or to beat any
mettall into plates.

Batír los diéntes, to gnashe the teeth.

† Báva, f. slauer, spittle.

Bavadéro, m.a muckender, a bib.

† Baváza, f. spittle, slauer, slimines.

Baveár, to slauer, to driuell.

Bavéra, f. a part of the head-piece or cask,
called the beauer.

* Bavéza, f. vide Bravéza.

* Baúl, m.a trunke or chest to put in ap­
parell.

* Bavósa, f. a snaile, a slug.

Bavóso, slauering out of the mouth.

* Bauprés, m.the bolt-sprit of a ship.

Bausán, or Pausán, m.one that standeth
gaping to behold any thing.

Bautismo, m.baptisme.

* Bautizádo, m.baptised, christened.

Bautizár, to baptise.

Bautísta, he that baptiseth.

Bautistério, m.a font vsed in Churches
to baptise children in. Also the bapti­
sing of children.

* Bavór, vide Babór. 

* Bavórda, vide Babórda. 

* Bavovíni, vide Babovíni. 

* Báxa, below, a daunce so called, a lowe
dale, a vale, a valley.

* † Baxá, m.a Bassa or commaunder a­
mong the Turkes.

Baxáda, f. a going downe.

* Baxádo, m.brought downe, humbled,
debased, made vile.

* Baxaménte, lowly, humbly, basely.

Baxár, to bring downe, to dismount, to de­
base, to make vile, to tread vnder foote. To
descend, to come or goe downe.

Báxas, f. quicke sands, shelues in the sea.

* Baxél, Bajél, vide Vagél, a vessell, a
skiffe, a boate.

* Baxéro, m.that which is below, the nea­
ther lip.

Baxéza, f. lownes, basenes, vilenes, con­
temptiblenes.

Baxílla, f. a garnish of plate.

* Baxíllo, vide Vaxíllo, m.a small ves­
sell.

* Baxío, m.a quicke sand, a shelfe in the
sea.

Báxo, vnder, beneath.





* Báxo, a trough to water cattell at.

Baxúra, f. basenes, cowardise.

Báya de mar, a bay, a creeke.

* Báya, as dar la báya, to iest, to mocke
at.

* Báyas, vide Váyas, bay berries.

Baybén, or Bayvén, a swaying from one
side to another, shipwracke, crosse-for­
fortune.

* Bayétas, bayes, such as they line gar­
ments with.

* Bayladéra, f. a woman dauncer, which
danceth & snappeth, or maketh a noise
with the fingers. Also a little toy or top
that children vse and set vp with their
fingers on a table.

Baylár, to daunce and make a snapping
noise with the fingers.

Bayladór, m.a dauncer.

Báyle, m.a daunce.

* Baylío, a iudge, a bayliffe of the order
of the knights of Malta.

* Báyna, vide Váyna. 

* Báyo, m.bay colour, a horse.

* vno piensa el Báyo, otro que lo en­
sílla, the bay horse thinketh one thing,
and he that saddleth him thinketh ano­
ther thing.

* Bayuén, a swaying, or rolling from one
side to another as a ship, crosse fortune.

* Bázo, the spleene, the milt.


B D
Bdélio, the liquor of a certaine tree, called
Bdellium.


B E
* Beatitúd, f. blessednes.

* Beatissimo, m.most blessed.

* Beáto, m.blessed.

* Bebída, f. drinck or a match at drin­
king: Also a potion to drinke.

Béca, f. a miniver hood that doctors vse to
weare, a hawkes hood, a tippet, a cloath
about the necke for warmenes.

* Beçar, vide Bezár. 

* Beçéto, the hanging part of the lip. Al­
so iewels that the Indians hang at their
lips, nostrels, and eares.

Béço, vide Lábio, a lip.

Beçudo, m.great lipped.

Bedél, a stone called Bedellium.

* Befár, vide Burlár. 

Béfas, iniurie, wrong, displeasure, iestes,
and mockes.

* Bége, or béje, vide Béque, the beak­
head of a ship.

Beguín, m.a religious man, a conuert.

* Beheméncia, vide Veheméncia. 

Behetrías, Lordships or liberties, franke
and free, at their owne gouernment,
by a metaphor taken for confused noi­
ses or tumults.

* Behórdo, an herbe called Cats taile.

* Bejés, vide Vejéz. 

* Béjo, vide Véjo. 

* Béla, a saile of a ship.

Beldád, f. beauty.

* Beléta, a weather-cocke.

* Belézo, small household stuffe, as pots,
pans, dishes, &c.

Bélho, vide Bello. 

* Belica, f. a proper name, as wee say
Bessie.

* Bélico, warlike.

* Bélicóso, m.warlike, bent to figh­
ting.

* Belida yerva, an hearbe called Crow­
foote.

Bellaménte, fairely, trimly, goodly.

Belléza, f. beauty, fayrenes.

Béllo, m.faire, beautifull.

* Bellóna, the imagined goddesse of war,
sister to Mars.

Bellón, as monéda de Bellón, base mo­
ney, copper money.

† Bellóta, vide Vellóta, an Acorne, the
bud or knop of a flower.

* cordónes de Bellóta, strings with ta­
sels or knaps at the end of them like A­
cornes: tassels.

† Bellotéro, m.hee that gathereth A­
cornes.

* Bélo, m.the first king of assyria: whose
image after his death was first wor­
shipped of any image.

* Beltaldár, vide Despinsár. 

* Belvedér, faire to see to or to looke on. Al­
so a place of faire prospect in Rome so
called.

Benblánco y róxo, a kind of nut.

* Bencedór, m.an ouercommer, a conque­
rour.

* Bendabál, or Bendabár, the south­
winde.

benDezír, Præs. Bendígo, bendízes,
biendize, 1. Præt. Biendixe, bien­
dixíste, biendíxo, Fut. Bendiré, rás,
rá, Sub. Præs. Bendiga, Imperf. Bien­
dixéra, biendiría, or biendixésse. 
Fut. Biendixére, to blesse, to say well.

Bendición, f. blessing.

* Benditóra, hallowed water.

Benedícho, m.blessed.

* Bendíto, m.idem. 

* Bienditaménte, blessedly.

Bendíxe, Bendixéra, Bendixésse, Ben­
díxo, vide benDezír. 

Beneficiádo, m.beneficed, one that hath a
good turne done him, grounds or fruits
well tilled and well husbanded.

Beneficiár, to benefit, to do a good turne.
To cherish any kind of fruit.

Benefício, m.a benefit, a good turne, a
curtesie.

* Benevoléncia, f. good will.

* Benévolo, m.well-willing, well min­
ded, helping.

* Benignaménte, kindly, bountifully,
gently.

Benignidád, f. kindnes, bounty, gentlenes.

Benigno, m.kind, gentle, curteous, boun­
tifull, ready to heare one.

* Benigníssimo, m.most kind, most boun­
tifull, most curteous.

* Beníno, m.kind, gentle, courteous, rea­
die to heare one.

* Beníto, as San Beníto, which is an ap­
parell pictured with images of diuels,
worne of such as hauing digressed from
the Romish Religion, without recan­
ting are lead therein to bee burnt: to
those that do recant, they put on a San
Beníto, with onely the pictures of a
red Saint Andrewes crosse thereon.

Bénjuy, an herbe called Laser.

* Bentálle, vide Ventálle. 

* Bentósa, vide Ventósa. 

* Bentóso, vide Ventóso. 

Beodéz, f. drunkennes.

Beódo, m.drunken.

* Béque, m.the beak-head of a ship.

* Berangéna, vide Berengéna, f. 

* Berberio, or Berveria, the countrey
Barbarie.

Berberís, Barberies.

Bérça, or Vérça, f. Colewoort.

Bérça perúna, wilde Mercurie.

Bercéra, belonging to Colewoorts.

* Bercétas, little Coleworts.

* Beréda, vide Veréda. 

† Berengéna, or Berejéna, a kinde of 
fruite growing on the grounde like a
Melon, it is fashioned like a peare, and
is about that bignes, vsually sodde in
Spaine in the pot, and eaten with
beefe or mutton.

* Beregenál, m.a place where Beren­
génas growe.

* Berenjéna, or Berengéna, a herbe gro­
ing on the ground like a Melon, of the 
forme and bignesse of a peare, vsuallie
sodden in the pot and eaten with beefe
and mutton in Spaine.

* Berga, vide Vérga. 

* Bergantínes, or Fústas, small shippes,
Brigandines, pynasses, foysts.

Beríl, a precious stone so called.

* Bermegíto, vide Bermejíto. 

Bermejér, vide Bermejescér. 

* † Bermejescér, to waxe reddish, or
redde.

† Bermejíto, ruddie, reddish.

† Berméjo, or Verméjo, m.red coloured.

† Bermejúra, f. rednes.

† Bermellón, vermillion.

Bernegál, m.a kinde of earthen vessell to





drinke in, painted with varnish which
they vse in Spaine.

Bérnia, f. an Irish rugge or mantle, a
rugge, such as sea men weare.

* Berniz, m.varnish.

* Berníz en grána, varnish before it be
ground.

† Berráco, m.a barrow hogge, a boare
pigge, a nut with a greene huske. Also a
peece of artillerie very short and great.

Berráças, or Berrázas, water cresses.

Berriondéz, f. a pigges going to brim­
ming, a dogges going to salt, anie other
beast going the male to the female to
engender at the time of the yeere.

Bérro, an herbe called Groundswell. Also
an herbe called water Cresses.

Berrocál, m.a place full of hillocks.

* Berrúca, vide Berrúga. 

Berruéco, a hillocke, a wart.

† Berrúga, f. a wart.

Berrugóso, or Berrugózo, full of warts,
full of hillockes.

* Bervería, vide Berbería, f. the coun­
trey of Barbarie.

* Bérza, vide Bérça. 

* Besádo, m.kissed.

Besár, to kisse.

Béso, m.a kisse.

Béstia, f. a beast.

* Bestia de aluárda, a bearing beast.

Bestiál, beastly.

* Bestialidád, f. beastlines.

* Bestiáme, m.a company of beastes.

Bestión, or Repáro, a kinde of fort, a
bulwarke, a rampire.

* Besúgo, a kinde of delicate fish.

Béta, or Véta, f. a beete.

Betónica, f. an herbe called Betony.

Betón de colména, a composition found
in Beehiues like to waxe.

* Betúmen, m.a kind of lime or clay, fast,
clammie like birdlime, vsed in old time
in steede of morter and in lampes to
burne in steede of oile, being of the na­
ture of brimstone.

Betumár, vide Betuminár. 

Betuminár con Betún, to daube with a
kinde of tough slime.

Betún, a tough kinde of slimie morter.

* Betúnes, id est, Betún es, that is, it is a
tough kinde of slime.

* Béudo cuérpo, a drunken bodie.

Bevedéro, m.a trough for beasts to drink
in.

Bevedór, m.a drinker, a blowster, a
drunkard.

* Bevedóra, f. tippling gossip.

Bevér, to drinke.

Bevér al cábo, to drinke all, to carrouse
whole pots.

Bevér á porfía, to drinke a vie, who shall
drinke most.

* Bevér múcho, to drinke lustily, to
quaffe, to tosse the pot.

Bevída, f. a potion, a drinke, a drunken
match.

Bexíga, or Vexíga, a bladder, a bubble.

* Bezíga de pérro, an herbe called win­
ter cherrie, or Alkakengie.

* Bexigázo, m.a blow or stroke with a
bladder.

* Bexiguilla, f. a little bladder.

Bexúco, m.a kinde of withe.

* Beýnte, vide Véynte. 

* Béz, vide Véz, f. 

Bezádo, m.kissed.

Bezár, to kisse, to accustome, to instruct.

* Bezéro, m.he that keepeth a turne.

* Bezerríllo, a little calfe.

* Bezerríco, idem. 

† Bezérra, f. an herbe called calues snout.

† Bezérro, m.a great calfe, velym.

Bézo, or Béço, custome, fashion, vse. Al­
so the lip.

* Bezúgo, or Besúgo, a sed breame.


B I
* Biásma, f. vide Bisma.

Bíblia, f. the bible.

* Bibliothéca, f. a library of books, a book
sellers shop, a place where bookes be kept.

* Biçáça, a pouch or great purse.

Biçárro, or Bizárro, braue, gallant.

* Bícha, f. a viper.

Biéldo, m.a fanne, a scowpe to cast corne
with against the winde for to win­
nowe it.

* Biélgo, a fan to winnow corne against 
the winde.

Bién, well.

Bienaventurádo, m.happie, fortunate,
luckie.

Bienaventuránça, f. good fortune, good
hap, good lucke.

Bien acustumbrádo, well accustomed of
honest and good demeanor.

* Bienaventuradaménte, happily, lucki­
ly, fortunately.

Biendezír, vide Bendezír, to blesse, to
saie well.

Biénes, goods.

Biengranáda, f. oake of Ierusalem, oake
of paradise, oake of cappadocia.

Bienhabládo, well spoken, affable.

* Bienhablár, to speake well.

Bien hazér, to do well.

Bien hécho, well done, a benefite.

Bien hechór, f. a well dooer.

Bienhechóra cósa, a bountifull mat­
ter.

* Bíenque, vide Aunque, albeit, al­
though.

Bienqueriéncia, f. good will.

Bienquerér, to wish well, to beare good
will.

Bienquísto, m.well beloued.

Bienquísta y amigableménte louingly
and friendly.

* Bifórme, double fashioned, of two
formes.

Bifrónte, one with two foreheades, a
surname giuen to Ianus, because he be­
ing a great iusticer looked euerie
waie.

* Bíga, vide Víga. 

Bigór, m.vigor, force, strength.

* Bigórnia, f. the iron vpon which ferri­
ers turne or worke horse shooes.

* Bigóta, f. a pulley of a ship.

* Bigóte, the muchachoes of the beard.

* Biguórda, f. a prickly bindweed.

Bíla, f. vide Hila, a ranke.

* Bilbáo, f. the principall citie of Biskay
so called.

Billón, as monéda de Billón, Bullion to
make money of, or copper to make mo­
ney of.

Bilma, f. a kinde of seare- cloth.

Bimbréra, f. a willow tree or osier tree.

* Bíra, f. a turning, a turning about. Also
a shaft, an arrow.

* Birár, to turne, to turne about.

* Birlár, to plaie at kailes.

* Bírlos, m.kayles to plaie with.

* Birotázo, m.the stroke with a bolt, the
shot of a birdbolt.

* Biróte, or Viróte, m.a bolt, a bird­
bolt.

Bisaguéla, or Bisabuéla, f. a great
grandmother.

Bisaguélo, or Bisabuélo, a great grand­
father.

* Bisaguéla, vide Visabuéla. 

* Bisaguélo, vide Visabuélo, m.

* Bisárma, or Visárma, f. a kind of wea­
pon with two pikes.

* Biscáya, vide Viscáya, f. the prouince
Biskay in Spaine.

* Biscaýno, or Viscaýno, a man of Bis­
caie.

* Bísco, vide Vísco, m.squint eied, gog­
gle eied.

* Bischochádo, m.hard as bisket, made
like bisket.

* Bischochéro, m.a maker of bisket
bread.

* Biscócho, or Viscócho, bisket bread.

* Bisiésto, or Visiésto, vide Bissiésto, 
leape-yeere.

* Bislúmbre, vide Vislúmbre, twy­
light.

* Bísma, f. a seare cloth.

* Bisnága, or Visnága, f. an herbe with
which ordinarily they pick their teeth
in Spaine.

* Bisnagra, vide Bisnága. 

* Bisniéta, f. the grandchilds childe, being





a female.

Bisniéto, or Visniéto, m.the grandchilds
childe, being a male.

* Bisóño, m.a new come souldier, a no­
uice.

Bispera, vide Vispera, f. the eeue of a
feast. Also the eeue of euery next mor­
row.

Bisperas, or Visperas, the euenings or
euensongs, euening praier vpon the eeue
of a holy day.

Bisperádas, f. vide Visperas.

Bissiésto, or Vissiésto, m.leape- yeere.

Bistórta yérva, an herbe called Bistort,
Adderwort or Snakeweed.

* Bitácula de náo, the place where the
light is kept in a ship, a place in a ship
where they keep the compasse.

* Bitácora, f. a place where the compasse
or light is kept in a ship.

Bitór, m.a fowle called a Bittour.

* Bitoria, f. victorie.

* Bituálla, victuals.

* Biváce, vide Viváce, quicke, liuely.

* Bivandéro, vide Vivandéro, a victu­
aller to a campe.

Bivár, m.a parke, a warren for conies or
deere, a place to keepe hens, geese, or
ducks in, a fish-poole.

Bivaro, m.a badger, grey, brocke, or be­
uer.

* Bívaro, or Bivério, a fish called a sea
dog, or beauer.

Biúda, f. a widow woman.

Biúdo, m.a widower.

Biudéz, f. widow-head.

Bivéza, f. quicknes, liuelines.

Biviéro, f. liuelyhood, liuing.

Biviéno, aliue, liuing.

Bivír, to liue, to haue life. Also to liue a
merrie life. Also to lead or spende his
life.

Bivo, m.aliue.

Bivora, f. a viper.

Bivorézno, m.a yoong viper.

* Bivoríno, m.a little viper. Also belon­
ging to a viper.

Bíxa, f. a certaine herbe wherewith the
Indians paint themselues.

* Bizárma, vide Vizárma. 

Bizarría, f. brauerie, gallantnes.

Bizárro, m.braue, gallant.

* Bizcáya, vide Viscáya, Biskay a pro­
uince of Spaine.

* Bizcaýno, vide Vizaýno, m.a man of
Biskay.

* Bizcochéro, vide Biscochéro, or Vis­
cochéro, a bisket-baker, or a bisket-
maker.

* Bizcócho, vide Biscócho, or Vizcó­
cho, bisket bread.

* Bize, a sea fish like a pearch.

* Bizéra, vide Vizéra, f. the beauer of a
helmet or headpiece.

* Bizérro, m.vide Bezérro. 


B L
Blánca, a peece of money being the six­
tieth and eight part of a royall of plate,
or an English sixepence. Also the proper
name of diuers women in Spaine. Also
for white in the feminine gender.

Blanchéte, m.a little beagle of Malta.

Blánco, m.white. Also a marke or a white
to shoote at.

* Dexár en blánco, to leaue a blancke in
paper to be filled vp. To leaue a man
suing for an office or such like, frustrat
voide, and beside it.

* Salir en blánco, to misse the cushion, to
be frustrate or voide of any thing.

* Quedár en blánco, to remaine fru­
strate of ones purpose.

Blancór, m.whitenes.

Blancúra, idem. 

Blandaménte, softly, gently.

Blandeár, to brandish or quiuer a sword,
to bend, to bow. Also to make soft or
gentle.

* Blandír, to make soft or gentle.

Blándo, m.soft, gentle, flattering.

Blandón de çéra, a waxe torch.

Blandúra, f. softnes, gentlenes, smooth­
nes.

Blanqueádo, m.whited.

* Blanqueadór, m.one that whiteneth or
maketh white.

Blanqueadúra, f. whiting.

* Blanquecedór, m.vide Blanquea­
dór. 

Blanqueár, to make white, to be white.

Blanquezino, m.whitish, somewhat
white.

Blanquiból, Ceruse.

* Blanquisco, m.whitish, somewhat
white.

* Bláo, of a blewish colour.

* Blasfemádo, m.blasphemed.

Blasfemár, to blaspheme.

Blasfemadór, m.a blasphemer.

Blasfémia, blasphemie.

* Blasón, or Blazón, armes, a scutcheon,
blazon.

* Blasonár, or Blazonár, to set out, to
talke at large, to blason out.

* Blazonadór de arnéz, a boaster of his
armes, or gentrie.

* Blebéyo, m.of or pertaining to the com­
mon people, one of the comminaltie,
poor, base, meane, simple, homely, of lit­
tle value, of the common sort, of small
estimation.

Blédo, an hearbe called a Blite, Spin­
nage.


B O
* Bóbas, an herbe called Shapewort.

* Bobeár, to be foolish, doltish. To be asto­
nished, amased. To play the foole.

Bóbeda, f. a vault.

* Bobedád, or Bovedád, f. foolishnes.

* Bobillo, or Bovillo, m.a little foote.

* Bóbo, or Bóvo, m.a foole.

Bóca, f. a mouth, a snowte.

Bóca del río, the hauen mouth.

* Bóça, f. a coard in a ship.

* Bóca arriba, lying wide open with his
face vpward.

Bóca abáxo, groueling.

Bocaci, m.buckeram.

Bocádo, a morsell, a bit, a mouthfull, the
stuffe that is put in a peece betweene
the powder and the bullet.

Bocál de pózo, the mouth of a well.

Boçál, a muffler, a muzzle, one that as­
sayeth and trieth to speake a toong, yet
cannot.

Boçál, vide Ignoránte, ignorant, vnskil­
full in a toong.

* Mancebillos boçáles, yoong youthes
that haue no knowledge in a toong.

Boçezár, to gape, to yawne.

Boçézo, m.gaping, yawning.

* Bochornádo, m.withered away with
a close hot weather.

Bochórno, m.a close hot weather.

Bóço de la barva, the mosse of the beard.

* Bocúdo, wide mouthed.

* Boçúdo, m.hauing great mustachoes.

* Bóda, f. a marriage, a wedding, a bri­
dall.

Bódas, a wedding, a marriage.

Bodéga, f. a seller to keepe wine in.

Bodegón, m.an ale-house, an inne.

Bodegonéro, m.an ale-house keeper, an
ale-house hanter.

Bodeguéro, m.a tapster.

* Bodián, a tench, a sea fish hauing red
spots almost like a tench.

* † Bodígo, m.a small cake or bun bread,
which in diuers villages in Spaine they
offer to the priest, as also giue their
children.

† Bodóques, m.pellets of clay.

* Boezuélo, m.a stalking oxe or horse
made of canuas or such like, to gather
within fowle to shoote at them with a
fowling peece.

† Bófes, m.the lungs or lights.

Bofetáda, f. a buffet, a blowe with the
fist.

* Bofetón, idem. 

* Bofónes de jubón, the bombast, furre
or lining of a doublet.

Bóga, f. rowing with oares.





* Bogadór, vide Vogadór, m.a rower
with oares.

Bogár, vide Vogár, to rowe with oares.

* Bogavánte, m.the foreman in rowing.

* Bohémia, f. a countrie so called.

* Bohío, m.a thatched house.

* Bohonería, pedlarie ware. The place
where such ware is sold.

* Bohonéro, m.a pedlar that selleth
small wares.

* Bohonóra, a banker, a lumbard, a mo­
ney lender.

Bohordár, to cast a kinde of reedes one
at another called Cats taile a horse­
backe. Vide juégo de cáñas.

* Bohórdo, an herbe called Water torch
or Cats taile.

Bója, compassing about.

Bojár, to compasse about.

Bóla, a bowle, a footeball.

* Bóla de viénto, a winde ball to tosse
from one to another.

* Imbocár la bóla, to hit the bowle in
the ring, at the play called juégo de
Bárras.

* Boladéro, m.flying.

* Boláda, f. the flight of a fowle or birde.
Also a cast with a bowle.

* Boládo, m.fled or flowne.

* Boladóra, flying.

Bolapíe, fluttering with the wings the
feete on the ground.

Bolár, to flie, to surprise.

* Bolár vn grúlla, to flie at the crane 
with a hauke.

* Bolarménico, m.Bole-Armeniake.

* Boláso, or Bolázo, m.the stroke of a
bowle.

* Bolcán, or Volcán, m.Mount Aetna
that continually casteth out fire.

* Bolcánes, idem. 

* Bolcáno or Vulcáno, m.Vulcan the
God of Smithes, as poets feigne.

* Bolcár, yo Buélco, to fall downe tum­
bling.

* Bolcádo me á, el víno, the wine ouer­
came me.

* Boleár a la tahóna, to hasten to Bride­
well.

Boléa de pelóta, the flying of a ball or
bullet.

* Boléo, m.a flight.

* Boléta, f. a billet or ticket for lodging,
&c. a little bullet to shoote.

Boletínes, little morsels of an orange,
little round stones. Vide Bolléta.

* Bólla, f. the Popes bull, letters patents.

* Bollído, m.boiled, sodden.

* Bollír, to boile, to seeth.

* Bolílla, a little bullet, a little ball.

Bolína, f. a rope in a ship called the sheate,
or the boling.

* Bolliciár, to make a tumult, hurly bur­
ly or great sturre.

Bollício, vide Alboróto. 

Bollicióso, m.seditious, contentious.

Bóllo de pán, a loafe of bread, a role of
bread.

Bóllo de gólpe, the swelling after a
stripe.

Bollón de cínta, a stud or bosse of a
girdle.

Bollonádo, m.studded, bossed.

* Bólos, the play at kailes or nine pins.

Bólsa, f. a purse, a pouch.

* Bólsa de camíno, a waifaring mans
capcase, portmanteaw or pouch to car­
rie his necessaries in.

* Bolséro, m.a purse maker.

* Bolsíca, f. a little purse, a small
pouch.

Bolsíco, m.a little purse, a pettie pouch.

* Bolsílla, f. idem. 

* Bolsón, m.a great purse or pouch.

Bolteadór, m.a tumbler, a vaulter.

Bolteár, to vault, to tumble.

Boltejadór, vide Bolteadór. 

Boltejár, or Bolteár, to tumble, to 
vaulte.

Boltezuéla, f. a short turne.

* Boltón, m.a iewell like a hart to hang
about the necke.

* Bolton, or chatón de cínta, a stud of
a girdle.

* Boltúra, f. vide Emboltúra.

Bolvér, yo bvélvo, to turne, to returne,
to restore.

* Bolvér lo recevído, to restore againe
that he had taken.

* Bolvér las espáldas, to turn his backe a­
gaine.

* Bolvér al revés, to returne backe a­
gaine.

* Bolvérse en álgo, to become, to be­
tide, to chance, to befall, to happen.

Bolvíble, that may turne, or be turned.

Bolvimiénto, m.turning.

* Bolúmen, m.a volume of a booke.

Bómba, f. a pumpe.

* Bómba de fuégo, a ball of wilde­
fire.

* Bombárda, f. a piece of artillerie.

* Bómbo, anie bumming or humming
noise.

Bonánça, f. faire weather, a calme.

* Bonançár, to make calme, to make
faire weather.

* Bonda, vide Hónda. 

Bondád, f. goodnes, bountie.

* Bonéta, f. the bonet of a saile in a
ship.

Bonéte, m.a cap, the top saile.

* Bonetéro, m.a capper.

* Boníco, or Boníto, prettie, good,
neate, fine.

† Boñíga, f. a cowturd.

* Boníssimo, most good.

Boníto, vide Boníco. 

* Bonito, m.a fish called a Tunnie.

* Bonvarón, an herbe called Ground­
swell.

* Boñuélo, m.a cake, a little loafe.

* Bóo, vide Buéno. 

Boquéar, vide Boçezár, to gape, to
yawn, to make mowes, to plaie or checke
with the mouth as horses do.

* Boquerón, m.a great hole in a wall or
such like.

* Boquiabiértos, m.wide mouthed, open
mouthed.

Boquiróto, foule mouthed.

* Boquirríto, vide Boquiróto. 

* Boquisécos, m.drie mouthed, thir­
stie.

Borboleár, to bubble, to seeth.

Borbollónes, m.bubbles with seething.

* † Borcegui, Buskins of leather.

Borcellár de cáxa, the brim of a chest.

Bordadór, or Bosladór, m.an imbrode­
rer, an edger.

* Bordádo, m.imbrodered, edged, frin­
ged.

Bordadúra, f. embrodering, fringing.

Bordár, or Boslar, to embroder, to edge.

Bórde, m.a border of embroderie, a skirt,
the brim or edge of a fort or anything.
Also a bastard sonne.

* Bórde tajádo, fringe.

Bordón, m.a staffe which pilgrims walke
withall.  Also the great or base string of
any instrument.

* Bordón de vihuéla, the great or base
string of a viall.

Bordonéro, m.a base fellow. Also a pil­
grime that carieth Bordon in his hand
to walke with.

* Bóreas, m.the north winde.

* Borgóña, f. the dukedome of Burgundy,
a woman of Burgundie.

Borgoñón, m.a Burgonian, a Wallon.

* Bórla, round fringe.

* Borladór, m.a maker of fringe.

Borneádo, m.bent by beathing at the
fire.

Borneár, to bend timber by beathing at
the fire.

† Bórne, m.the bending of a staffe or
timber by beathing at the fire.

† Borní, m.a kinde of hauke.

Boróna, f. a kinde of graine in China.

* Bórra, f. a blot, the drosse of anything,
ewes mutton.

* Borrácha, f. a bottle with haire. Also a
drunken woman.

* Borrachéra, or Borrachería, f. drun­
kennesse, a drunken feast.

Borrácho, or Beódo, a drunkard.

Borrachéz, vide Borrachéra. 

* † Borrádo, m.blotted, cancelled, razed





or blotted out.

* Borradór, m.a blotting booke, a day
booke, a house booke.

* Borradór de cuéntas, a blotting booke
of reckonings.

* Borradúra, f. a blotting, a rasing out.

Borrája, f. an herbe called Burrage.

† Borrár, to blot, to blurre.

Bórras, f. dregs of wine, oile, or of oint­
ments.

Borrásca, f. a tempest.

* Borrascóso, tempestuous.

Borráx, or Borráz, vide Atincar, solder
for goldsmithes.

* Bortaza, idem. 

* † Borréga, f. a lambe.

† Borrégo, m.a lambe of a yeere old.

† Borrico, m.an asse colt.

* Bórro, m.a lambe giddie in the head.

† Borrón, m.a blot.

Borújo, vide Burújo, the hunks of grapes
or such like fruit after the wine or iuice
is pressed out.

† Borzegui, or Boszegui, a buskin.

† Borzeguinéro, f. a buskin maker.

* Boscáge, m.a thicke wood, wooddie.

Bosládo, vide Bordádo, embrodered.

* Bosladóres, m.embroderers.

Bosladura, vide Bordadúra, f. embro­
derie.

Boslár, vide Bordár, to embroder.

Bósque, m.a woode, a groue, a cop­
pise.

* Bossál de cavállo, a kinde of furniture
for a horse head, vsed in Spaine of syl­
uer, with bels and a point in the same,
right on the forehead like a vnicorne.

† Bossar, to vomit.

Bostezár, or Boçezár, to gape, to 
yawne.

Bostézo, m.gaping, yawning.

Boszegui, vide Borçegui, m.

Bóta, a boote to weare, a bottle, a bus­
kinne.

* Bóta de víno, a bottle of wine.

* Bóta, f. a boote to weare.

* Botaménte, bluntly, dully.

Botána, f. a peece of wood to stoppe a hole
in a bottle, to be stitched fast or tried to
that the drinke run not out. Also by a
metaphor vsed for an issue in the legs.

Botár, or Votár, to put foorth, to thrust
foorth, to vowe, to dimme the colour, to
dull the edge.

* Botár jurando, vide jurár, to vowe,
to sweare: as

* Bóto a Dios, I sweare by God.

Botárse el color, to dimme the colour.

Bótas, f. bootes.

* Bóte, m.a boxe, the blow or stroke with
a pike or such like, the rebound of a bal,
a boxe of an Apothecarie, a stone or a
kinde of stonie morter. They vse in
Spaine to make a ball rise to strike
him afterwarde with a racket or bat­
tle-dore.

* Bóte de conserva, an Apothecaries 
boxe.

Bóte de pelóta, the rebound of a ball.

* ýr de bóte, to go the readie way.

Boteçica, f. a little boxe, a little bot­
tle.

* Botelleria, f. the butterie.

* Botezillo, m.a galley pot, a kinde of
lymbecke or stillatorie, a little mea­
sure.

Botica, f. an Apothecaries shop, a shop.

Boticário, m.an Apothecarie.

Botija, f. a tubbe.

* Botijuéla, f. a little tub.

Botilla, f. a little bottle.

* Botillér, m.a butler.

Botillería, f. a butterie, a place where bot­
tles are sold.

Botilléro, m.a butler.

Botin, m.a bootie taken. Also pincens of
leather that women weare in Spaine.

* Botínes, idem. 

Botinéro, he that keepeth the bootie, or a
pincen maker.

Bóto, m.dull of edge, dull witted.

* Bóto a Dios, I vow to God, or I sweare
by God.

* Bóto a tál, I sweare by such a one,
&c.

Botón, m.a button, a bud, a searing iron,
a byle, an impostume.

* Botón de fuégo, a ball of wilde
fire.

Botór, m.an impostume.

* Bouchétte, vide Mexilla, a cheeke.

Boveár, to plaie the foole.

Bóveda, vide Bóbeda, a vault.

* Bovedár, to vault, to make vaults vn­
der ground.

* Bovedilla, f. a little vault.

Bovería, f. foolishnes, doltishnes.

Bóvo, or Bóbo, a foole, a dolt.

* Bóut, m.a moonefish.

† Bóx árbol, a boxe tree.

* Bóx de çapatéros, a shoomakers last 
to fashion their shooes on.

* Boxár, m.a promontorie or hillie spong
of ground standing into the sea.

† Boxedál, m.a groue of boxe trees.

* Bóxo, roundnes, compasse, circuit.

Bóya, f. a booy for an anchor, a corke for a
bet or angle, a push or bile. Also one
that serueth in the gallies for monie or
pay.

Boyáda, f. a herd of oxen.

* Boycár, to lift vp his voice, to crie out.

Boyéro, m.a neatheard, a haywarde.

* Boyezuélo, m.a runt, a steere. Also a
stalking oxe to stalke at and kill par­
tridges or such like.

Boyúno, m.pertaining to oxen.

Bóz or Vóz, f. a voice.

* Bóza, vide Bóça. 

* Bozeadór, m.a crier out, one that ma­
keth a noise.

Bozeár, to crie out, to make a noise.

Dár bózes, idem. 

* Bozeria, or Bozería, f. a great noice of
many voices.

Bozina, f. a trumpet, a cornet, a shepherds
pipe. Also a purple fish.

Bozinéro, m.a trumpeter, a piper.

Bozingléro, m.one that crieth out, one
that maketh a noise.

* Bozios, m.a horne shell fish.



Brabáda, Bravita, or Braváda, a bra­
uado, a shew of challenge or of daring.

* Brabeár, to giue the brauado, to make a
shew of challenge.

* Brabéza, f. fiercenes, wildnes, brauerie.

* Brábo, m.wilde, fierce, cruell.

* Brabúra, vide Brabéza, f.

* Bráça, a fathom, an ell, a coard in a ship
called the brace.

Braçáda, f. an ell, a fathom.

* Braçádo, vide Abraçádo, m.imbra­
ced with armes.

* Braçál, m.pouldrons or armour for the
armes, or attire that women put on
their armes toward the shoulder.

Braçáles, pouldrons, armour for the
armes.

* Braçalétes, m.bracelets. Also armour
for the armes.

Braçeár, to shake the armes.

Bracéro, m.one that casteth out the
armes.

* Brácho, vide Bráço. 

* Braçíto, m.a little arme.

* Bracillo, vide Braçito. 

* Bráço, m.an arme.

* Braçóles, vide Braçáles. 

Bráços, the armes.

* Bráços, or Tenazas de cangréjo, or
Scorpión, the clawes of a Crab fish,
&c.

* Braçól, m.arming for the armes, poul­
drons.

* Braçoléte, idem. 

Bragado, one with breeches, an oxe with a
white leg.

† Brágas, f. breeches.

* Braguéra, vide Braguéro. 

Braguéro, m.a trusse for a broken bellied
man.

† Braguéta, f. a codpeece.

* Bramadór, m.one that roareth.

Bramár, to roar like a lyon or bull, to
make a fretting noise.





Bramido, m.roaring, lowing.

* Bránca, f. a claw, a paw, a foot of a bear
or such like beast. Also chaines in gal­
leyes or prisons to tie the slaues or pri­
soners.

Bránca vrsína, an herbe called Beares
foote.

Brása, f. a burning coale.

Braséro, m.a chafing dish, or vessell of
earth, copper, or siluer, which in Spaine
they vse to put coales in, and so make
fire, and not in chimneies. Also a bre­
wer.

* Braséros de pláta, a chafing dish of sil­
uer, or vessels to make a coale fire, of sil­
uer, in steed of chimneyes.

Brasíl, m.Brasill-wood, the redde colour
made with Brasill. Also the countrey
Brasill.

* Bráva, warlike, fiercely.

* Braváda, or Brabáda, a brauado, a
shew of chalenge or daring.

Bravaménte, wildly, fiercely, brauely.

* Bravánte, the prouince of Brabant.

Braveár, or Brabeár, to be fierce, to shew
himselfe wilde, to braue it, to giue the
brauado.

Bravéza, f. fiercenes, wildnes, brauery.

Brávo, m.fierce, wilde, cruell, braue.

* Bravonél, m.vide Brávo, also the pro­
per name of a certaine Moore.

* Bráza, or Bráça, a great coard in a ship
called the brace. Also vide Bráça.

* Brazáda, vide Braçáda. 

* Brazáles, vide Braçáles. 

* Brazeár, vide Braçeár. 

* Brazíto, vide Braçíto. 

* Brazíllo, vide Bracíllo. 

* Brazo, vide Bráço. 

* Brazol vide Braçól. 

* Bréa, f. caulking of ships.

* Breádo, caulked.

Breár navío, to caulke a ship.

* Bréba, or Bréva, a fig soone ripe.

Bréço, a twig to make coale. also furzes,
a shrub called heath, Sweete-broome
or Lingwort.

* Brédo, a kinde of beete hauing no sauor,
called Blite.

* † Bréga, strife, contention in law, wran­
gling.

* Bregár, to striue, to contend.

* Bregigám, a shelfish cleauing on the
rocks, called a Lympin.

Bréña, f. a shrubbie place, a yoong orchard,
a nurserie for trees, a crag of a moun­
taine, a bushie or thornie place.

* Breñál, f. a bushie place, a place full of
briers.

B* retáña, f. Britany, a kinde of linnen
cloth brought from Britaine in France.

* Bréte, m.a paire of stockes or fetters of
yron to fasten the feete in.

Bretón, a yoong sproute of any thing. Al­
so a man of Britaine in Fraunce.

Bretónica, f. an herbe called Betony.

Bréva, or Bréba, f. an early ripe fig.

* Breváge, m.beurage, a kinde of homely
drinke.

Brevál, a fig tree, the figs whereof are
soone ripe. Also a place where fig trees
growe.

Bréve, short, brief.

* Bréve de pontifice, a schedule, a ticket,
a billet, a bill, a bote, a docket. A Popes
bull.

Brevidád, f. shortnes, breuitie.

Breveménte, shortly, briefly.

* Brevesíto, or Brevezíto, somewhat
briefe or somewhat short.

Breviário, m.an epitome, an abridgement,
a briefe, a breuiarie of prayers.

Brézna, f. a chip.

* Briagués, f. drunkennes.

* Bríco, m.a banke.

Brída, f. a bridle.

Andár a la brída, to ride a great horse
with the legs hanging down long in the
stirrops: the contrary to which is Ca­
valgar a la ginéta, to ride with the legs
vert short or high trussed vp in the
stirrops.

* Briénto, m.forcible, violent.

Brimbilláda, f. Marmelade, conserue of
quinces.

Brincádo, m.dandled as a childe, lea­
ping, skipping.

* Brincár, Præs. yo Brínco, 1. Præ. yo
Brinqué, to dandle a childe, to 
leape.

Brínco, m.a ierke, a leape.

* Brindár, or Hazer bríndes, to drinke
to one, to salute one with drinking to
him.

* Bríndes, as Hazer Bríndes, idem. 

* Brínque, vide Brincár. 

* Brinquíllo, m.a little ierke, a little
leape.

* Brinquíño, a toie for a childe to plaie
with.

Brío, wilfulnes, headines, liuelines.

* Briónia yerva, f. an herbe called Bry­
onie.

Brióso, m.wilfull, liuely.

* Brísa, f. the north winde, the northeast
winde.

Brisár la cúna, to rocke the cradle.

* Bríscos, m.vide Ríscos, craggy rockes.

Brocádo, m.cloth of gold and siluer.

* Brocádo ráso, smooth, or plaine cloth
of gold or siluer.

* Brocádo ríco, m.rich cloth of golde or
of siluer.

Bróca, f. a shoomakers tacke naile.

Brocál de pózo, the couering of a well,
the brinke of a well.

* Brocatél, m.counterfait cloth of golde
or siluer.

Brócha, f. a claspe, or button.

* Bróche, m.a claspe or button.

Bróma, f. a worme that eateth holes in
ships. Also a heauie, lumpish thing.

* Bromído, vide Bramído. 

* Bróncha, f. a breech, the boughes of a
tree.

Brónze, m.brasse.

Broquél, m.a target. 

Broqueládo, m.armed with a target.

Brosládo, or Bordádo, embrodered.

* Brosladóres, vide Bordadóres, em­
broderers.

* Brosladúra, f. embrodering.

* Brotádo, m.budded.

Brotár, to bud, to breake out with scabs.

Brózno, m.rough, rugged, sharpe.

Brúçes, groueling, with the face betweene
the hands.

* Bruchéte, m.a kinde of shellfish.

* Brúja, f. a hagge, a woman enchaun­
tresse, a witch.

* Brúma de ynviérno, f. midwinter, 
frost, mist, fog, colde, frosen weather.

Brunéto, m.blackish, sad colour.

* Bruñído, m.burnished with a boares
tooth, or other like toole.

* Bruñidór, m.a burnisher.

* Bruñidúra, f. burnishing.

Bruñír, to burnish.

Brúno, m.browne coloured.

* Brúsca yerva, a shrubbe called Knee­
holme, Butchers broome, Petigree, or
Kneehuluer.

* Bruscadór, m.one that vseth or selleth
Kneeholme.

* Bruscár, Præs. yo Brúsco, 1. Præt. yo
Brusqué, to heate a ships side with bur­
ning reede.

* Brúsco, vide Brúsca. 

* Brúsque, vide Bruscár. 

Brutál, or Brúto, brutish, beastly.

Brúto, idem. 

Brúxa, or Brúxo, a hagge, a fiende, a
witch.

Brúxula para tirár, f. the aime string, or
beade they shoote with, that which they
take their aime by in a crosse-bowe or
such like.

* Brúxula, f. a boxe wherein the marri­
ner compasse is set and fastned. Also
the marriners compasse.



* Búas, vide Búbas, f. 

Buáro, or Buárro, an owle.

* Búbas, f. the french pocket, a swelling in
the flanke rising of that disease.

* Bubóso, m.full of the pocks.

* Búces, as Beuér de búces, to drinke by
sips, to lie downe and drinke at the
riuer with the mouth after the manner





of cattell.

Búche de animál, the maw of a beast.

Buchéte, a cheeke, a pop with the mouth.

* Budián, vide Bodián. 

* Buélco de dádo, m.the tumbling or
rolling of a die.

* Buélco, m.a tumbling, a falling downe,
rolling or tumbling.

* Buélco, Buelque, vide Bolcár. 

* Buéle, Buélo, vide Bolár. 

Buélo, m.a flight.

* Lleuár en Buélo, to take away quickly.

* Buélque, vide Bolcár. 

Buélta, f. a returne, a turning away, a
turning round.

* aBuéltas, togither.

* Ser de buélta, to come back againe.

* Buélta dár, to wheele about, to giue a
turne.

* Buélto al revéz, a turning backe, tur­
ned backe.

Buélto, m.turned, tumbled, tossed, chan­
ged.

* Buélva, Buélvo, vide Bolvér. 

Buenaménte, well.

Buéno, m.good.

* Bueñól, a simnell or bunne made of
flower, oile and raisins.

Buétagos, or Bóses, the lungs, the tripes
or bellie of a beast.

Buéy, m.an oxe.

Buey nóvo or Novillo, a steere.

Buéytre, m.a vultur.

Bueytréra, a place to kill vultures. Also a
kinde of fishing net.

Búfalo, a buffle, a kinde of wilde oxe.

* Búfano, vide Bufalo. 

Bufár, to puffe, to blowe as a horse.

* Buféo, m.a great kinde of fish.

Buféte, m.a standing table.

* † Buffár, to huffe, to puffe, or snort as a
horse, bull, or other such beast doth.

Bufido, m.puffing, blowing, or snuffing of
a horse.

* Bufón, m.a iester. Vide Truhán.

* Bugállas, f. galles vsed of diars.

* Bugelládas, f. painting for womens
faces.

* Bugelladór, a masker or seller of pain­
ting for womens faces.

Bugerias, f. trifles.

* Bugulósa, Buglosse.

Búho, m.an owle, shrich- owle.

Buhonéro, m.a pedlar, a seller of small
wares vp and downe the countrie.

* Búho sólo, m.an owle alone.

Bujarroneár, to commit sinne against
nature.

Bujarrón, m.a buggerer.

Búla, f. a Popes bull.

Bulár la frénte, to burne the forehead.

Búlbo, m.a wilde oinion.

* Buldéto, m.vide Buléro. 

* Buléro, a carrier of pardons or buls.

* Búlla, a seditious or tumultuous stirre.

* Bullénte, stirring, boiling.

Bullício, m.a tumult, a sturre, a hurly
burly, a sedition.

* Bulliciosaménte, tumultuously.

* Bullicióso, m.contentious, bent to
wrangling.

Bullidúra, f. springing vp, boyling.

Bullir, to spring vp, to boile vp.

Bullón, m.an Irish skeine.

Búlto, m.shape, the bulke of the body.

* Búlto de vóz, a great voice.

* † Buñolería, f. the place where they
sell buns, or little cobloaues, or where
they make them.

* † Buñoléro, m.he that maketh or selleth
cobloaues.

† Buñuélos, m.pancakes, cobloaues, buns.

* Burátos, m.a kinde of light thin stuffe
for clokes vsed in Spaine, or most vsed
for womens mantels there, Cipres or
Cipers, such as they make hatbands of.

Burbugeár, to bubble.

Burbúja, or Ampólla, a bubble on the
water.

Burdégano, m.a mule.

Burdél, or Putería, a stewes, a brothel­
house.

* Búrgos, a citie in old Castile in Spaine.

* Buriél, a kinde of cloth.

Buril, m.a grauing toole.

* Burín, a goldsmithes iustrument to
graue or carue with.

Búrla, f. a iest, a mocke, a scoffe, a deceit.

Burladór, m.a iester, a mocker, a decei­
uer.

* Burlándo, iesting.

Burlár, to iest, to mocke, to deceiue.

* Burlílla, a pretie iest.

Burlón, m.a iester.

* Búrra, f. a shee asse.

* Burrásca, f. a tempest or storme at sea.

* Burrátos, a kinde of stuffe whereof they
make womens mantels in Spaine.

* Búrro, a hee asse.

* Búrro pece, a sea fish.

* Burújo, m.the husks of grapes or such
like fruite after the wine or iuice is
pressed out.

Búsca, f. a search, seeking.

* Buscádo, m.sought, searched.

* Buscadór, m.a seeker, a searcher.

Buscár, Præs. yo Búsco, 1. Præt. yo
Busqué, to search, to seeke.

* Busqué, vide Buscár. 

* Bustamántes, a surname of a certaine
linage in Spaine.

* Butréra, f. a place where they catch
vultures, a place where baite is laid for
vultures. Also a fishing net.

Búva, vide Búbas, f. the pocks, a botch, a
bile.

* † Buxahamél, a Moorish daunce.

Buxéta, f. a box, a little box, a ciuet box.

* Búxula, f. vide Brúxula, a place where
they keepe the compasse a shipboord.

* Buýtre, m.a vulture.

* Buytréra, a place to kill vultures in, or
to catch vultures.

* Buytron, m.a weele to catch or keepe
fish in the water.

* Echár Buytrónes, to cast weeles in the
water to catch fish.

* Buyzillo, a yoong bullocke, a steere.

* Búzano, m.a diuer, a ducker vnder
water as Moores doe in the Indies for
pearles.

* Búzio, m.a certaine cockle fish with a
smooth shell, glistering like the mother
of pearle. Also the same as Búzano.

* Búzo, vide Búzano. 



* Býrsa, f. a cheuerell skin to make purses
with.

* Býsa, vide Býze. 

* Býze, the north winde.



C

* cA, id est Que, for, for that.

Cabál, iust, right.

* Cabála, f. a mysticall science of heauen­
ly things, or reuelations of things secret
professed by the Rabbies.

* Cabalía, f. idem. 

* Cabalista, m.one professing the arte of
Cabála.

* Cabalístico, m.of or pertaining to the
arte of Cabála, mysterious, cabalisti­
call.

* Cabálla, vide Caválla. 

* Caballaríza, vide Cavallaríza. 

* Caballéro, vide Cavalléro. 

* Caballillo, vide Cavallillo. 

* Cabállo, vide Cavállo, m.

* Cabalménte, iustly, rightly.

Cabáña, f. a cabbin, a cottage, a shepherds
cottage, a soldiers cabbin.

Cabañuéla, f. a little cottage, a little
cabbin.

Cábe, neere to, hard by.

Cábe, the verbe Impersonall, it is held, it
is contained, it happeneth, it contayneth
or holdeth.

Cabéça, f. a head.

Cabéça de pérro, the head of a dog, or
an herbe called dogs-head.

* Cabéça de ternéro, f. an herbe called
Calues snowte, or Snapdragon.

* Cabéça verguençádo, f. the nut of a
many yard.

* Cabeçáda, f. a blow with the head a­
gainst the wall, the headstall for a
horse. A stickneckednes, a wilfulnes, a
stubbornes, a headstrongnes.





Cabeçáda de cavállo, the headstall of a
bridle.

Cabeçádo, m.a headstall for a horse. Al­
so the vamping or putting to the instops
to bootes.

* Cabeçáje, vide Cabeçamiénto. 

Cabeçál, m.a pillow, a bolster.

Cabeceamiénto, m.nodding, shaking of
the head.

Cabeceár, to nod, to shake the head.

* Cabeceléro, the executor of a testa­
ment.

Cabeçéra, f. the vpper end of a table, bed,
or other thing.

Cabecéra de cáma, a beds head.

Cabeçéra de méza, the vpper ende of
a table.

Cabeçón, the necke band of a shirt, a fal­
ling band, the necke of a dublet, a man
with a great head, the coller of any gar­
ment.

* Cabeçón, a towne of Castile not farre
from Valladolid.

Cabéço, or Cérro, m.a hill.

Cabeçúdo, m.head-strong, great-hea­
ded.

Cabeçuéla, f. a little or small head.

Cabelládo, m.long haired.

Cabelladúra, f. the bush of haire.

* Cabelladúra agéna, a false haire.

Cabéllos, m.the haire of the head.

Cabellóso, m.hairie, full of haire.

Cabellúdo, m.idem. 

Cabér, Præs. Quépo, cábes, cábe, 1.
Præt. Cúpe, cupiste, cúpo. Fut. Ca­
bré, cabrás, cabrá, Sub. Præs. Qué­
pa, Jmperfect. Cupiéra, cabria, or 
cupiésse, Fut. Cupiére, to receiue, or
containe, or to be contained or receiued
in any thing.

* Cabérna, f. a caue.

Cabéro, m.the last.

Cabestrár, to halter.

Cabestráge, m.haltering.

Cabestréro, m.a roape-maker.

Cabéstro, m.a halter.

* Cabezáda, vide Cabeçáda. 

* Cabezcaýdo, wri-necked, his head fal­
len downe.

* Cabezéra, vide Cabecéra. 

* Cabezón, or Cabaçón, the necke or
collar of a dublet, the necke band of a
shirt, a falling band. Also one with a
great head.

* Cabezúdo, vide Cabeçúdo, head­
strong or hauing a great head.

* Cabezuéla, vide Cabeçuéla. 

* Cabída, f. an entrance.

* Cabída tenér, to haue interest with
one.

Cabído, contained, receiued, taken.

* muy Cabído, verie familiar.

* Cabildádas, f. sentences giuen by the
senate.

Cabildo, a senate, the chapter or whole
societie of the Dean and Prebends in a
Cathedrall Church. An assembly of
Aldermen. A corporation of a citie.

Cabíldo de yglésia, a Chapter house.

* Cabillo, m.a little end, the small end.

* Cabizbáxo, the head downeward.

* Cáble, m.a cable roape.

* Cableçádas de cavállo, headstals for
horse.

Cábo, or Cávo, m.an end, a finishing or
conclusion.

* Cábo de esquádra, a corporall among
souldiers.

Cábo de cuchíllo, the haste of a knife.

* Cábo, or Púño, a handle or pummell.

Cábo de tiérra, a cape, a headland.

* † çabórda, f. a boarding or arriuing of
a ship close to land, or close to a wharfe
or key.

* † çabordár, to approach with a shippe
close to lande, or close to a wharfe,
landing place, or key.

Cábra, f. a shee goate.

* Cábra pece, a fish called gurnard.

Cábra Silvestre, or montezína, a wilde
goate.

* Cábra, a towne of Andaluzia.

* çabra, vide Zábra. 

Cabrahígo, a wild figge tree or figge it
selfe.

* Cabraýgo, idem. 

Cabrahagár, to ripen figs, to set wilde figs.

Cabréro, m.a goatherd.

Cabrerízo, idem. 

* Cabrestánte, m.a capston in a ship.

Cabriál, or Cábrio, a rafter, a quarter
set on ende, to lift some thing on high
with.

* Cabrílla, f. a little goate, also vide Ca­
bríllas.

Cabríllas, f. a constellation called the
goate and kids.

Cábrio, vide Cabriál. 

* Cabriólas, f. capering in dauncing.

* Cabriolár, to caper.

* Cabritíco, m.a kid or little goate.

Cabrito, m.kid.

* Cabríto montés, a wilde goate.

Cabritúno, m.belonging to a kid.

Cabrón, m.a he goate, a great goate.

* Cabronzíllo montés, m.a roe bucke.
Also a mountaine or wilde goate.

* Cabrúna, f. a goates skin.

Cabrúno, of a goate.

çabullído, m.diued vnder water, plun­
ged in water, laide in a deepe sleepe.

† çabullír, to diue or ducke vnder water,
to plunge in water, to laie a sleepe, a
chace.

Cáça, f. birding, fowling, bunting, fi­
shing, wilde foule.

Cáça de áves, Birding.

* Caçádo, hunted.

* Caçádo, as lo han caçádo, they haue
caught him in a snare, they haue hun­
ted him.

Caçadóra, f. a huntresse.

Caçadóra cósa, a thing belonging to
hunting, hawking, fishing, or fow­
ling.

Caçadór, m.hunter.

Caçár, to hunt, to hauke, to fish, to foule.

* Caçár áves, to foule, to goe a bir­
ding.

Cacareár, to cackle as a hen.

* † Cáchas de cuchíllo, f. the haste of
a knife.

* Cacheár, or Cachár en pedáços, to
cleaue in peeces.

Cachéte, m.a strouting out of the cheekes
with much meate or winde, a whirret
on the cheeke.

Cacheteádo, m.whirretted on the
cheeke, smitten on the cheeke with a 
hand.

* Cachetón, m.a whirret on the cheeke.

* Cachónda pérra, a bitch that goeth
proud.

Cachórro, m.a whelpe.

Cácho, a crust, a peece, a lumpe.

* Cachorríco, or Cachoríco, m.a little
whelpe.

* Cachorríto, m.idem. 

Cacíque, m.an Indian prince.

* Cáco, m.a sonne of Vulcan, who was a
notorious theefe, wasting all Italie vn­
till Hercules slue him.

Cáco de cóbre, a brasen vessell to put
pots in, as butlers vse by the cupboord.

Cáço de hiérro, a fleshhooke, a pipkin, a
trout speare.

* Caçoléta, f. a touchpan of a smal peece.
Also a little pipkin.

* Caçoléta del poluorín, f. a touchpan
for powder of a peece.

Caçolílla, f. a little skillet.

Caçón, a fish of whose skin water glue is
made.

* Caçórla, f. a citie in the kingdome of
Granada in Spaine.

Caçórro, m.couetous, sparing, niggardly.

Caçuéla, f. a pipkin.

* Caçuéla para pringár, a pipkin to
keepe hot larde to drop vpon Moores or
Neagers, and on other malefactors.
Also a pipkin with dripping in it that
the poorer sort eate of.

Cáda, euery.

Cáda día, euery day.

Cáda dos, y cáda tres días, each two
and three daies, euery second or thirde
day.

Cáda buéno, euery good man.





Cáda qual, euery such a one.

Cadañéro, of euery yeere, yeerely.

* Cadaldia, vide Cada día. 

* Cádalécho, m.a horselitter or chaire
to carrie one in, a cowch or little bed, a
beere for dead men, the sides of a bed.

† Cadahálso, m.a scaffold whereon exe­
cution is done, a pulpit, a preaching
place.

* Cada hóra, each hower.

* Cadárço, course silke, rawe silke.

Cada ruyn, euery bad man.

* Cada séndos, euery one one, each one
one.

* Cada vez, euery time.

Cada vno, Euery one.

* Cadéna, f. a chaine.

* Cadenilla, f. a little chaine.

Cadéra, the hip, the huckle bone, a chaire
with a backe.

* Cadinillas, vide Colláres. 

* Cádis, the citie of Cales in Spaine.

* Cadózes, gudgeons.

* Caducéo, a signe of peace, Mercuries
mace.

Cadúco, m.weake.

Caér, Præs. yo Cáygo, 1. Præt. yo
Caý, to fall.

Caedizo, ruinous readie to fall.

* çafari granáda, the principall pome­
granate, a kinde of pomegranate.

* çafarihigo, a chiefe or principall fig.

† Cáfila, f. a companie of beastes togither,
a companie of base people togither.

* çáfio, rude, rusticall.

çáfio en lengua, rude in any tongue.

çafir piedra, the saphir stone.

* çáfra, f. a citie in Spaine.

† çága, f. the end.

* Cagádo, shitten.

Cagajón, or Cagádo, m.a turde.

* Cagadór, m.a shiter, a fish called a sea
hare.

* çagál, vide Zagál. 

* çágano, vide Zágano. 

Cagár, Præs. yo Cágo, 1. Præt. yo Ca­
gué, to shite.

* Cagárolo de már, a whelke fish, a per­
winkle.

* Cagarrútas, f. goates turdes, or sheepes
turdes or tirtles.

† çaguán, vide Açaguán, m.a porch, a
pond, a brooke where women wash.

* Cagué, vide Cagár. 

* çaguéra, f. the last, the hinder part.

† Caguéro, m.the last. Also a treelike
an alder tree.

* çaharéñas razónes, f. wilde, coy, dis­
dainfull reasons.

† çaharéño, m.wilde, coie, disdainfull.

† çaherimiénto, m.vpbraiding.

† çaherir, yo çahiéro, to vpbraide.

* çahiére, çahiéro, vide çaherir. 

† çahínas, sops made of bread, hony and
water.

* † Cahíz, m.a measure containing 12.
Hanégas, that is about eighteene bu­
shels of English measuring.

* çahondádo, m.diued to the bottome.

† çahondár, to diue to the bottome.

† çahónes, m.certaine hosen or bree­
ches.

† çahórda, vide çahúrda, f. a hogs stie.

* Cahúcho, vide Cartúcho. 

çahumério, m.a perfume.

* çahúrda, or pocilga, f. a hogs stie.

Caiádo, vide Cayádo, m.

Caida, or Caýda, f. a fall.

* Caíga, Caýgo, vide Caér. 

Cál, f. chalke, lime.

Cál por regár, vnsleaked lime.

Cála, Calilla, or Mecha, f. a supposito­
rie, a pessarie, a surgeons searching
toole, a searche.

Cála, or tiénta, f. a tent to put in a
wound.

† Calabáça, or Calabáza, f. a gourd, a
bottle of a gourd.

* Calabáça silvéstre, a wilde gourd.

* † Calabaçáda, f. a blow with the head
against the wall.

* Calabáza, or Calabáça, a gourd.

* Calabazada, vide Calabaçáda. 

† Calabóço de hiérro, m.a kinde of
fetters, a certaine manner of impriso­
ning, a clasping iron or grapple, a
hooke, a drag.

† Calabóço, m.a dungeon for to cast
downe condemned folke in, a crooked
knife.

* Calabóço péce, a kinde of fish.

* Calabózo, vide Calabóço. 

* Calabriada, f. a mixing of one sort of
wine with another.

* Caládo, m.penetrated, persed through.

Caladór, m.a searching toole.

Calafateár, to caulke ships.

* Calafáte, or Calefáte, a caulker of ships,
one that filleth the chinks with Okam,
&c.

* çalagárda, f. a deceit, a cosenage.

Calamár, m.a Cuttle fish, a Sleene or
blackfish. Also a standish, a pen and
inkehorne.

Calamár, m.a standish, a pen and ink­
horne.

Calámbre, m.stiffenesse of the sinewes,
the crampe.

Calaménta yérva, an herbe called wilde
Penniroyall, or Cats mint.

* Calamidád, f. miserie, calamitie.

Calamita piedra, f. the adamant stone.

Calamón páxaro, m.a kinde of birde
that in drinking maketh as though he
did bite the water.

* Calándra, f. a woodlarke, a bunting.

Calándria, a thrush.

Calár, to search, to pearse.

* Calatráva, f. the order of the knights of
Calatrava. Also the place where they
liue and make residence together in
Spaine.

* Calaváça, or Calabáça, a pumpion or
kinde of melon, a gourd.

* Calavéra, f. the head or skull of any
dead creature.

Calavérna, a skull.

* Calça, f. a hose.

* Cálças, hosen, breeches.

* medias Cálças, stockins, knee hosen.

Calçáda, f. a causey way.

Calçádo, m.hosed or shod. Also a horse
that is white footed about the pasterns.

Calçádo de guántes, m.gloued.

Calçádo de çapátos, m.shod.

Calçádo de alcórques, in pantostes.

Calçádo de bótas, m.booted.

* Calçadór, m.a shooing horne.

Calçádo de chinélas, he that weareth
slippers.

Calcañár, m.the heele.

* Calcáño, m.vide Calcañár.

Calcár, Præs. yo cálco. 1. Præt. yo cal­
qué, to tread vnder feet, to kick, to stuf,
to presse, to throng, to thrust, to stampe.

* Calçár, or Calzár, to put on hosen or
shooes, to fit, to agree, or square in pro­
portion, to trig a wheele.

Calçás, f. hosen.

* Calceádo, vide Calçádo. 

* Calceamiénto, m.a hosing or shooing,
a furnishing with hose or shooes.

Calcétas, f. linnen neather stockes.

Calcetéro, m.a hosier.

* Calcído, vide Calçádo. 

* Calcinár, to calcinate, to morter, to
lome, to lime, to glase earthen pots
within.

Calçónes, m.breeches, hosen, slops.

* Calçuélas, vnder-stockings, small stoc­
kings.

* Calculár, to calculate.

Caldéra, f. a kettle, a caudron, a brewers
lead or fat, a pot to seeth meate in.

* Calderáda, f. that which is sodden or
dressed in a caldron, a caudron full, as
much of any thing that a caudron will
hold.

Calderería, f. a brasiers shop, or the place
or street where brasiers worke.

Calderéro, m.a brasier, a tinker, a kettle
maker.

* Calderéta, f. a little kettle.

Calderílla, f. a possenet.

Calderón, or Caldéro, m.a great cal­
dron.

Caldéro, idem. 

Calderuéla, a bowet, buffet or kinde of
vessell made of copper much like a cal­





dron to carrie a great light in. It is
vsed in Spaine to take partridges, as in
England to got with a lowbell for o­
ther birds. Also a little cauldron or ket­
tle.

Cáldo, m.broth, porrage, a caudle.

* Cáldo de zórra, a manner of speech
saying, that is colde and yet skaldeth,
as if one should say, your pottage is cold
enough, yet it will burne your mouth.

* † çaléa, a furred mantell to wrap chil­
dren in.

† çalémas, f. curtesie, fained kindnes. Also
kind of fish.

* † çaléma péce, a kind of fish.

* Calénda, the kalends.

* noche dé la Calénda, the night of the
kalends. Also the eeue before a feast­
day, as Christmas day.

Calendário, m.a kalendar, a roll, a cata­
logue, a booke of accounts, an Alma­
nake.

Calentamiénto, m.warming, heating.

Calentadór, m.any thing that warmeth
or heateth.

Calentadór de cáma, a warming-pan.

* Calentadúra, f. a fomentation to com­
fort the bodie, a thing that maketh one
warme.

Calentár, yo caliénto, to warme, to heat, to skalde, to scorch, to parch, to
chafe, to incense, to inflame.

Calentúra, f. heat, warmth, a feauer, an
ague.

* Calenturiénto, m.sicke of an ague.

Calenturóso, m.idem. 

Caléra, f. a lime-kill.

Caléro, m.a lime-maker, a burner of
lime.

Caléta, f. a suppositorie, a little creeke in
the sea.

* Calibre, m.the diameter.

Calidád, f. a qualitie, sort, size or matter,
a condition, a state, a calling or profes­
sion.

Cálido, m.hot, warme in operation.

Caliénte, Caliénto, vide Calentár. 

Caliénte, warme, warming, hot, earnest,
violent.

* Calientúra, or Fiébre, vide Callen­
túra. 

Calificár, to qualifie, to allay or mitti­
gate.

Calílla, f. a creeke in the sea.

* Cáliz, m.a challice, a cup. Also the citie
Cáliz in Spaine.

* Calladaménte, quietly, secretly, with­
out speaking any word, couertly, with­
out noise, inwardly in the heart.

Calládo, m.keepe secret, silent, quiet,
husht, secret, that holdeth his peace and
is still. Also passiuely, that is not spoken
of, let passe without any mention.

* Calladór, m.a man of fewe wordes, a
close fellow, a still quiet fellow.

Callandíco, m.quiet, soft and faire, still,
secret.

Callár, to be silent, to hold one's peace, to
conceale, to be quiet or husht, to keepe
secret, to make no noise.

Cálle, f. a streete, a lane, a high way.

Calléja, f. a narrow streete.

* Calléja estrécha, a narrow lane, or an
alley.

* Callijeadéra, or Callejeadóra, a wo­
man goer much in the streetes.

* Callejuéla, f. a little lane, an alley.

* Callejón, m.a narrow lane, an alley.

* Callejeár, to beate the streetes, to goe
much vp and downe the streetes.

* Callejéra, vide Callejeadéra, a wo­
man walker of the streetes.

* Callecér, to waxe hard skinned.

* Callénte, vide Caliénte. 

* Callentúra, Calientúra, or Calentu­
ra, f. an ague.

Cállo, m.brawne, the thicke skinne of the
hand, a corne growing on mens handes
or feete, hard skin. Also a tripe of an
oxe or cowe.

Callóso, m.thicke skinned, harde fleshed,
brawne, knobbie with labour, full of
cornes.

Cálma, or Bonánça, a calme, or faire
weather, a peaceable time.

* Calmár, to calme, to appease, to quiet, to
asswage.

* Calofrío, m.a fit or sicknes when it is
vpon a man, it causeth heate and cold
togither.

* Calón, any thing that penetrateth or
descendeth to the bottom.

* † çalóna, a measure being halfe an
Arróba.

Calongía, f. a canonship.

* Calongías magistráles, y doctoráles 
certaine degrees of canonship as ma­
stership and doctorship.

Calór, m.heate, warmth.

* Caloróso, m.hot, earnest, warme.

Calóstre, m.the first milke that commeth
in the teates after a birth, in woman or
beast, called beestings.

* Cálthra, f. a marigold. Also a kinde of
violet that commeth in Autumne.

Cálva, baldnes.

* Calvário, the head or skul of a dead bo­
die. Also the mount Caluarie.

Calvéz, f. baldnes.

Calúmnia, a cauill, a false or craftie ac­
cusation, a forged crime, a malicious
surmise or detraction to slander or
trouble one.

Calumniadór, m.a cauiller, a malicious
detractor, or deceitfull accuser.

Calumniár, to cauill, to accuse, to laie to
ones charge falsely and malitiously.

Caluña, vide Calúmnia, f.

* Calunádo, m.slandred, wrongfully
accused, falsely charged.

Caluñár, vide Calumniár. 

Cálvo, m.bald.

Calúra, f. heate.

Caluróso, m.heate, hot weather.

* Calzádo, vide Calçádo, m.

* Calzár, vide Calçár. 

* Cálzas, vide Cálças. 

* Calzeádo, vide Calceádo. 

* Calzétas, vide Calcétas. 

* Calzetéro, vide Calcetéro. 

* Calzinár, vide Calcinár. 

* Calzónes, vide Calçónes. 

* Calzuélas, vide Calçuélas. 

Cáma, f. a bed, a couch, a pallet, a bedsted.
Also a cockle fish, a close stoole.

Cáma de arádo, a furrow.

* Camaféos, m.kinde of stone to be gra­
uen which men ordinarily make broo­
ches to set in their hats and such like.

* Camalláda, f. a companie of cam­
mels.

Cámara, f. a chamber, a close stoole, a
purgation, the laske, the ordure.

* Cámara, a citie in Candie.

Cámara, the bloudie flixe, often goings
to stoole. Also chambers.

* Cámaras de Arcabúz, or Artille­
ria, the barrell of a harquebusse or
piece, or ordinance where they put in
the powder.

* Camaráda, f. a comerade or cabbin
mate souldier. Also a placing of diuers
pieces of ordinance in warre togither.
Also placing of diuers men togither.

* Tirár por Camerádas, to shoote one
volley of shot after another.

* Camarádo, vide Camaráda, a come­
rade, a bedfellow, a chamberfellowe, a
camerado souliour.

Camarán de Lisbóa, m.a small Lop­
ster.

Camerán de villafránca, m.a kinde of
fish called a shrimp.

† Camaranchón, m.a garret, a loft or
roome in the top of a house, a roome or
chamber with a crosse beame in it, a
rude chamber vndrest.

Camaréro, m.a chamberlaine, a groome
of a chamber.

* Cameréra, f. a chamber maide, a wai­
ting woman.

* Camaréta, f. a little chamber, studie or
closet.

* Camarílla, idem. 

* çamarílla, vide Zamarílla, f. an herbe
called Shepheards purse.

Camarón, a shrimpe, a crauish, a kinde
of small sea crab, a lopster. Also a fish
somewhat like to a grashopper, a prane.





* Camaronéra, f. a crauish net.

Camaróte, m.a cabbin in a ship or else­
where.

† çamárra, f. a leather pelt, a short cloke
furred with lambes-kins vsed in Ger­
manie.

* † çamárro, m.a rug, a freeze gowne, a
seamans gowne, a shepherds frocke or
mantle. Also a kinde of musicall in­
strument with strings.

* çamarrón, vide çamarro, m.

* Cambiádo, m.changed, altered, giuen
or taken in exchange.

Cambiadór, m.a changer, one that ta­
keth vp money by exchange.

Cambiár, to change, to exchange one for
another, to barter, to trucke.

Cambio, m.a change, an exchange, a
steede or place. Also a banker or money
changer.

* çambra, vide Zámbra, f. 

* Cámbra, the name of a towne in
Fraunce. Also a kinde of linnen called
Cambricke or lawne.

* Cambrón, m.a hempe or flaxe pit, a
place in water to rot or steepe hempe
in. Also a kinde of thorne shrub called
round, or harts thorne.

Cambronéra máta, f. brambles, or the
shrub called harts thorne.

* † Cambux, a maske or couering before
the face.

Camédrios, germander or English
treacle.

* Cameleón, m.a Camelion. Also an
herbe growing by the sea side vpon
rocks called Chamelion.

* Camelléro, vide Cameléro, m.

* Caméllo, vide Camélo, m.

Cameléro, m.he that keepeth camels.

Caméleria, or Camélleria, f. the office
of a camell keeper.

Camélo, m.a camell.

* Camélo par dál, a grey cammell.

* Camelóte, m.chamlet, a kinde of wilde
sheepe in India shaped like a camell.

* Cámera, vide Cámara. 

* Camerón, vide Camarón. 

Camiça, or Camisa, f. a shirt, a smocke,
a priestes surplesse, a porters frocke, a
long white garment.

Camiçáda, or Camisáda, a camisado,
an assault, a sudden attempt, inuasion,
or surprise vpon the enemie in time of
warre, so called because it is performed
with shirts ouer the soldiers armors.

* Camicéta, vide Camiséta, f. a little
shirt or smocke.

Caminadór, m.vide Caminánte.

* Caminánte, a traueller, a wayfaring
man, a wanderer.

Caminár, to goe a iourney, to walke, to
goe, to march, to wander, to trauell.

* Caminillo, m.a little narrow lane,
way, path, alley or causey.

Camino, m.a way, the streete, a path, a
high way, a tracke, a causey.

* Camino reál, the kings high way, a
great high way.

* Camíno pisoneádo, a causey, a paued
street or way, a common beaten street.

Camíno de sant yágo en el ciélo, a 
place in the heauens distinguished by
Astronomers by the name of Via la­
ctea, the milke white way.

* Camisa, vide Camiça. 

* Camisa de lána, a woollen shirt, a cas­
socke, a wastcoate.

* Camisáda, vide Camiçáda. 

* Camiséta, or Camiçéta, a little shirt.

* Camisilla, Camiçilla, Camizilla, idem. 

* Camisón, a porters frocke, a body coate,
or great shirt.

* Camissa, vide Camísa. 

* Camiza, vide Camíça. 

Camodár, to sell, to set to sale. Also to
change, to exchange.

* çamóra, a citie in olde Castile in
Spaine.

* en vna hóra, no se gána çamóra, çamora was not woon in an hower, a
prouerbe implying that euery thing
must haue a time: not vnlike our Eng­
lish prouerbe, Rome was not built in
one day.

* çamoráno, a man of çamóra.

* çamotáno, vide çamoráno. 

* Campál, belonging to a champaine
countrie, as Batálla campál, a cham­
paine warre. 

Campána, f. a bell.

* Campána de quéda, the bell rung at
nine of the clocke at night, to warne
folke to leaue to goe in the streetes.

* Campanílla, f. a little bell. Also the
weesill or little tongue of the throate.
Also a herbe called bindweede, or rope­
weede, or withie winde, or hedge bels: it
is like Iuie.

* Campáña, f. a field or a champaine
countrie.

* Campáña rása, a rased plaine, an open
fielde without any hedge, ditch or
other encombrance, a bare peece or
ground.

* piéças de Campáña, fielde peeces of
ordinance.

Campanário, f. a steeple, a tower of bels,
a belfrie. Also iangling or ringing of
bels.

Campanéro, m.a bell ringer, a sexten of
a church, a bell founder.

* Campañeár, to ring a bell.

* Campaño, m.pertaining to Campania
a prouince in Italy.

Campeár, to pitch a field. Also to destroy
or waste a countrey with an armie.

* Campeár vn vandéro, to flourish an
ensigne.

* Campéche, a kinde of wood growing in
India verie medicinable.

Campesíno, of or pertaining to the field.

Campéro, m.he that keepeth the field.

Campéstre, m.rude, rusticall, belonging
to the field, wild, vnciuill.

Campíña, f. a higher champian ground
then the rest.

* Campión, m.a champion.

Cámpo, m.a field, a camp, an armie, an
host of men, a field in armorie. Also an
escape.

* çampóña, f. a bagpipe, an oten-pipe.
Also a bell hanged about sheepe or
gotes, a lowbell.

* çampoñár, to sound or play vpon any
kind of reed or pipe.

çampuzár, to be drowned.

* Camúça, f. kids leather.

Camuéça, or Camuéza, f. a pippin.

* Camuéço, m.the pippin tree.

* Camuéso, idem. 

* Camuéza, vide Camuéça. 

* Camuézo, vide Camuéço. 

Cán, a dog in generall. An instrument to
pull out teeth, a snap-hance, the name of
a fish.

Can sóbre que cargán vigas, the post in
a house which Carpenters call the Sum­
mer.

* Cána, as Bárva cána, a hoare white
beard. Also a Barricado or fortificati­
on to defend the enemie.

* Cana, vide Cáña, the stalke of a pipe, a
cane, a reed, a pipe, a fishing or angling
rod, a barrel, a rundlet, a mans throte. al­
so a leaden pipe or gullet to carie water.

* Canabálla, f. a kinde of boates in olde
time made of Osyers and reeds couered
with leather, & pitched with pitch and
Rosin.

* Cañahója, f. or Cegúta, an herbe cal­
led Hemlocke.

† çanahórias, f. caret-roots.

† Canál, f. a channell, a gutter, a pipe car­
rying water to a conduit, a water­
course.

* Canál de tejádo, a gutter made of
tiles.

Canaládo, m.chamfured, that is, wrought
hollow, or indented as a reede or pipe.

* Canálla, f. the base people, raskalitie, the
skum of the earth, raskall people onely
fit for dogs company. Also a company
of vnprofitable women gathered togi­
ther.

* Canária, f. one of the Ilands of Cana­
ria.

* Canário, m.a man of the Ilands. Also





a Canarie bird.

Cánas, f. hoarie haires.

Canásta, f. a great maund or basket, a
dosser, a pannier.

Canastilla, f. a little hand-basket.

* Canastillo, a little basket.

* Canástio, or Cañásto, a basket or dos­
ser.

* Canaverál, vide Cañaverál, a place
where canes grow.

* Cánbio, vide Cámbio. 

† çánca de piérna, f. a small leg, a spindle
shanke.

† çancadílla, f. a hopping or tripping.

çancadíllas armár, to trip.

† çancajóso, m.croockt legged, one that
hath croocked legs, stump footed.

* Cançár, vide Cansár. 

çancarrón, m.a dead horse leg, the bone
of the leg.

* Cancél, or Canzél, m.a peece of wain­
scote to set before a chimney in summer
time, or a portall of wainscote to barre
the looking into a roome when the other
doore standeth open.

* Cancellaria, f. the description of pub­
lique orders and lawes in tables.

* Cancellár, or Cancelár, to cancell, to
abolish, to frustrate, to disanull.

* Cancellário, m.a chauncellor.

Cánçer, m.a sea crab or crab fish. Also
one of the 12. signes, called by that name
Cancer. also a canker that eateth, a dis­
ease in the mouth or other parts.

Cançión, f. a song, a singing, a sonnet,
a canzonet, a ballet, a dittie, a lay, a
rundelay, a virelay.

Cancionéro, m.a song-booke, a dittie-
booke.

† çáncos, stilts, such as they vse to goe
with in fens, startops. Also woodden
pattens or chappines. Also crouches.

† çancúdos, gnats with long legs.

Candádo, m.a hanging-locke, a pad­
locke, such as men hang vpon trappe­
doores. Also a bolt or barre of a doore.
Also a button, a buckle, a tacke or hooks
and eies of siluer, &c. vsed of women in
times past.

* Candádos de los ójos, the eie lids.

Candaléro de tinieblas, vide Cande­
léro de tinieblas, a great candlesticke
to set on many candles to giue great
light.

* Candalíza, f. a great corde wherewith
they pull vp or hoise vp saile.

Candéda, the flower of chestnuts.

Candéla, f. a candle, a light.

Candeléro, m.a chandler. Also a can­
dlesticke.

* Candeléro de tinieblas, a candle­
branch that hath many candlestickes
in it.

* Candelica, f. a little candle.

* Cándia, f. Candia or Creete.

* Candiál, of Candia, or red wheate.

Candiál trigo, faire red wheate.

* Cándido, m.white, pure, sincere,
cleere friendly.

† Candil, m.a lampe, a candle.

* Candiléro, a chandeler. Also a can­
dlesticke.

Candiléjos de Judíos, newe lampes of
the Iewes.

Candióta, f. a vessell of Creete, any kind
of barrell or firken, a rundlet, a little
tub, a tubbe of any kinde, a brewers or
vintners fatte, a trough or washing
boule. Also a kinde of measure of li­
quid things.

* Canecíllo, vide Canezíllo. 

Canéla, f. Cynamon.

* Canelón, m.a Cynamon tree, or comfits
made of sugar and Cynamon.

Canéz, f. baldnes.

* Canezíllo, m.a bragget or corbell in
building placed in a wall to beare vp
the summer or principall of a house, it
is a iuttie of stone or timber on the
outside of the wall to support the maine
poast of the building.

* † Cánfora, f. Camphire.

Cangilón, an earthen vessell to carrie
water.

* çángano, vide Zángano. 

* çánges, vide Zánges. 

* çángo, vide Zángano. 

* Cangréja, f. a kinde of crab fish called
a Fryll.

Cangréjo, a crab or creuish. Also a
dragging hooke. Also the crampe, a
foolish fellow, a noddie, a gull. Also a
disease or crampe in a horse.

* Cangrejóla, vide Cangréja, a little
creuish, a prawne, a shrimpe.

* † çanjádo, m.compassed about with
hollow bankes.

* † çánja, f. vide Barránco. 

* Caniculáres, m.the dogge daies.

Canílla de bráço, the bone of the arme,

* Canílla de piérna, the shanke.

* Canílla en páño, a quill of yarne, wo­
uen loose in the cloath.

* Canílla de cúba, or Tinája, the fau­
cet wherein they put the spigot into a
barrell or other vessell.

* Canilléras, armour for the legs. Also
the hole of a faucet or spigot, out of
which the drinke runneth.

* Caníncro, sabúco, or sáuco, elderne.

* Caníno, m.dogged, currish, of a dogge,
the weede called houndgrasse prouoking
vomite: a worme breeding in a horse.
Also a little dogge.

† Cáña, a quill, a pen, a reede.

Cáña fistola, Cassia fistula, an apotheca­
ries drugge.

† Cañáda, or Cañádo, a cragge or cliffe,
a rocke, a caue: a way to driue sheepe,
a sheepe or goates walke.

Cañahéja, or Cañahéxa, a clouen cane,
or reede. Also a kinde of mantle that
shephards weare. Also a reede or sedge
or bent growing by the water side. Al­
so a kinde of shrub. Also an herbe like
big fennell, calle Sagapene or fen­
nell giant. Also ferula or hemlocke.

Cañaróya, pellitory of the wall.

Cañál de pescadór, an angling rod, or
fishing pole.

Cáña de pescár, a rodde or cane to fish
withall.

* Cáña dúlce, sweete cane.

* Cáñas, as juégo de cáñas, a plate
vsed in Spaine on horsebacke.

* Cañavéra, the true reede, or Christes
reede.

Cañaverál, m.a plot of ground bearing
canes or reedes.

Cáñama, subsidie men.

* Cañaméra, f. marsh Mallowes.

* Cañamázo, course hempen canuas. Al­
so hempen hurdes, or sackcloth.

Cáñamo, hempe to make a hempen hal­
ter or a kinde of linnen called can­
uas.

Cañamón, m.hempe seede.

Cañilla de bráço, vide Canílla de
Bráço. 

Cañílla de pierna, vide Canílla de 
piérna. 

Cañílla de cúba, or Tinája, vide Ca­
nílla de cúba, or Tinája. 

* Cañilléro, m.a bishops or cardinals
rochet. Also a cane or bobbin to winde
silke vpon. Also the wheele of a mill
which causeth the grinding stone to
turne or goe: the hole where the tap or
cocke is put in to drawe drinke.

* Cañizo, a bed to lie on made of reede.

† Cáño, a sinke to a priuie, a kennell.

* Cáño de água, a conduit or pipe of
water, a water pipe of lead vnder the
ground, a dam of a mill, a spout.

Cañón, m.the great bones in the armes
or legs, a quill, the barrell of any gunne,
the cannions of breeches. Also a cannon
or great peece of ordinance.

* Cañón de batír, a cannon to batter
withall, a peece of ordinance.

* Cañón de cruxía, the cannon of the
Cruxia in a gallie.

* Cañón pedréro, a peece of ordinance
to shoote stones with.

* Cañonáda, f. the shot of a Cannon or
great peece of ordinance.

* Cañonázo, m.idem. 

* Cañoneár, to batter with cannon or





great ordinance.

* Cañonéra, f. the place of the cannons, a
spike hole, a loope hole to shoote out at.
Also the place where the cannon is
placed vpon a bulwarke.

* Cañonéro, m.a cannonier, a gunner or
one that shooteth in great ordinance.

Cañutillas or Cañutillos, the space be­
tweene knots in a cane.

* oro Cañutillo, m.embrodering gold.

† Cañuto, m.a reede to make a pipe, the
ioints of a cane or reede.

Cáno, m.hoare headed.

Canóa, f. an Indian boate hewed out of a
whole tree like a trough, a riuer boate
made all of one peece, a canowe.

Cánon, m.a rule, a canon.

* Canón pedréro, vide Cañón pe­
dréro. 

Canonicamente, according to rule, or
according to an ordinarie course.

Canónigo, m.a prebend of a cathedrall
church.

Canonista, m.a canonist, a student of
the canon law.

Canonización, f. canonizing of a saint.

Canonizádo, m.canonized.

Canonizár, to canonize.

* Canpanário, m.vide Campanário. 

† çanqueadór, m.stalking fellow.

† çanqueamiénto, m.stalking.

† çanqueár, to goe stalking, to goe on
stilts, to halt or goe lame.

Cansádo, m.wearie, tired, faint, weake,
feeble.

Cansancio, m.wearinesse, faintnesse, ti­
ring.

Cansar, to tire, to wearie, to faint, to
ouerlabour.

* Cantádo, m.sung.

* Cantadór, m.a singer.

* Cantánte, a singer. Vide Cantór.

Cantár, to sing, to chaunt, to chirpe as a
bird, to crowe as a cocke.

* Cántara or Cántharo, a tankard or
iug that holdeth much, a pitcher.

* Cantaréro, m.a tankardmaker, a iug­
maker.

Cantéra, f. a quarrie of stones digged for
building.

* Cantería, a quarrie of stones, a masons
trade.

Cantéro, m.he that diggeth stones. Also
he that heweth stones. Also the corner
of any thing.

Cantéro de escóda, m.a free mason.

* Cantéro, a stud or a naile, or a bosse
with a great head. Also a blocke.

* Canterúdo, m.with great large cor­
ners.

* Canthéno, a certaine fish.

Cantidad, f. quantitie.

* Cantina, f. a celler.

Cánto, m.a song, singing, a sonnet, the tre­
ble string of an instrument, a hymne, a
ballade.

Cánto, or Ládo, a shore, a banke or side
of any thing as of a bedsted.

Cánto de rópa, a purfle, a welt, a lace, a
border or garde about a long garment.
Also a hem or skirt of a garment.

Cánto or piédra, a rock, a cliffe or shelfe
in the sea. Also a stone.

Canto, the chirping of birds, the crowing
of a cocke. Also depth, thicknes.

Cánto accordádo, a song well sung to­
gither.

Cantón, m.a corner, a nooke, a canton, an
angle, the corner of a streete.

Cantonáda dár, to giue the slip at the
corner of a streete, to cosen, to deceiue,
to beguile, to conie-catch. Also to
canton.

Cantonéra púta, f. a common strumpet.

* Cantonéras del libro, the fower cor­
ners of a booke.

Cantór, m.a singer, a chanter.

* Cantór tiple, a singer of the treble or
small.

* Cantuçár, vide Cantuzár. 

Cantuésse, or Cantuésso, a kinde of
herbe or flower called cottonweede or
stechados, a certaine electuarie.

† Cantuzár, to deceiue, to faile, to misse,
to beguile, to cracke his credit.

Canúto, the cane or stalke betweene two
knots.

† Canzél, a portall, a porch, a gallerie or
walking place vnderpropped with pil­
lers.

* Cánzer, vide Cáncer, m.

* Cápa, a cope for a priest, a Spanish
cloake.

* Cápa de camíno, a wayfaring cloake.

Cápa de soldádo, a soldiers cassocke.

* Cápa despedaçáda, a cloake all in
peeces.

* Cápa, as Gente de Cápa priéta, gen­
tlemen better then the meane, which
weare blacke cloakes.

* Cápa de água, a fishermans cloake or
gaberdine with a hood behinde in the
necke.

* çapa, vide Zápa. 

Capecéte, or Yélmo, m.a caske, a head­
peece, a helmet.

* Capácho áve, a birde that singeth in
the night.

Capácho de molíno, m.the hopper of
the mill, the fraile wherein they put
oliues to be pressed.

Copácho, or Esportón, a great basket,
maund, or flasket. Also a trunke or
hamper. Also a fishermans great bas­
ket wherein hee keepeth fish aliue, a
wilchin.

Capácho, a fraile wherein they put figs,
resins, and such like.

* Capacidád, f. capacitie, largenesse,
amplenesse, ablenesse to receiue and
containe.

* Capadélla, f. penny woort.

Capádo, or Castráto, gelded, splaied, an
eunuch, a gelded man.

* Capadór, m.a gelder.

Capadúra, f. a gelding of any creature.

* † Caparaçón, a coparison for a horse.

Capár, to geld, to splay any creature, to 
cut off the priuie members.

Caparrósa, f. vitreoll or copperas.

* Caparúça, f. a capouch of a frier.

* Capás, vide Capáz. 

* çapátas, f. vide çapátos. 

* Capatáz, m.an ouersier or a bailie of a
mans farmes or lands. Also a clowne, a
countrieman, a swaine, a hinde, a bor­
rell, a certaine instrument vsed of those
that melt siluer or gold.

* çapateadór, m.one that daunceth and
claps his hands on his shooes.

çapateria, f. the shoomakers craft or
where they sell shooes.

çapatéro, m.a shoomaker.

* çapatillo, m.a childes shoo, a small shoo,
a button on a paire of foiles.

çapáto, m.a shoo.

çapáto sobre pilár, a stay to lay a som­
mer on in building.

* médios çapátos, a kinde of pattens
with soles onely, and tied ouer the foote
with a latchet of leather.

* Capáz, or Capás, capable, ample,
large, able to receiue or containe.

Capeár, to take away the cloake, to waiue
the cloake, to shake the cloake at any 
thing.

Capellán, m.a chaplaine, a priest.

* Capellania, f. a chaplaines place or
office.

* Capellína, f. a little chappell. Also a
locke of haire. Also a little hat.  Also a
kinde of armour in old time vsed.

* Capélo, m.a bonegrace or broad brim­
med hat, or a Cardinals hat.

Capélo de cardinál, a Cardinals hat.

* Caperúça, vide Caperúza, f. a cap
behinde the necke to pull ouer the head,
a poore sillie cloake or such gaberdine, a
cappouch.

* Caperúza, vide Caperuça. 

* çaphíro, vide Zaphíro, m.the Saphire
stone.

Capilla, f. a chappell, the chauncell of a
church, the cape of a cloake.

* Capílla de rópa, a hood or cowle.

Capelléjo de múger, m.a cawle or coife
of a woman.





Capirotáda, f. a cheesecake or such other
meate made of goates milke.

Capiróte, m.a haukes hood, a hood such
as mourners vse to weare on their
heads.

* Capiróte de lúto, m.a mourners hood.

* Capiróte de rópa, a kinde of miniuer
hood that doctors are woont to weare
in signe of honor.

Capiscól, m.a chanter in the quire.

Capitán, m.a captaine, a chieftaine, a
leader, a chiefe, a duke, a generall, a
ruler, a gouernor, a deputie, a prouost
marshall, a president.

* Capitán generál, a captaine generall.

* Capitán de la manáda, the chiefe lea­
der of the flocke.

* Capitána náo, f. the admirall ship of a
fleete of ships.

Capitaneár, to rule and gouerne as a
captaine.

Capitania, f. a captaineship, a conduct, a
charge, a leading, a guide.

Capitél, m.a little heade, the heade of a
stillitorie, or the head of a pillar, pina­
cle, or such like.

Capitél de colúna, m.the head of anie
pillar.

* Capitólio, m.the capitoll, a place in
Rome.

* Capitulación, f. a capitulation, condi­
tion, or couenant, an ordering, dige­
sting, or bringing in order, an account
or reckoning rolle.

* Capituládo, m.capitulated, digested,
and brought in order, enrolled.

* Capitulár, to couenant, to capitulate,
to count, to condition, to digest
and bring in order, to reckon, to bring in
account, to enroll.

Capítulo, m.a chapter, a chapterhouse, a
meeting place for any societie to sit in
disputation or in councell, a conuocati­
on house.

* † çápo, m.a toade.

Capón, m.a capon, a kinde of shell fish.
Also one that is gelded, a fillip.

* Caponcíllo, m.a caponet.

Caponéra, f. a pen, cage, or coope for ca­
pons, or other poultrie.

* Caponzíllo, m.a caponet.

* Caporál, m.an officer of a band of men
called a corporall.

† Capóte, m.a gabardine, a frocke, an
Irish rugge, a shepherds cloake or cas­
socke.

* Capóte de Erbáje, m.a felt, frocke or
cloake to ride withall.

* Capóte de marinéros, a capouch, or
cassocke with a hoode to put ouer the
head, worne by marriners and fisher­
men.

* Capotíllo, m.a little cloke, gaberdine,
frocke, or cassocke, a short dutch
cloake.

* Capotín, m.idem. 

* Cápra, as gente de cápra priéta, vi­
de Cápa priéta, gentlemen.

* Caprióla, f. a caper or loftie tricke in
dauncing.

* Captivár, or Cautivár, to captiuate or
take prisoner.

* Captivério, m.imprisoning, holding
captiue, captiuitie.

* Captívo, or Catívo, or Cautívo, a 
captiue, prisoner, or bondman.

Capúlla de la séda, the ball that a silke
worme maketh.

Capúllo de miémbro viríl, the foreskin
or prepuce of a mans priuie member.

Capúllo de rósa, m.the buds of roses or
flowers, the blossomes.

çapuzár, to diue, to ducke, to drowne, to
plunge or ouerwhelme in the water, to
sinke in the water.

† Capúz, m.a hoode, a mourning hoode.

* çáque, vide Záque. 

çaquesamí, m.vide Zaquezamí. 

* † çaquicamí, or çaquicamés, seeled
worke about a house.

Cára, f. the face, visage, sight, or counte­
nance, looke, or cheere of a man.

Cára a cára, face to face.

* Cára añubláda, or frénte añubláda, 
a grim, sowre, frowning, lowring looke,
or countenance.

* Carabéla, a small ship called a caruell.

Cárabo, or Cáravo, a kinde of barke or
boate.

* Caráca, vide Carráca, a carricke.

† çaráças, f. crooked pins to choake one
with, any thing that is full of prickles.
Also poisonous things.

† Caracól, m.a snaile, a cockle fish, a
welke, or periwinkle, a tortoise. Also
a paire of winding staires. Also the
place where a rower sits to rowe in any
boate.

* Caracolzíllo, m.a yoong snaile. Also
an herbe called Saint Iohns woort.

* Caracuchilládo, m.slashed, or woun­
ded in the face.

* çaragóça, f. the chiefe citie in the king­
dome of Aragon. Also a citie in Ci­
cilia.

* Caragólo, m.the blacke snaile with
hornes and without shell.

† çaraguélles, gascoine hose.

* † çarahuéles, great gascoine or spa­
nish hose.

* Carájo, m.a mans yard.

Carámbano, m.a great flake of yce, a
hore frost, an ysicle.

* Caraménte, deerely, preciouslie.

Caramíllo, m.brabbles.

* Carámio, or Carámyo, vide Cara­
cól, a snaile.

* Caránças, vide Carláncas, nailes in 
dogs collers to pricke those that should
laie hold on them.

çaránda, f. a sieue to sift with, a winnow,
a searce, a vanne.

† çarandár, to sift meale, to winnowe, to 
purge, to fanne, to searce.

Carantóña, vide Carátula, f. a maske.

* çarapíto, a kinde of sea birde.

† çaratán, m.a canker. Also a fine bread
in Madri made of Caraton.

Carácter, a figure, a character.

Carátula, or Carantóña, f. a maske, a 
visard, a couert, a muffler.

* Caravéa, f. an herbe called Caroway.

Caravéla, f. a kinde of ship called a car­
nell.

Cáravo, vide Cárabo. 

Carbón, or Carvón, m.any kinde of coale

* Carbonáda, f. a Carbonado on the
coales.

* Carbonéro, or Carvonéro, m.a col­
lier.

* Carbonélo, idem. 

* Carbónco, or Carvónco, m.a preti­
ous stone called a carbuncle, vide also
Carboncól.

Carboncól, an infirmitie called a car­
buncle, a blaine, a pocke, a plague sore,
a bile, a botch, a swelling in any part of
the bodie. Also a little coale.

çárça, f. a brier, a shrub, a bramble, a
brake, a throne, a bush, a blacke-ber­
rie-bush.

çárça móra, a blacke-berrie.

çárça parílla, f. a rough-bindweed.

çárça pertúna, or Perrúna, f. dog-brier,
Eglantine or sweet-brier. Also the ca­
per-bush.

* Carcabón, m.a hollow way.

* çarçádo, m.catched or entangled a­
mong berries.

çarçál, a great brake or bramble bush, a
place full of briers.

† Carcajádo de risa, extreme laugh­
ter.

Carcajádas dár, to laugh extremely, to
burst foorth with laughing.

* Carcáje, m.a quiuer for arrowes.

* Carcajeár, to put arrowes in a qui­
uer.

* Carcañál, m.the heele.

çarça parílla, f. a roote vsed among the
Apothecaries.

çárças de vérgas, hurdles of rods, grates
of woood, harrowes, gridirons.

Cárcava de muérto, a toombe, a pit.

Carcavéra púta, f. a strumpet vsing





churchyards.

Cárcavo del viéntre, the panch, the bot­
tome of the bellie.

Carcáx, a quiuer for arrowes.

* Carcáx de árco, or Góldre, a bowe­
case.

çarceár, to trauerse the ground.

Cárcel, f. a prison.

Carceláge, m.the fees of the prison.

Carcelléro, m.a Iailer or keeper of a
prison.

* Carcés, m.one of the sailes of a ship.

* çarçillo, or Fiseréta de la vid, the ten­
drill or small string that windeth a­
bout the poles or props of a vine.

çarcillo, m.an earing, a ring.

* Carcoléjo, m.the shell or house of a 
snaile.

Carcóma de madéra, a worme that
breedeth in old timber.

* Carcomér, to eate or gnawe as wormes
do old rotten wood.

* çarço, a hurdle.

Carcomido, m.worme-eaten.

* Cardadéras, f. cards or teazels to carde
wooll with.

Cardadór, m.a carder or winder of
wooll.

* Cardádo, m.carded, picked, teazed,
touzed, plucke, haled.

Cardadúra, f. carding, teazing, picking
wooll, flaxe, hempe or clothes.

Cardár, to teaze, to card, to picke clothes,
wooll, flaxe, or hempe. Also to hale, to
touze, to plucke, to tug, to ruffle, to pull
by the haires, to disheuell, to teare ones
haires, to rough cloth as shearmen doe.

Cardas, f. cardes to carde with, working
cardes.

* Cárdena cósa, f. any thing blacke and
blew, of a leaden and dead colour.

Cardenál, m.a Cardinall or chiefe man.

Cardenál de gólpe, m.the blew or black
wales of a blow or stripe.

Cardenál de ójo, the blacknes or blew­
nes vnder the eies, by a stroake or such
like.

Cardenaládgo, m.a Cardinalship.

Cardéncha, or Cárdo penteadór, a
card-teazell.

Cardenillo quese háze de cóbre, the
rust of copper.

Cardenillo, verde ráme, the rust of
brasse, Verdigrease or greene cop­
peras.

Cardenillo, a colour somewhat blacke.

Cárdeno, m.blacke and blew colour
much like old brasse. the black & blew
marke of any hurt, stripe or bruise.

* Cárdeno lirio, a Floure-de-lice, or
Floure-de-luce.

* Cardillo, m.a yoong thistle.

* Cardinál, vide Cardenál. 

Cárdo, m.a thistle, a teazel, an artichoke.
Also the huske of a chest-nut.

Cárdo corredór, m.the weede or herbs
Sea-holme, Sea-holly, or Sea-huluer.

* Cárdo penteadór, m.Teazell.

* Cárdo pinto, the great whitish thistle
that is full of white spots.

Cárdo-húso, wilde bastard Saffron, the
holy thistle called Carduus benedictus.

* Cárdo silvéstre, wilde thistle, a thorne.

* Carduçár, to carde wooll.

* Cardúme, m.a shole of fish, or a compa­
nie of fish togither.

Cardusar, vide Carduçár, to carde.

* Careádo, m.made or brought face to
face. Also carried, fetcht, brought.

* Careár, to bring face to face.

Carecér, or Carescér, to lacke, to want,
to aile, to faile, to misse, to erre, to cease,
to leaue off, to be defectiue, to defalke,
to faile, to make lesse.

* Caréna, f. the keele or bottome of a
ship.

* dar Caréna, f. to renew, to rig, to trim a
ship, by turning vp the keele or bottome
of her.

* Caréra, vide Carréra. 

Carescér, vide Carecér. 

Carestia, or Caréza, f. dearth, penurie,
want, scarcitie of things.

Caréza, idem. 

* Cárga, a charge, a burthen, a weight, a
fraight, a loade, a lading, a bundle, a
sheafe, a fardle, a trusse, either for man
or beast.

Cárga dár al enimígo, to charge the
enimie.

* Cárga de léña, a burthen of wood.

* Cargadaménte, heauily, dully, charge­
ably.

* Cargadéra, f. a coard in a ship called a
Staie. Also a thing to be loaden.

* Cargadór, m.a charger, a loader, a
fraighter, an imposer of burdens, ta­
xes, and payments vpon the people.

Cargádo, m.charged, burdened, fraigh­
ted, loaded, laden, taxed.

* Cargágo, vide Cargádo. 

Cargár, Præs. yo Cárgo, 1. Præt. yo
Cargué, to charge, to burthen, to
fraight, to loade, to lade, to impose taxes
and payments vpon the people, to thrust
an office of charge vpon a man.

* çargatóna, vide Zargatóna. 

Cárgo, a charge in office. Also a burden, a
weight.

Cárgo, or Carréta de léña, a burthen or
loade of woode.

* en cárgo sér, to be beholding to one.

* Cargue, vide Cargár. 

* Caria cuchilládo, m.wounded or sla­
shed ouer the face.

* Caribe, m.an Jndian, which eateth
mans flesh.

Carícia, f. a cherishing, a cockering, or
making much of, a louing entertain­
ment, flattering, fawning, blandish­
ment, enticement, allurement, quaint­
nes, squemishens, dalliance, wantonnes.

* Caricióso, m.full of flattering, cheri­
shing, entertainement, cockering, blan­
dishment.

Caridád, f. loue, charitie, pitie, almes, a­
greement, compassion. Also dearth,
deerenes, scarcitie, want of things.

* Caríl, vide Carríl. 

Carillo, or Carrillo, a cheeke or a little
face. Also a little cart or wheele bar­
row, but properly those little carts or
sleds that haue low woodden wheeles.
Also the truckle, pully or windle wher­
with a thing is easily drawen vp on
high.

Caritatívo, m.charitable, louing, pitifull,
mercifull, compassionate.

* Carláncas, f. nailes in dogs collers.

Carlina, f. a kinde of thistle. Also a ful­
lers teazell.

* Carmánia, f. a prouince so called.

Carmél, an herbe whereof if scorpions
eate they loose their senses.

* Carmelita, m.a frier Carmelite.

* Cármen, m.a verse. Also one of the
order of Carmelites.

* Carmenádo, m.carded, teazed, picked,
haled, touzed, pluckt, tugged, rent or
pulled in peeces.

Carmenadór, m.a carder or picker of
wooll.

Carmenadúra, f. picking, teazing, car­
ding of wooll.

Carmenár, to picke, to teaze, to carde
wooll, flaxe, hempe or clothes, to hale, to
teare, to touze, to ruffle.

Carmesí, m.crimsen, scarlet, stamell in
graine.

* Carmín, a kinde of red colour.

† Carnácha, or Garnácha, f. a kinde of
Moorish garment.

Carnál, carnall, fleshly.

Carnalidád, f. carnalitie, fleshlinesse, al­
liance in blood.

Carnavál, or Carnestoliéndas, shrof­
tide, shrouing time.

* Carnáza, f. deuouring of flesh, great
and much flesh eating.

Cárne, f. all manner of flesh.

* Cárne humeáda, f. smoked fish, flesh
dried in the smoke or chimney, such as
is our Martelmas beefe.

* Cárne sal-présa, salted or powdred
flesh when it beginneth to take salt.

* andár en púras Cárnes, to goe naked.

en Cárnes, naked, stripped to the skin.

Cárne de membrillo, preserued quinces. Also marmalade of quinces.





* Carnecería, or Carnicería, f. the
butcherie or shambles where flesh is
killed and sold, a slaughterhouse. Also
a place of torment.

* Carnecéro, or Carnicéro, m.a but­
cher, a slaughterman, a hangman.

* Carnecílla, vide Carnezílla. 

Carnéro, m.mutton, generally either of a
ram, weather, tup or ewe, but vsually
of a weather. Also a sepulchre. Also a
net bag to carrie flesh in.

* Carnéro castrádo, a weather or ewe
mutton.

* Carnéro para cásta, or Carnéro
moruéco, a ram for breede.

* Carnéro cojúdo, m.a ram. 

* Carnéro desmochádo, a ram with­
out hornes.

Carnestolléndas, Carnestoliéndas, vide Carnavál, shrouetide.

* Carnezería, vide Carnecería. 

* Carnezílla, f. yoong tender flesh, small
muttons.

Carnicéro, vide Carnecéro. 

Carnicól, m.a game with huckle bones
called Cock-all. Also dice play, the pa­
sterne bone.

Carnosidád, f. fleshinesse, carnositie.

Carnóso, or Carnúdo, fleshie, brawnie,
full of flesh.

Carnúdo, vide Carnóso. 

Cáro, m.deere, beloued, costly, pretious,
rare, gratefull, acceptable, liefe, scantie,
scarcitie, dearth, penurie.

* Caróna, f. a carob tree. Also stinking
carion. Also the complexion or consti­
tution of a bodie.

Cárpa, f. a carpe fish. Also a kinde of
worme or moth that consumeth clothes.

* çarpáda la áncora, the anchor being
waighed.

* çarpadúra de áncora, the waighing of
anchor.

* çarpár la ánchora, to waigh anchor.

çarpas, f. daggles of durt, spots of durt
that a long garment gathereth about
the skirts. Also troubles, griefes, vexa­
tions or garboiles that a man hath. Al­
so common whoores or bawdie houses.

* çárpe, a tree with a rugged black bark,
the wood whereof is easie to be climed,
called of some the yoke tree. Some think
it the plane tree, it is called also horne­
beame, hard beame, or yoke-elme tree.

* Carpéta, f. a carpet of a table.

Carpinteár, to play the carpenter.

Carpintería, f. the carpenters craft.

Carpintéro, m.a carpenter.

* Carpio, a carpe fish, a little towne in
olde Castile in Spaine.

* çarpóso, m.daggled with durte as
sheepes tailes or long garments drag­
ging on the ground.

Carraca, f. a great ship of Spaine called a
carract.

Carránças, vide Caránças, nailes in
dogs collers.

* Carrásca, f. a kinde of holme.

Carrascál, a groue of holmes.

Carrásco, a kinde of holme.

Carréra, f. a carreere, a course, a race for
horses to runne, a place where races are
runne, the tilt yard or place for tilting
or tourney.

Carréta, f. a cart, a waine, a wagon.

Carretáda, f. a cart loade, a waine loade,
a wagon loade.

* Carretería, f. luggage, carriage, lading.
Also cartership.

Carretéro, m.a carter, a wagoner, a
carman, a waineman.

Carretón, m.a little cart or wagon. Al­
so a childes standing stoole to learne to
go by.

* Carríça, vide Carríza. 

* Carriçál, vide Carrizál. 

* Carrícia, vide Carícia. 

* Carríço, vide Carrízo. 

Carril, m.a cartwheele. Also a trace,
slough, or rut that the wheele of a cart
maketh in foule way.

Carrilládo, m.swollen cheeked, a man
with great cheekes. Also diuers waies
made wth cartes.

* Carríllas yerva, f. an herbe.

Carríllo, vide Caríllo. Also the turning
iointes of the backe bone or chine.

Carríllo de róstro, vide cacillo, a
cheeke, a iawe.

Carríllo como rodója, a pully, or win­
dle of a well, ship, or garret to drawe
vp any thing on high.

* Carríza, f. sedge or reede.

Carrizál, or Cañízo, the place where
sedge or reede groweth.

Carrizo, m.sedge sheregrasse.

Cárro, m.a cart, a chariot, a waine, a
wagon, a tumbrell, a dungcart.

* Cárro de dámas, a coach.

* Cárro de flándes, a flemmish wa­
gon.

Cárro con ándas, a horselitter.

Carróça, f. a kind of coach.

* Cárrosmatos para las piéças, the 
blocke cariages whereon great ordi­
nance lie.

Carruáge, or Carruáje, m.cariage, bag­
gage, luggage, loading.

* Carruajál, m.a proper name of a kind­
dred or stocke in Spaine.

* Carrúaje, vide Carruáge. 

Carrúcha, f. carroch, a coach.

* çárso, vide çárzo, a hurdle.

Cárta, f. a letter, or character, an epistle
or a missiue letter, a leafe of a booke, a
carde, a mappe, a type, a playing carde.
Also a pasteboord, a schedule.

* Notár cártas, to indite letters.

Cartapácio, m.a matter penned downe,
a noting booke, a nothing paper, a daie
booke, or iournall: a memoriall, or booke
of slate stones.

* Cárta de espéra, a writ of recoue­
rie.

Cárta de págo, an acquittance.

* Cárta para certificár, a certificate.

* Cárta de mareár, a sea carde.

Cartabón de carpintéro, m.a carpen­
ters square, squire, or ruler.

* Cartagéna, f. a citie or towne in In­
dia.

Cártamo, m.bastarde saffron, or wilde
saffron.

* Cárta-salva-guárda, letters of safe
conduct.

* Cártas, as Notár cártas, to endite.

* Cartavón, vide Cartabón. 

* Cartecíllo, vide Cartezíllo. 

Cartél, m.a challenge, a cartell, a defi­
ance, a libell.

Cartél de desafío, a letter of challenge
or defiance.

* Cartezillo, or Carteçíllo, a little pa­
per, schedule or letter.

* Cartído, m.a little barrell or boxe to
keepe conserued things in.

Cartilla, m.an A.B.C. to teach chil­
dren.

* Cartúcho, m.a charge of powder to put
into a peece of ordenance or lesser
shot.

* Cartújo, idem. 

* Cartuxáno, a Carthusian, one of the
Carthusian order of friers.

* Cartúzo, vide Cartúcho. 

Caruáge, or Caruáje, vide Carruáge. 

Caruáje, idem. 

Carvón, vide Carbón, a coale.

Carvoncól, vide Carboncól, a car­
buncle.

Carvonéro, vide Carbonéro, m.a col­
lier.

* çarzagavíllo, vide Zarzagavíllo. 

* çarzahán, vide Zarzahán. 

* çarzír, vide Zarzír. 

çarzo de vergas, vide çárças de ver­
gas, a hurdle.

Cása, f. a house, a family, a name or blood,
a mannor or dwelling place.

* Cása de la monéda, a place or house
where a minte or place or coining is
kept.

* Cása de Méca, the place or temple
where Mahomet was buried.

* Casáca, f. a souldiers cassocke, a frocke, a
horse-mans coate.

Casadéra moça, f. a maide marriagea­
ble, of yeeres to take a husband.





Casádo, m.married, espoused, wedded, a
bridegroome, a married man, a hus­
band.

* Casamáta, f. a kinde of fortification
called in English a casamat or a slaugh­
ter-house, and is a place built low vn­
der the wall or bulwarke, not arriuing
to the height of the ditch: whereupon
the great ordinance being planted, it
skowreth the ditch, annoying the eni­
mie when he entreth into the ditch to
skale the wall.

Casamentéro, m.a maker of marriages. 
Also hee or she that is ioyned with the
bride or bride-groome to make him or
her readie, an ouer-looker of a marri­
age or wedding.

Casamiénto, m.a marriage, espousall or
wedding.

* Casamúro, m.a single wal without for­
tification.

Casár, to marrie, to allie, to ioyne house to
house, to espouse, to wed.

Casár, m.a place where a house stoode, a
village or countrey parish.

* Casaria, f. housing, a countrey farme.

Casárse, vide Casár. 

Cascatruégos, a truce-breaker, treache­
rous, disloyall, false, vntrue, vnfaith­
full, deceitfull, craftie, false of promise,
perfidous.

Cascabél, or Cascavél, m.hawkes bels,
a rattle or bell such as children play
withall.

Cascabellíllo, m.a little bell or rattle, a
little hawkes bell.

Cascajál, m.a grauell pit.

Cascajo, grauell and stone, course sande,
shingle or pebble stones.

* Cascajóso, grauelly, full of sand, san­
die.

Cascár, 1. Præt. yo Casqué, to shake, to
breake, to crush in peeces, to fall, to let
fall.

Cascara, f. a shell, a case, parings, a nut­
shell: the parings of fruite, a hide, a
skinne, the barke of a tree, a huske, a
cod.

* Cascavél, vide Cascabél. 

Cásco, m.a caske or burganet, the sherds
of an earthen pot, a tile shard.

Cásco de la Cabéça, the skull.

* Cásco, or Capecéte, a burganet, a skul,
a caske.

* Cásco, or Tiésto, a head, a pate, a
skonce, an earthen pot, sheard or galley
cup.  Also burnt tile or bricke: a peece of
a broken bone, a shard of a pot or tile.

* Caseria, vide Casaria, housing in the
countrey.

* Caséro, as muger Caséra, a married
man or woman pertaining to the house,
a woman that keepeth home.

Caséro, m.one that keepeth house much.
Also a soiourner in another mans
house.

* Caséro a capatáz, a clowne, a pesant,
a borrell, a countrey-man, a swaine, a
hinde, a bailiffe.

Cási, as though, almost, about, as it were,
vpon.

Cásia, f. the fruit Cassia.

* Casilla, f. a little house.

Casílla pagíza, a thatched house.

* Casína, f. idem. 

* Casique, m.a Prince among the Indi­
ans.

* Casita, f. a little house.

Cáso, m.chance, fortune, lucke, a case of
law, fate, destinie, lot, venture, hap, ac­
count, estimation, reckoning, a casualty,
the maner how a matter is.

Cáso que, albeit that, if so be that, put
case, admitting that.

* hazér Cáso, to make account, to esteeme,
to weigh, to recken, to value, to make a
matter of.

* Casoléta, the touch pan in a piece. Also
a little frying pan, or little pots or pans
where painters keepe their colours.

Cáspa, f. dandroffe or skurffe on the head
or eies.

Caspóso, m.full of dandroffe.

Casquéte, m.a head-peece, a helmet.

* Casquillo, m.a little head-peece.

* Casquillo de saéta, the head of an ar­
row.

Cassación, f. cancelling, disanulling, cros­
sing of an account or writing, cassee­
ring.

* Cassádo, casseered, crossed, defaced,
blotted out of a booke, put out of checke
role, cancelled, anulled, frustrated, or
made voide, discharged.

Cassadór, a casseer, he that cancelleth, a
factor, a purcer, one that keepeth mar­
chants accounts or monie.

Cassár, to strike out, to cancell, to blot, to
disanull, to crosse, to casseere out of a
booke, to put out of checke role, to dis­
charge, to frustrate, to make voide.

* Cassaún, m.a dog fish.

Cásta, f. a race, a linage, a breede, issue of
ones bodie, a progenie, a stocke, an of­
spring.

Castaménte, chastely, cleanly, honestly,
shamefastly, maidenly.

Castáña, f. a chestnut.

Castañál, m.a groue of chestnut trees.

* Castañár, idem. 

* Castáña color, a bay chestnut colour.

Castáño, m.a chestnut tree.

Castañuélas, f. the cracking of the fin­
gers, the snapping of the fingers.

* Castelláno, m.a Castilian, a Spaniard.
Also a captaine of a castell, a castell
keeper, a keeper or commaunder ouer a
castell or cittadell.

* Castidád, f. chastitie, temperancie, con­
tinencie, cleanlinesse of life, virginitie,
puritie.

* Castigádo, m.punished, chastised, cor­
rected.

Castigadór, m.a chastiser, a corrector.

Castigár, Præs. yo Castígo, 1. Præt. yo
Castigué, to correct, to punish, to cha­
stise, to reprooue.

Castigo, m.punishment, correction, cha­
stisement.

* Castigué, vide Castigár. 

Castiléjo, m.a rattle vsed by children.

* Castíl de próa, the forecastell of a ship.

* Castil de pópa, the poope, or hinder
decke of a ship.

* Castillas, little castels, or the picture
of castels in Spanish monie.

* Castilléte, m.a little castell.

Castillo, m.a castell, a fortresse, a rocke,
a blockhouse, a fort, a strong holde, a
cittadell.

Castíza, f. of a good race, hauing many
children, a stocke.

Cásto, chaste, honest, temperate, conti­
nent.

Castór, m.a brocke, a badger, a beuer, a
gray.

Castor & Pollux, vide Pollux. 

Castradéra, f. a cutting or gelding knife.

Castrádo, m.a gelded man, an eunuch.

Castradúra, f. gelding, cutting off the
priuities, spaying, libbing of cattell.

Castrár, to geld, to spay, to lib.

* Castráto, gelded, spaied, libbed.

Castrazón, m.time to geld, time of the
yeere to make honie.

* Castrénses biénes, goodes gotten in
the warre.

* Cástro, m.a hold, a fort, a sconce.

* Casuál, casuall, that which happeneth
by chaunce.

Casúlla, f. a cope for a priest.

* Cáta, or Míra, beholde, see, looke, lo
here, at hand, here, take heede.

* Cáta le aquí, behold him here, see, he is
here, here he is.

* Catadúra féa, f. of an ill semblance, of
an ill looke, ill fauoured, a bad counte­
nance.

* Catanátes, m.men armed at al points,
their face and all in the field or campe.

* Catár, to beholde, to looke, to see, to re­
spect.

Catarráña aue, a sheldrake.

Catarráña, is also taken for the herbe
Smallage.

Catarráta, vide Sarazinésca. 

Catarráta de ójos, f. the cataract in the
eie.

Catárro, m.a catarrhe, a rheume.





Catasól, a daisie flower.

* Catelína, the name of a citizen of
Rome. Also an ordinarie name in
Spaine, in English Catherine.

* Cátedra, any kinde of chaire.

* Catedrático, vide Cathedrático. 

* Catérva, f. a companie, a flocke, a crew,
a rout, a shole, a troupe, a herde, a com­
panie called by the Greekes Phalanx,
by the Romanes Legion, by the Swit­
zers and Italians Batallon, by the
Spaniards Esquadron, containing be­
tweene 6000. and 8000. soldiors in
squadron.

* Cathálago, m.a catalogue, a rolle.

* Cathedrático, a doctor of the chaire.

Catedrático, Catredático, a publike
reader in the vniuersitie.

* Cathólico, vide Católico. 

* çatíco, a shiue of bread.

* Catión, or Cautión, f. a caution, a
suretie, a pledge, a pawne, a baile, an
assurance, a shift or starting hole, an
obligation.

* Catiquéro, a clarke of the kitchin, a
cater.

Cativár, vide Captivár. 

Cativério, m.captiuitie, bondage.

Catividád, f. idem. 

Catívo, m.a captiue, a wretch, a bond­
man, a prisoner.

Católico, or Cathólico, catholike, vni­
uersall.

Catórze, foureteene.

Catórze vézes, foureteene time.

Catorzéno, m.the fourteenth.

Cátreda, vide Cátedra, a chaire.

Catredál, cathedrall.

Catredático, or Catedrático, or Ca­
thedrático, a graduate, a reader in
schooles in a chaire.

* Catapúlta, a kinde of instrument vsed
in olde time in warre, a warlike engine
to shoote darts, or long quarrels out at.
Also a sling.

Cáva, the ditch or trench of a forte, a pit,
a vault or place vnder the grounde, a
lurking or starting hole.

Cavadíza cósa, f. a hollow place.

Cavádo, m.digged, delued, mined, tren­
ched, vndermined.

Cavadór, m.a digger, ditcher, deluer,
pitmaker, a miner, a pyoner.

Cavadúra, f. a digging, a pit, a graue, a
making hollow, a miner.

* Cavál, vide Cavállo, a horse.

* Cavalcár, vide Cavalgár, to ride.

* Cavalgáda, f. a troope of horsemen.
Also a riding. Also a companie of
horse, the taking of a prize or bootie.

* Cavalgadór, m.a rider, a horseman.

Cavalgadúra, f. a riding. Also a hack­
ney.

Cavalgár, Præs. yo Caválgo, 1. Præt.
yo Cavalgué, to ride, to stride, to
straddle.

* Cavalgué, vide Cavalgár. 

* Caválla, f. a mackrell fish.

Cavallár, pertaining to a horse.

* Cavalláres, a boorde a ship.

Cavalléjo, m.a nagge, a poore silly leane
horse.

Cavallería, f. horsemen in warre, caual­
lerie, knighthood, chiualrie, horseman­
ship, gentilitie.

Cavalleríza, or Cavalleríça, f. the
horsemans warde, a princes quierie or
stable, where his horses of seruice are
kept and ridden, a stable.

Cavallerízo, or Cavalcáro, m.a rider
of horses, horsemanship, a horseman, a
horsebreaker, master of the horse.

Cavalléro, m.a knight, or gentelman ser­
uing on horsebacke.

Cavalléro de espuélas dorádas, a knight of the order.

* Cavalléro, m.a certaine fortification
being a mount or platforme of earth
built or raised on high either within or
without the wall to plant great ordi­
naunce vpon.

Cavalléte de tejáda, the ridge of a
house.

Cavallíllo, m.the ridge betweene fur­
rowes.

Cavallíllo entre éra y éra, the banke
betweene the quarters in a garden.

Cavállo, m.a horse in generall, a knight
in chesse plaie.

* Cavállo arocinádo, a iade, or poore
bare horse.

* Cavállo corredór, a steede or courser
of Naples, a post horse.

* Cavállo garañón, a stallion.

* Cavállo que derríba, a horse throw­
ing his rider.

Cavállo emparamentádo, a horse rea­
die sadled, with trappings and copa­
rison.

Cavállo castrádo, a gelding.

* Cavállo que sajúde o da del lómo, 
a trotting horse.

* Cavállo que tiene la bócca porfiá­
da, a hedstrong horse.

* Cavállo Remendádo, a fleabitten
horse.

Cavállo tropeçadór, a stumbling horse.

* Cavállo acezóso, a short winded
horse.

Cavállo de brída, a horse to run at tilt
or tourney.

* Cavállo pece, vide Caválla. 

* Caváña, f. a cabbin. Also a warehouse,
a store-house, a place couered ouer
where they builde or keepe little boates
or barges in, a shed or shelter. Also a
hole or den vnder the ground.

* Cavañuéla, a little cotage, a little cab­
bin, a little caue, hole or den.

Cavár, to dig, to delue, to make hollowe, to
mine, to vndermine, to trench.

Cavazón, m.digging, ditching, mining,
trenching.

Cavidál, vide Caudál, m.

* Cavíla, f. sea Syngreene or Aloes.

Caúcaso, m.a hill or a mountaine so cal­
led among the north Indians.

Caución, f. a caution, a watchword to
make one take heede.

Caudál, m.a mans stocke or principall, the
maine, the principall matter.

* Caudalóso, or Caudalózo, full of
stocke, the very maine or principall.

* Caudalózo rio, a maine principall
riuer.

Caudíllo, m.a captaine, a guide, a leader.

* Cáve, vide Cábe. 

* Cavéça, vide Cabéça. 

* Caveçáda, vide Cabeçáda. 

* Caveçón, vide Cabeçón. 

* Caveçúdo, vide Cabeçúdo. 

* Cavezuélo, vide Cabeçuélo. 

* Cavelládo, vide Cabelládo. 

Cavéllos, vide Cábellos. 

* Cavellúdo, vide Cabellúdo. 

Cavér, vide Cabér. 

Cavérna, f. a caue, a den, a cauerne,
a grot, a hole.

Cavernóso, m.full of caues, dennes, pits,
holes, hollow.

* Cavestrár, vide Cabestrár. 

* Cavezúdo, vide Cabezúdo. 

* Cavída, vide Cabída. 

* Cavidád, f. hollownes.

* Cavído, vide Cabído. 

* çavíla, f. Aloe.

Cavilación, f. cauilling, wrangling, dod­
ging, contention.

* Cavilla de bráço, the smaller bone in
the arme.

Cavilár, or Cavillár, to cauill, to wran­
gle, to fall out, to vse deceit, to contend,
to quarrell, to take exception at, to
iangle.

* Cavildádas, vide Cabildádas. 

* Cavíldo, vide Cabíldo. 

Cavilosaménte, dodgingly, contentious­
ly, deceitfully, fraudulently.

Cavilóso, m.full of cauils, cauilous, dod­
ging, contentious, wrangling, deceitful,
troublesome.

* Caulínho maríno, a thing in the sea
liuing in an ugly lumpe without any
proportion of a fish.

* Cávo, m.a head, an end.

* Cávo, or Cábo de esquádra, m.cor­
porall.

* Caúsa, f. a cause, a matter, a meanes, an
occasion, a question.





* Causádo, m.caused, occasioned, brought
to passe, wrought, effected.

Causár, to occasion, to meane, to bring to
passe, to giue cause, to excuse.

Causón, a burning feuer.

Cautéla, f. a cautele, a taking heed, a pro­
uision, a sleight, a subtiltie.

Cautelosaménte, craftily, subtilly, hee­
dily, prouidently, wittily.

Cautelóso, m.craftie, deceitfull, wittie,
subtle, cautelous.

Cautério, m.a searing iron, an iron
which surgeons vse to cauterize or seare
withall.

Cauterizádo, m.seared or marked with
a hot iron, or cauterized.

* Cauterizár, to cauterize, to seare, to
burne with a hot iron.

* Cautión, f. a caution, a watchword to
take heede.

* Cautióso, that is bound for assurance.

* Cautivério, or Catividád, captiuitie,
bondage.

* Cautívo, or Captívo, captiue, bond,
imprisoned, wretched.

* Caúto, m.warie, wise, wittie, circum­
spect.

† Cáxa, f. a chest, a deske, a cofer, a coffin,
a shrine, a little cupboord, a trunke, a
hutch, a pennar, a sheath, a binne, a
chase at tennise, a beehiue, the stocke of
a gunne, a marchants caske. Also a
drumme.

Cáxa de escrivinías, a case of pennes or
a pennar.

† Cáxa de líbros, a deske.

* Caxabél, vide Cascabél. 

Caxcabél, vide Cascabél. 

Caxcár, vide Cascár. 

† Cáxco, vide Cásco, the skull, the
sheards of an earthen pot, a skull or
head peece for the head.

Caxéro, m.a ioiner. Also a pedler, a
skreene worker, a chest maker.

* Caxíta, f. a little cofer, a cabinet or lit­
tle boxe.

* Caxilla, f. idem. 

* Cáxo, vide Cáxco, m.

* Caxón, a great chest, or standerd with
drawing chestes, or boxes in it.

Caxón de árca, the till of a chest.

* Caxuéla, f. a little chest.

* Caxquéte, m.a helmet.

* Caxquillo, an arrowe head, a little
caske.

Cayáda, or Cayádo, a shepherds staffe.

çayáda cruxía, vide çáyda, Cruxía. 

Cáyda, f. a fall.

çáyda, or Cruxía, a kinde of crane.

* Caýdo, m.fallen.

* Cayga, Cáygo, vide Caér. 

Caymán, m.crocodill.

Caymiénto, m.a falling.

* Caymíto, m.an herbe growen in the
Indians.

* Cayoláque, a kind of perfume.

* Cáza, vide Cáça, f. 

Cazcárias, f. tanglings about chickens
feete, dagglings about sheeps tailes and
feete.

* Cazíque, an Indian prince.

* Cázo, vide çáço. 

* Cazoléta, vide Caçoléta. 

* Cazolílla, vide Caçolílla. 

* Cazón, vide Caçón. 

* Cazórro, vide Caçórro. 

* Cazuéla, vide Caçuéla. 


C E
* Ce, as Ce Celestína, O Celestine.

* Ce, Ce, Ce, o, o, o, hola, hola, hola, 
a softe calling vnto one that the rest
about them may not heare.

Ceática, f. the Sciatica.

* Cebér, vide Cebár. 

* Cebíl, vide Cevíl, vile, base, of no re­
koning.

* Cébo, or Cévo, m.meate, fat, baite,
tallowe.

* Cebón, m.fatte, growen fat as a hogge
doth.

Cebólla, or Cevólla, f. an onyon, a chi­
boll.

Cebólla albarrána, squill or sea onyon,
a kinde of herbe with a roote like an
onyon growing both on the sea and on
the land.

Cebollíno, m.onyon seede.

* Cébra, vide Zébra. 

* Cebráta, vide Zebráta. 

* Cebretána, vide Zebretána. 

Ceceár, to lispe, to stutter, to stammer.

Ceceóso, lisping, stutting.

* Ceçérro, m.vide Cençérro, a cow­
bell.

Cecína, f. powdred flesh.

* Cecinádo, salted, powdred, laide in
brine.

Cecinár, to salt, to powder, to lay in
brine, to pickle.

Cedacíllo, m.a little sieue to sift.

† Cedáço, a boulter, a sieue to sift meale,
a searcer, a strainer.

* Cedazíllo, vide Cedacíllo. 

* Cedázo, vide Cedáço. 

* Cedibónes. as Hazér Cedibónes, to
denie all that he hath spoken, to eate his
worde.

Cedício, weake, filthie.

Cédo, hastily, quickly, speedilie, readi­
lie.

Cédro, m.a cedar tree.

Cédula, f. a schedule, a scrol, a bill, a note,
a ticket, an obligation or handwriting,
a docket, a writ or warrant.

* Cedúla de alquilér, a bill vpon a house
shewing that the same is to be let.

Cedulónes, m.billes of account, or billes
on poastes or walles.

* Cefálica, f. a veine so called comming
from the head downe into the arme.

* Céfiro, vide Zéfiro, the west winde.

* Cegádo, blinded.

Cegagéz, f. purblindnes, dimnes of sight,
bleare-eiednes.

Cegageár, to be purblinde, or bleare­
eied.

Cegajóso, m.purblinde, bleare-eied,
sand-blinde, dimme sighted.

Cegár, yo ciégo, to make blinde, to in­
veagle, to hoodwinke. Also to fill vp a
ditch.

Cegúda, vide Cegúta, f. Hemlocke.

Ceguedád, f. blindnes.

* Ceguejár, to dimme the eies, to make
blinde.

Ceguéra, f. dimnes of sight.

Cegúta, f. Hemlockes.

Céja, f. the eie-browes, the space betweene
the eie-browes, the eie-lids.

Cejúnto, he that hat bushie eie-browes,
beetle browed, or the haire of the eie-
browes meeting.

* Cejúnzo, vide Cejúnto. 

Celáda, f. a secret hidden thing. Also a
head-peece. Also a lying in waite, an
ambush, a skull, a murrion, a helmet.

Celádo, m.hidden. Also a stratageme, a
wile, an ambush, lurking or deceit.

* Celadór, m.a hider, a concealer, a kee­
per of secrets.

* Celáje, m.a couering or darkning the
sun with clouds.

* Celamiénto, m.a hiding, concealing, or
keeping close.

Celár, to hide, to conceale, to couer, to keepe
close, to be iealous.

Célda, f. a cell, a cabbin in a ship.

Celebración, f. a celebrating, a solemni­
tie.

* Celebrádo, m.celebrated, solemnized,
renowned, frequented.

Celebrár, to celebrat, to make famous, to
solemnize, to renowne, to frequent.

* Célebre, famous, renowned.

Célebre fiésta, a famous, renowned, or
much frequented feast.

Celébro, m.the braine.

Celedónia, f. the herbe Celandine, Swal­
lowwoort, or Tetterwort, or silken­
Sisley.

* Celédrio, a proper name of a man.

* Celéma, f. a fish called a Shad or sea­
Rauen.

† Celemín, m.a kinde or measure much
about a pecke.

* Celeminéro, m.one that measureth or





selleth by that measure.

* Celéno, one of the harpies.

* Céler, vide Ligéro, swift, speedie, nim­
ble, quicke.

Celestiál, heauenly, or of heauen, as any
part of the heauens.

Celestialménte, heauenly, or after a hea­
uenly maner.

* Celéstre, a skie colour in cloth.

Celício, m.a shirt of haire.

* Celiduénha, vide Celidónia. 

* çélo, m.iealousie, suspition, suspect, mi­
strust.

çélos, vide Célo. 

Celóso, m.iealous, suspitious, mistrust­
full.

* Celsitúd, f. highnes, nobilitie, excellen­
cie.

* † Celugía, f. iealousie. Also a lattice
window.

Cementadór, m.he that laieth a founda­
tion.

Cementár, yo Cemiénto, to lay a foun­
dation, to ioine togither with lime, to
cement or fasten togither.

Cementério, a churchyard, a burying
place.

* Cemijár, vide Semijár, to be like, to
make like.

Céna, f. a supper.

* Cenadál, or Cenedál, a durtie or mi­
rie place.

Cenadéro, m.a parlor or a supping place.

Cenadór, m.a dining chamber, or a sup­
ping chamber.

* Cenagál, moorish wet ground, mud,
durt, mire, earth or claie, a puddle.

* Cenagóso, m.mirie, durtie, muddie,
clayie ground.

Cenár, to sup.

Cençeño, single, vnleuened, bare, leane,
gant, lanke, meere, thinne, fine, withe­
red.

* Cençerrar, to ring with a low-bell or
cow-bell.

† Cencérro, m.a bell for a cow.

Cendál, a fine rag or linnen, a kind of fine
thin silken stuffe called Taffeta, Sarce­
net, or Sendall.

Cendál, m.a fine rag of linnen, a kinde of
fine thinne silken stuffe called taffata,
sarcenet, or sendall.

* Cendráda pláta, siluer plate that is
embossed, siluer that is well fined and
tried.

* Cendradíssimo, m.most fine, most pu­
rified.

Cendrádo, m.imbossed worke. Also well
tried and fined, cleansed from drosse.

Cendrár, to imbosse, to trie, to fine well,
to cleanse from drosse.

Cenedál, m.a mirie plot.

* Cenéfa, f. the vallance of a bed.

* Cenjár, vide Cenizár. 

* Cenijár, vide Cenizár. 

Ceníza, f. ashes, sinders.

* miercóles de Ceníza, ash wednesday.

* Cenizár, to couer with ashes or sinders.
Also to sprinkle or strewe with ashes.

Ceniziénto, m.full of ashes.

* Cenizóso, m.idem. 

Ceñidéro, m.a girdle of a ribband or
lace.

* Ceñído, m.girded.

Ceñído animál, m.a bonelesse creature,
as a flie, a beem, diuers womrs, &c. called
in Latine Insectum.

Ceñidór, m.one that girdeth.

Ceñidúra, f. girding.

Ceñír, yo Cíño, to girde, to put on a
girdle.

* Céño, m.a lowring looke, a frowning
looke, a bending the browes.

* Ceñúdo, m.one that looketh lowring­
ly, frowningly or bending the browes,
angrily.

* Céno, vide Céño. 

† Cenogíles, m.garters of cruell.

* Censíllo, vide Senzíllo. 

Cénso, m.taxe, subsidie, sessing or rating
of mens goods, rent.

Censór, m.a taxer, a sesser of subsidies, a
valuer of lands or goods. Also a refor­
mer of manners, a punisher of misde­
meanor.

Censúra, f. taxing, sessing of subsidies,
rating of rents.

Centaúrea, f. the herbe called Centaurie.

Centaúro, m.a centaure, a monster that
poets hold to haue beene halfe a man
and halfe a horse.

Centélla, f. a sparkle of fire.

* Centélla, f. an herbe called woolfebane.
Also a shell fish, the shell like a starre
shining.

* Centelleár, to sparkle.

* Centélles, vide Centélla. 

* Centenál, a place where rie groweth,
a field or plot of rie.

* Centenár, the number of a hundred.

* Centenário, m.of or pertaining to a
hundred, a hundred in number.

Centéno, m.rie.

* Centilóquio, m.the hundreth dialogue
or the hundreth speech or talke.

Centinéla, f. a sentinell, one that wat­
cheth in the night or wardeth in the
day, a watchman.

* Centóla, vide Cangréja, f. a crabfish.

Centólla, a kinde of shell fish thought to
be a tortoise.

* Centória, f. the herbe Centaurie.

Céntro, m.the centre, the point in the
middest of any round thing.

Centúria, f. a companie of soldiers being
of a hundred men.

Centurión, m.a captaine that hath
charge ouer a hundred soldiers.

Centurionádgo, m.a captainship ouer a
hundred.

* Cenzíllo, single, cleere, voide of encom­
brance, simple, small, thinne.

Cépa, f. a vine, the branch of a vine, the
plants of a vine, a hedge, a snare, a pit­
fall.

Cépa cavállo, a ground thistle, common
thistle.

* Ceperár, vide aPartár, to separate or
part one from another.

* Céphiro, vide Zéphiro, m.the west 
winde.

* Cepílla, f. a little vine or little vine
branch. Also a little hedge, snare or
pitfall. Also vide Cepíllo.

Cepilladúras, f. shauings, chips, tinder.

Cepillár, to plaine with a plainer, to
make smooth, to make plaine.

Cepíllo, m.a plainer, or toole wherewith
ioyners do make smooth and plaine.

Cépo, m. stockes to put in the feete of ma­
lefactors. Also a poore mans boxe in
the church to put money in.

* Céppo, idem. 

Céra, f. waxe.

Cérapez, f. a kinde of oyntment made of
waxe and pitch with gumme and rosin

* Céra de minéra, Mummy.

* Cerbál, vide Cervál. 

* Cerbatíllo, vide Cervatíllo. 

* Cerbéça, or Cerbéza, f. beere or ale.

* Cerbélo, or Cervélo, vide Celébro. 
the braine.

* Cerbéza, or Cerbéça, beere or ale.

* Cerbigúdo, vide Cervigúdo. 

Cerbiguillo, m.the nape of the necke, the
poll of the necke.

* Cerbíz, or Cervíz, f. 

Cerca, about, neere at, night to, close by,
at hand, towards, vpon.

Cérca, or Cercádo, a compassing, a
closing in a wall, a trench, a rampire, a
siege, armed with a brigantine, haber­
gion, or coate of defence, or armour of
proofe.

Cérca de lo vltimo, the last sauing one.

Cercádo, m.inclosed, hedged in, compas­
sed about, besieged.

* Cercadór, m.one that incloseth or com­
passeth about, hedgeth, or fenceth, or
besiegeth.

* Cercanía, f. neerest at hand, bordering
neere by.

* Cercanidád, f. neerenesse or neighbor­
hoode, bordering hard by.

Cercáno, m.a neere neighbour, a borde­
rer, one that dwelleth hard by.

Cercár, Præs. yo Cérco, 1. Præt. yo
Cerqué, to compasse about, to inclose,
to wall about, to hedge or fence in, to





intrench, to cast a rampire or bulwarke
for defence, to besiege, to arme with a
brigantine, maile coate, or armour of
proofe.

* Cercár de séto, to hedge about, to 
fence.

* Cercár de génte, to beset with people,
to besiege.

* Cercéna, f. a cutting round, a cutting
off, a cutting a sunder.

* Cercenádo, m.cut off, cut a sunder, cut
round, circumcised.

Cercenár, to cut round, to circumcise, to
cut off, to cut a sunder, to clip or cut
about.

Cercéta aue, f. a sea birde like a coote:
some call it a coote, other saie it is a
moorehen, other a teale, other a seacob,
or seamew.

* Cercillo, m.an eare-ring.

Cérco, m.a hoope such as coopers vse, a
roundill, a winding or turning about, a
circle, a siege laide about a towne or
fort, a companie of men.

Cérco de génte, m.a siege laide about a
towne or fort, a company of men.

* Cercuíta, vide Cercuíto. 

* Cercuíto, or Cerquíto, a circuit, a
round compasse.

* Cérda, f. a bristle.

Cérdas de béstia, the mane of a horse,
the bristles of a boare, or such like
haires of beastes.

* Cerdéña, f. a garment of beares skinnes
and woolues skins, vsed in Sardinia.
Also the Iland of Sardinia.

* Cerdóso, m.full of bristles.

* Ceréça, vide Ceréza. 

Ceremónia, f. a ceremonie, a curious cu­
stome obserued in matters of religion,
or in pompous shewes.

* Ceremonióso, m.giuen to obserue ce­
remonies, superstitious.

* Ceréro, m.a waxe chandler.

* Céres, m.a daughter of Saturne, re­
ported to be the goddesse of corne, and
haruest, because she was thought to bee
the first that inuented the vse of sow­
ing and reaping of corne.

Ceréza, f. a cherrie.

Ceréza tiésta, f. a Spanish cherrie, a
harde stoned cherrie that hath the
meate cleauing to the stone.

Cerézo, m.a cherrie tree.

* Cercil, a beast vntamed.

Cerillas, or múdas, lip salue.

* Cerimonióso, vide Ceremonióso, m.ceremonious.

Cernáda, f. lie ashes, bucke ashes.

Cernéjas, f. the mane haires of a horse
or such like beast.  Also the foote lockes.

Cernícalo, m.a birde or hauke called a
kestrell or a wind-whiffer.

* Cernido, m.sifted, rauelled, boulted.

Cernidúra, f. sifting of meale.

Cernidúras, f. the brandust, or refuse of
meale.

Cernir, yo Ciérno, to sift meale.

* Cerón, vide Serón, or a proper name.

Ceróte, m.a searcloth.

* Cerqué, vide Cercár. 

* Cerquíta, vide Cercúita. 

* Cerquíto, vide Cercuíto, m.a circuit, 
a compassing about.

* Cerrádo, m.locked, stopped vp or made
fast, bolted, barred.

Cerrádo el ciélo, cloudie, ouercast, gloo­
mie weather.

Cerrádo camino, a way stopped vp so
as none may passe, a rough way closed.

Cerrádos áños, m.olde age, vnlustie
yeeres when men can no longer stirre
well.

Cerradúra, f. a bolt of a locke, the bolt of
a doore, a barre, a hedge, stoppage, a
cloister, a limiting within a compasse.

Cerrája, a locke.  Also the herbe Sowthi­
stle that giueth white milke.

Cerragéro, or Cerrajéro, m.a locke­
smith.

Cerrár, yo Ciérro, to locke, to barre, to
bolt, to hedge, to stop, to put into a cloi­
ster, to limit or appoint his compasse, to
button in, to close or come in togither.

* Cerrár úno con ótro, one to assaile or
set vpon the other in fight, to close in
one with another.

* Cerrár con las pícas, to come in and
close with the enimie by setting on
them with their pikes, or at push of
pike.

* Cerrazón, m.close, gloomie or ouercast
weather.

* Cerríl, vntamed, vnbroken or vnbackt
as horse or mule.

Cerrión, m.fresh cheese, a great flake of
ise, an isicle on the eaues of a house.

Cérro, m.a little hill, a hillocke, a taske of
wooll or flaxe, a heape, a clod.

Cérro entre las espáldas, the space be­
tweene the shoulder blades.

* yr al água con cavállos en Cérro, to
goe to the water with horses riding on
the bare ridge or backe without a sad­
dle.

Cerrójo, m.a bolt of iron or barre for a
doore.

Certéro, m.a sure shooter, a good mark­
man.

* Certéza, f. certaintie or certainnesse,
assurance, suretie.

Certidúmbre, f. suretie, assurance, faith­
fulnesse.

* Certificádo, m.certified, giuen to vn­
derstand.

Certificár, Præs. yo Certifico, 1. Præt.
yo Certifiqué, to certifie, to giue to
vnderstand.

* Certinidád, f. certaintie.

* Cervál, any thing like a hart or bucke,
of or pertaining to a hart or bucke.

* Cervatica, f. a kinde of herbe.

Cervatíllo, m.a fawne of a red deere, a
yoong hinde.

* Cervélo, or Cerbélo, vide Celébro, 
the braine.

* Cervéça, f. beere or ale.

Cervéza, vide Cervéça. 

* Cerugia, f. surgerie.

* Cerugiáno, m.a surgeon or chirur­
gion.

Cerujáno, vide Cirujáno, a surgeon.

Cervigúdo, m.great necked, thicke nec­
ked, thicknesse of necke.

* Cerviguillo, m.the nape of the necke,
the pole of the necke.

Cerviz, f. the hinder part of the necke, the
pole or nape of the necke.

* Cerúleo colór, blewish, seawater
greene or skie colour.

Cervúno, m.pertaining to a hart or a
stagge.

* Cerzenár, vide Cercenár. 

* Cerzéta, vide Cercéta. 

* Cerzillo, vide Cercillo. 

Cesárea, as Majestád Cesárea, emperi­
all, belonging to an emperour.

Césped, f. a turfe.

Cessación, f. ceasing, leauing off, giuing
ouer, letting alone.

Cessár, yo Ciésso, to cease, to giue ouer,
to let alone.

Césta, f. a basket, a chest, a maund, a
fraile, a pannier.

Cestéro, m.a chest maker, a basket maker,
a maker of panniers.  Also he that car­
rieth a basket.

Cestilla, f. a cofer, a little basket, a little
pannier, a hand basket.

* Cestillo, m.idem. 

Césto, a wicker basket.

cogér água en Césto, to take vp water
in a wicker basket, to labour in vaine.

* Cestón, m.a gabion, a great basket.

Cetreria, f. hawking, faulconrie, skill to
keepe and vse a hawke.

* Cetréro, m.a faulkoner.

Cetríno, m.a pale yealow colour.

Cétro, m.a scepter, a kings scepter or roy­
all mace.  Also kingdome, dominion.

Ceváda, f. barley.

* Ceváda de Cavállos, prouender for
horses.

Cevadéra, f. a wallet or bag to carie bar­
ley in for horses to eate. Also the bolt­
spreet saile in a ship.

* Cevadéro, m.a baite to catch with.
Also vide Cevadéra.

Cevadízo, m.made of barley, or of bar­





ley. Also a thing baited as a hooke.

Cevádo, m.fatted, fed, crammed, baited
with some pleasing baite, fed with faire
wordes.

Cevár, yo Ciévo, to feed, to fatten, to
cram, to baite, to allure with faire
wordes, to bring into a fooles paradise.

* Cevellínas, vide Mártas, marternes
fur.

Cevíl, common, base, vile, shamefull.

Cévo, or Cébo, meat to feed with, baite,
fat.

Cevón, fat, growen fat.

* andár tras el Cévo, to hunt after good
cheere.

* Cevólla, f. an onion.

* Cevollíno, a little onion, a chibboll.

Cexár, vide Cessár, to cease, desist, or
giue ouer.


C H
* Chábro, vide Cangréja, or Cangré­
jo, a crab-fish, a punger.

Cháça, f. a chace at tenis play.

Chacóta, f. a merrie meeting of friends, a
reioycing of acquaintance togither.

† Chafaldéte, m.a coard, or roape in a
ship, called the maine-tacke.

† Chafállos, m.peeces or patches, old rag­
ged cloathes.

* Chalár, vide Charlár. 

* Chalúpa, f. a flat bottomed boate.

* Chamárro, a cassocke or ierkin furred
within after the manner of the lowe
countrey.

Chambrána de puérta, the garnishing
of gates or doores. Ornaments fastened
on the iaumes or doore-postes.

* Chamedreos, an herbe called German­
der.

Chamelóte, m.chamlet.

* Chamepítcos, Ground-pine, an herbe
so called.

Chamuscár, Præs. yo Chamúsco, 1.
Præt. yo Chamusqué, to sindge with
fire.

* Chamúsco, m.a sindging with fire.

* Chamúsque, vide Chamuscár. 

Chamusquína, f. sindging with fire.

Chancelár, to cancell, to deface, to make
voide, and of none effect, to blot out, to
determine how it shall be.

Chancillér, m.a chanceller, a chiefe nota­
rie, or controller of notaries and their
writings.

Chancillería, f. the chancerie, a court so
called. Also the office of a chancellor.

* Chançonétta, f. a wittie saying, an
apophthegme, a wittie conceited speech.

* † Chanquéta, a pantofle.

* Chantár, vide Cantár, to sing a part.

Chántre de yglésia, m.the chanter in a
church, or he that beginneth the tune.

Chantría, f. the chantership.

Chápa, f. a rattle, clapper, or such trifle
for children to play with. A thin plate
of some mettall to mend a kettle or such
like. 

Chapádo, m.plated, spangled.

* Chapadór, m.one that plateth ouer, or
spangleth.

Chapár, to plate ouer, to set with spangles.

Chápas, f. a cimball, a clapper, rattles, an
instrument made with two plates. Also
thin plates, spangles.

Chapeár, to make a ringing noise, to
make a ratling.

* Chapelétes, m.little hats.

* Chapería, f. the working of plates or
spangles, rattles, Cymbals, or such like.

Chapído, m.the noise of plates, tingling,
ratling.

Chapín de mugér, a womans shooes, such
as they vse in Spaine, mules, or high
corke shooes.

* Chapinázo, a blowe or beating with 
slippers.

† Chapinería, f. the place where such
shooes, pantofles, and slippers are solde,
such a shoomakers shop.

Chapinéro, m.a maker of such shooes,
slippers, and pantofles.

Chapitél, m.a pinnacle.

Chárco, m.a poole, a ponde, or ditch of
water.

* Charídad, charitie or dearth.

* el páño de la Charidád, a bear-cloth,
a cloth that they cast ouer the dead
corps in carrieng him to be buried.

* Cháro vide Cáro, deere.

* Charlár, to prate or talke ouer­
much, to babble.

* Charlatán, m.a pratler, a talkatiue
fellow.

Charlatár, to babble, to prattle, to tattle.

* Chárua, f. a hoye or barke for carri­
age, a lighter.

* Cháta, f. a thing flat and broade that
should be high, as a flat nose.

* Chatón, a studde of a girdle or such
like.

* Cheminéa, f. a chimney.

* Cherriadór, m.one that chirpeth like
birdes, or creaketh as the hinges of a
doore.

* Cherriadóres quícios de las puér­
tas, the creaking of the hinges of a
doore.

* Cherriár, to chirpe as birds do, to creake
or squeake as the hinges of a doore.

Cherubín, m.a cherubin.

* Chía, f. a scrap, shred, or welt of cloath
hanging downe, which in old time they
vsed on their garments.

* Chiárro, a sheete of glasse.

* † Chibáto, m.a he goate.

† Chibitúl, a heard or flocke of goates,
a place where they put goates.

† Chíbo, or Cabrón, a goate.

* Chíbo, or Cabríto, a kid.

* Chíbo castráto, m.a gelded goate.

† Chíbo mayor, a he goate.

† Chichárro, vide Cigárra, a grashop­
per, a cricket.

† Chíco, m.little, small.

† Chicón, m.a blister, a push, a wheale.

Chicórea, f. an herbe called Succo­
rie.

† Chiflár, to whistle.

† Chífle, or Chíflo, m. a whistle, a pi­
ping.

* Chifléte, m.a whistling as the boate­
swaine aboord the ship doth make with
his whistle in waying anchor.

* Chiléra, f. a place in a ship where they
bestow their bullets.

* Chilidónia, f. an herbe called Celan­
dine.

† Chillár, or Rechinár, to make a shrill
crie, to creake as the hinges of a doore,
as the filing of a sawe, to peepe as a
mouse.

* Chillída, f. the chirping of birdes, the
peeping of a mouse or such like.

† Chillido, m.a shrill crie, creaking, or
noise.

* Chillindrón, as Juégo de Chillin­
drón, a kinde of plaie at cardes vsed in
Spaine.

* Chillón, m.any thing that maketh a
shrill or schriking noise.

* páño Chillón, a kind of cloath.

Chimenéa, f. a chimney.

* Chiméra, f. a high mountaine in Ly­
cia, casting out fire at the top, on the
highest place thereof dwell lyons, on the
middle wilde goates, belowe serpents,
whereupon it is saide to be a monster
with a head like a lyon, a belly like a
goate, and taile of a serpent. Also a
fansie or imagination.

* Chiméras, or Cismerás, y nécias
lénguas, tale-bearing, and foolish
toongs.

Chiminéa, f. a chimney.

Chína, f. a little stone, a counter, some­
times a doubt. Also the kingdome of
China.

† Chínche, m.a worme that in hot coun­
tries lieth about beds, and biteth ve­
nemously.

* † Chinchórro, m.a kinde of boate. Al­
so a net to catch fish with.

† Chinéla, Chinélas, f. slippers for to
weare in the house.

* † Chiquíllo, m.pretie, little and small. 





* Chiquito, idem. 

* Chiribias, f. parsneps, carrots, birdes
called wagtailes.

* Chirínas, f. skirret rootes.

* Chírlas búrlas imagined toies.

† Chirriár, to sing as a swallow, to creake
as the hinges of a doore.

* Chirriadóras áves, birds that sing like
swallowes.

* Chirribí, or Chirriví, vide Chiribías. 

* Chirrídos, m.the chirping of birds, the
noise of hinges of a doore.

* † Chirrimia, f. an instrument of mu­
sicke.

Chirrimías, f. a kinde of musicall in­
strument.

* Chirriví, or Chirribí, vide Chiribías. 

Chirrivia, f. a parsnep, a carrot, a wag­
taile.

* Chírlo, m.a fillip or flicke on the cheeke.

Chisma, f. a schisme, a factious renting
or breaking off from the true religion.

Chisme, vide Chinche, a stinking flie
called a wall-louse.

Chismería, f. factiousnesse, schisme, or
trifling.

Chisméro, m.a factious or schismaticall
fellow. Also a pratler of trifles.

* Chispa, f. the drosse that flieth from the
iron when it is beaten hot.

Chístes, iestes, toies to laugh at, sportes,
daliances, pastimes, scoffings.

Chiváto, a hee goate.

* Chivitál, a heard or flocke of goates.

* Chívo, a hee goate.

† Chóça, f. a cottage, a cabbin, a shep­
herds cottage, a shed, a simple poore ha­
bitation. Sometimes a farme house.

Chocallos, m.little bels, small iewels,
eare-rings.

* Chocár, Præs. yo Chuéco, 1. Præt.
yo Choqué, to but or run at as rams
doe, or as men run at tilt.

* al Chocár, at butting, at the shocke.

† Chocarreár, to iest, to gibe, to tell fond
tales, to vse fond gestures for to delight
with, to scoffe, to cogge, to counterfeit
other mens doings.

* Chocarrerias, f. fond iests, gibings,
foolish tales to make people laugh, coun­
terfeiting of other mens gestures, scof­
fings, making of mowes, daunsing the
anticke, or any ridiculous toies to moue
laughter or fond delight.

† Chocarréro, m.a iester, a scoffing fel­
low, one that plaieth the foole for ad­
uantage, a counterfeiter of other mens
gestures, one that by making mowes
and vsing fond toyes seeketh to make
men laugh.

* Chocarréro de pássa, pássa, m.a iug­
lar.

* Chócco, m.a cuttle fish.

* † Chócho, vide Altramúzes. 

* Chopinázo, m.vide Chapinázo. 

* Choqué, m.a butting togither as rams,
a shock or meeting togither as lanciers.

Choqueçuéla, f. the bone in the knee.

* Choquezuéla, f. idem. 

* Chorlíto, m.a kinde of bird.

* Chóro, vide Córo. 

† Chorreár, to run as a brooke doth, to
flush downe with abundance of waters.

† Chorríco, m.a kinde of pudding.

† Chórro, m.a land floud, a running
brooke, a floud of waters.

Chotacábras, f. birds like guls that vse
to sucke goates.

* Chóza, vide Chóça. 

Chózno, m.a nephew of the thirde de­
gree.

* Christiandád, f. christianitie.

* Christianíssimo, m.most Christian,
most like a Christian.

* Christiáno, m.a Christian.

* Chrónica, f. a chronicle, a historie.

* † Chúço, m.a kinde of pike and wea­
pon with a very large and long pike of
iron.

Chuéca, f. the hollownes of a ioint where
the bone plaieth in and out, or to and fro.

* Chuéco, Chueque, vide Chocár. 

* Chupádo, m.sucked.

Chupadór, m.a sucker, or a milker of
goates.

Chupadúra, f. sucking.

* Chupamél, or yerva de bívora, an
herbe called Buglosse.

Chupár, to sucke.

† Chúsma, or Chúzma, a companie of
poore base people, the meinie.


C I
Ciár, to stop, to retire, to stir backward, to
cause to goe backe.

† Ciabogár la galéra, Præs. yo Ciabó­
go, 1. Præt. yo Ciabogué, to make the
galley to goe backward, to driue it arse­
ward.

* Ciática, f. the goute in the hip or huckle-
bone. also the hip or huckle-bone it selfe.

* Cibdád, or Ciudád, a citie.

* Cibíl, or Civíl, as guerra Cibíl, be­
longing to a citie, ciuill war.

* Cibilménte, vide Civilménte. 

* Cibolléte, m.a trusse, a mandilion, or a
sleeuelesse iacket. Also a little onion.

* Cicaládas ármas, armour well burni­
shed, shining armour.

* Ciçálla, the clipping of money or other
mettall.

* Ciçáña, vide Cizáña. 

Cicatéro, m.a cutpurse.

* Cicatrizár, or Cicatriçár, to heale vp
vnto a skar, to heale so as nothing but a
skar shall be seene.

* Cicatrízo, or Cicatríço, m.a skarre
where a wound hath beene.

Cición de callentúra, a fit of ague, a
cold fit.

Cicórea, f. an herbe called Suckory or Ci­
chorie.

* Cicúta, f. a venemous herbe called Hem­
locke.

Cídra, f. a Limon.

Cidrál, a place where Lymons grow.

* Cidréra, vide Abejéra. 

* Cídro, m.a Limon tree.

Cidrón, m.the stinke of a rotten figge. A
great Limon.

Ciegaménte, blindly, like one that is
blind.

* a Ciégas, blindfold.

Ciégo, m.blind.

* Ciégo, Ciegué, vide Cegár. 

Ciélo, m.the heauen, the weather, the skie,
the world.  The tester of a bed.

* Ciélo de la cáma, the hanging of a
chamber, the tester of a bed.

* de Ciélo présto, by Gods strange iudg­
ments.

Cién, or Ciénto, a hundred.

Cien ñudillos, Knot-grasse.

Cien cabéças, a hundred heads, or a kind
of Thistle full of heads.

* Ciénaga, a marish low ground, a place
of slime, mud, and tough durt.

Cienagál, a quagmire, a bog.

* Ciénago, the mirie durt of a bog or
quagmire.

* Ciéncia, vide Sciéncia. 

Ciéno, mud, durt, mire.

* Cienór, vide Ciéno. 

* Cienóso, m.full of mud, durtie, mirie.

* Ciénta yerva, the herbe Knot-grasse.

Ciénto, or Cién, a hundred, the hundredth
in order.

Cientopíes, a certaine worme ful of feet.

Cienteñál, an hundred yeeres old.

Cién vézes, a hundred times, an hundred
fold.

Ciéra, vide Céra, waxe.

* Ciéra berméja, red waxe.

Ciérço, or Ciérzo, the North-wind.

Ciérne, the flower of Grapes.

* Ciérne, vide Cernír. 

* Ciérre, Ciérro, vide Cerrár. 

Ciertaménte, surely, verily, certainly.

Ciérto, m.sure, certaine, assured.

Ciérva, f. a hinde.

Ciérvo, m.a hart, a stag, or red deere.

* Ciérzo, the North-wind.

* Ciésse, Ciésso, vide Cessár. 

* Ciéve, Ciévo, vide Cevár. 

* Cífo, m.a cup, a cruse, a pot to drinke
in.

Cífra, f. a cipher.





* Cifrádo, m.a thing done in cyphers.

* Cifrár, to cipher.

Cigárra, or Chichárra, f. a grashopper, a
cricket.

Cigoñal, m.a brewers crane to draw vp
water with.  Also a crane to winde vp
other burthens with.

Cigoñíno, m.a yoong storke.

* Ciguatréga, f. a grashopper, or rather a
cricket.

Ciguéña, f. a storke.

* Cigueñal para sacár água, vide Ci­
goñál. 

Cilicío, m.hairie cloath.

Cilíndro, m.a diall, a roller to role
ground after it is sowed with corne, for
t breake the clods, and to smooth the
ground.

Cilla, f. a granier to keepe corne in. Also
a binne to keepe bread in.

Cilléro, m.one that keepeth a cellar, or a
pantrie or a garner for corne.

* Cillérvedas, small splints, ribbes or
bones.

Cilluerédas, vide Cillérvedas. 

* Címa, the top of any thing, vpon.

* çimbório, vide Zimbório. 

* çimbro, vide Zimbro. 

* Cimentadór, m.a mason, one that lai­
eth foundations.

* Cimentério, m.a churchyard.

Ciméra, f. the crest of a helmet, the vp­
per part whereon the crest is set.

* Ciméra sacár, to draw out an inuen­
tion.

* Ciméra, f. a prouince of Greece so cal­
led.

Cimiénto, m.a foundation, morter.

* Cimintério, vide Cimentério, m.a
churchyard.

† Cimitárra, f. a faulchion, a Turkie
sword.

† Cíncha, f. a girth, the iron that bindeth
a wheele about.

Cinchadúra, f. a girding, a compassing
about.

† Cinchár, to girde about.

* Cínche, vide Chísme. 

* Cíncho, m.the round compassing of a
wheele with iron.

Cíncho para quéso, a cheese fat to make
and presse cheese in.

Cínco, fiue.

* Cínco en ráma, Cinquefoile or fiue
leafed grasse.

* Cincuénta, vide Cinquénta. 

* Cíñe, Cíño, vide Céñir. 

* Cinpeçár yo Cinpiéço, vide Empe­
çár, to begin.

* Cinpiéçe, Cinpiéço, vide Cinpe­
cár, to begin.

Cinquénta, fiftie, the fiftieth.

Cinquepúl de los Judíos, certaine
Iewish sacrifices.

* Cinquésma, f. Whitsontide, or Pen­
tecost.

Cínta, f. a girdle of silke, cruell, or riband
for a woman, and Cínto, or Pretína,
a girdle of leather or such like for a
man.  Also Cínta, a flat or broade
point.Duplicate lexemes in form removed.

* Cínto, m.or Pretína, a girdle of lea­
ther or such like for a man, and Cín­
ta, a girdle of silke or such like for a
woman.

* Cintúra, vide Cínta. 

Ciprés, m.Cypres, a Cypres tree.

Cipresál, a groue of Cypres trees.

* Circuír, to compasse about.

* Circúito, a compasse, a circuit.

Circulár, pertaining to a circle, rounde.

Circularménte, in round compasse like a
circle.

Círculo, m.a circle, a rounde com­
passe, a companie of men standing
round togither.

* Circumágio, a prouerbe.

Circuncidádo, m.circumcised, cutte
round.

Circuncidár, to circumcise, to cut round.

* Circuncisión, f. circumcision, cutting
round.

* Circundádo, compassed round.

* Circundár, to compasse rounde, to be­
set on all sides.

* Circunferéncia, f. the compasse of all
round about.

* Circunlóquio, m.a speech fetched far
about, talke by circumstance.

* Circunvezíno, m.a neighbor dwel­
ling about.

* Circúro, vide Círculo m.

Ciriál, a candlesticke for waxe candles, a
taper.

Círio, m.a waxe candle, a torch.

Ciruéla, f. a plum.

Ciruélo, m.a plum-tree.

Cirugía, f. chirurgerie.

Cirugiáno, m.a chirurgion or surgeon.

* Cirujáno, idem. 

* Cirurijáno, or Cirurjáno, vide Ciru­
jáno. 

Ciscádo, m.afraide.

* Ciscár, to be afraid, to feare.

Císco, m.a sparkle of fire, the drosse of
coales.

Císma, f. a faction, a schisme, a renting
himselfe from common societie.

Cismático, m.a factious fellow, a schis­
maticke.

Císne, m.a swan.

Cistérna, f. a cesterne.

Citación, f. a summons, a citation or
warning to appeere.

Citár, to summon, to cite, to warne for to
appeere.

* Cítara, f. an instrument of musicke cal­
led a citterne.

* Cíthara, f. idem. 

† Cítola, f. a citterne, the clapper of a
mill.

† Citoléro, m.a maker of citternes.

Ciudád, f. a citie.

Ciudadáno, m.a citizen, a burgesse, a
townesman.

* Ciudadéla, f. a cittadell or a certaine
fort about a citie or towne.

* Ciudadéta, a little citie.

Ciuéra, f. corne, bread corne.

Cívil, ciuill, pertaining to a citie, or to
administration of actions in suite be­
tweene partie and partie.

Civilidád, f. ciuilitie.

Civilménte, ciuilly.

* Civolléte, vide Cibolléte. 

* çíza, vide Zíza. 

* Cizálla, the clipping of monie or met­
tall.

* Cizádo, vide Zizádo. 

* Cizána, f. tares, cockle, darnell, discord.

* Cizañadór, m.one that soweth dis­
cord, tares, cockle or darnell.

* Cizañár, to sow discord, tares or cockle.

* Cizérca, f. Ciche pease.


C L
* Clába, vide Cláva. 

* Clabár, vide Clavár. 

* Clábe, vide Cláve. 

* Clábo, m.a naile, the rudder of a ship,
a harde swelling or corne on the toe
or foote, the corner of eie, a knot or
knurt.

* Clamár, vide Llamár, to crie out, to
make exclamation.

Clamór, or Gríto, m.crying, outcrie, ex­
clamation.

Clamoróso, m.clamorous, giuen to make
exclamation or outcries.

* Clandéstino, secret.

Clára de huévo, the white of an egge.

* Clarabáya, vide Claraváya. 

Claraménte, cleerely, plainly, euidently.

* Claraváya, vide Claravóya. 

* Claravóya, f. iags or cuts in garments,
such as cutters inuent for gentle wo­
men.

Claréa, f. clarie, drinke of hony and wine.
Some say muscadell, others call it Ne­
ctar or kingly drinke.

Cláre de víno y miel, honied wine, Rob­
dauie, Metheglin.

Clarescér, to waxe faire, cleere or ma­
nifest.

* Claréza, vide Claridád. 

Claridád, f. cleerenesse, plainesse, per­
spicuitie, brightnesse.

* Clarificádo, m.made cleere, plaine or





manifest, clarified.

Clarificár, Præs. yo Clarifíco, 1. Præt.
yo Clarifiqué, to clarifie, to make
bright, cleere or manifest.

* Clariméntos, m.paintings, bright co­
lours.

* Clarín, m.a certaine musicall instru­
ment.

Clarión, m.an instrument of musicke
called a clarion.

Cláro, m.bright, cleere, light, plaine, easie
to be vnderstood, perpicuous, euident,
shrill.

* Cláva, vide Argamássa. 

* Clavádo, m.nailed.

Clavadúra, f. nailing.

Clavár, to naile, to fasten.

Clavazón, f. the setting of nailes, nai­
ling, or studding.

Cláve, f. the stone on the top of a vault.

Clauél, vide clavéllinas, gilliflowers.

Clavellinas, f. gilliflowers, carnation
gilliflowers.

Clavéro, m.a bearer of keyes, a maker of
keyes, a bearer or keeper of keyes for
the treasurie for the orders of knight­
hood.

* Clavéta, or Clavíja, f. pins of iron, or
pegs of wood to fasten any thing. Also
pegs or pins to winde vp the stringes of
an instrument.

* Clavía, vide Clavíja. 

* Clavíllas de las cámas, f. vices or
skrewes to fasten a bedsteed togither.

* Clavicórdio, m.an instrument of mu­
sicke called Claricords, or virginals.

Clavíja, f. the key of virginals, the pin of
a lute, any pegge or pin.

* Clávis, pinke gilliflowers.

Clávo, m.a naile, the rudder of a ship, a
corne on a foot or toe, a hard swelling in
the corner of the eie, a knur or knot.

Clávo de governálle, the helme of a
ship.

Clávos de espécia, cloues, a spice so cal­
led.

Clávos de gerófle, idem. 

* Cláustra, f. a cloister.

* Cláustrio, m.a cloister.

* Cláustro, m.idem. 

* Clausúra, or Clauzúra, f. an inclosure,
a shutting in.

Clemátide, m.an herbe called Perwin­
kle.

Cleméncia, f. gentlenes, meekenes, cur­
tesie.

Cleménte, gentle, curteous, meeke, low­
lie.

Clementeménte, meekely, gently, cur­
teously.

Clerezía, f. the clergie, a conuocation.

* Clericáto, a clarkeship, the office of
priest or function of a priest.

Clérigo, m.a clarke, a priest.

* Clerizón, m.youth or boyes that sing
in the quire, singing boies, quiristers,
boies bred vp to be priests.

* Clíma, f. a climate.

* Climetérios, áños, vnfortunate yeres.

* Clines, f. a horse mane.

* Clipeo, m.a bucklar.

* Cloáca, f. a priuie.

Clóque, m.boatehooke, a grappling
hooke, a hooke to catch holde with.

Cloqueár, to clocke as a hen doth, to kill
fish with a trout hooke.

* Cloquéro, m.one that goeth to kill fish
with a trout speare.

* † Cluéca, f. any birde that sitteth to
breed yoong.

Cluéca gallina, a clocke hen.

Cluquillas, cowring downe.


C O
* Coadjutór, or Coajutór, m.a fellowe
helper, one that aideth another.

* Coadjuvár, to helpe his fellowe, to
helpe togither.

* Coagulación, a coagulation, a crud­
ding togither.

* Coája léche yérva, an herbe called
Maidenhaire, pettie Mugwet, or
cheese runnet.

* Coallí, id est que Allí, that there.

Cobárde, vide Covárde, a cowarde, a
milkesop, a hartlesse fellow.

* Cobardía, f. cowardize, faint harted­
nes.

* Cobdícia, f. couetousnes.

* Cobdiciár, to couet.

* Cobdicióso, m.couetous.

* Cóbdo, vide Códo, m.an elbowe, a
cubite.

Coberdía, f. cowardlines.

* Cobertáza, a pot lid, a couer.

Cobertéra, f. a couer.

Cobertór, m.a couer, any thing to lay
on.

Cobertór de cáma, m.a couerlet for a
bed.

Cobertúra, f. a couering.

* Cobigéra, a waiting woman.

* Cobijádo, m.couered, hidden.

Cobijár, to couer, to hide ouer.

* Cobránça, or Cobránza, f. recouerie,
an obtaining, a getting.

Cobrár, to recouer, to get or obtaine, to
receiue.

Cóbre, m.copper.

Cóbre de cebóllas, a roape of onions.

Cóbre de béstias, a houell of cattle.

* Cóbre de ájos, a roape of garlike.

Cobrír, yo Cúbro, to couer, to hide, to
recouer or obtaine.

Cóbro, m.recouerie, receit, a place of safe
keeping.

* Cobuijáda, a kinde of larke with a crest
or tuft of feathers on his crowne.

† çóca. f. a place for a faire.

Cocadríz, f. a serpent called a Basiliske,
or Cocatrice.

Cocár, Præs. yo Cuéco, 1. Præt. yo
Coqué, to gape at, to mocke, to make
mouthes at.

Cóce, f. a kicke or spurne.

* Titár cóces contra el agujón, to 
kicke against the pricke.

† Coceadór, m.a kicker, a spurner.

* Coceádo, m.kicked at, spurned at.

† Coceár, to kicke, to spurne, to trample
on.

* † Cocédra, a quilt or mattresse bed.

* Cocédras de pluma, f. feather beds.

* † Cocedrón, m.an vnder mattresse
bed.

* Coceléte, m.a corslet.

* Cocér, vide Cozér. 

Cóche, m.a coach, a waggon.

* Cochéro, a coach-man, a waggon
man.

Cochinílla, f. the hearbe called Cuche­
neale.

Cochinílla, a certaine infectious flie, or a
yoong sucking pig.

* Cochiníllo, m.a yoong sucking pig.

Cochíno, m.a sucking pig, a pig, a yoong
hog. Sometimes a slouenly fellow.

* Cóchio, that which may be sodden, ba­
ked, or dressed.

Cócho, m.sodden, baked, dressed. Also a
cart with two wheeles.

* Cocína, vide Cozína, f. 

* Coçinéro, vide Cozinéro, m.

Cócle, a grapple, a hooke to catch holde
with.

* Cóço, vide Cósso. 

Cóco, m.a woorme that eateth vines, a
weuill. Also a voice to skar chidren
with, as we say, the bugbeare. Also a
fruit growing in the Indians.

* çoçobrádo, m.ouerturned, crossed, o­
uerthwarted.

† çoçobrár, to ouerturne, to crosse, to o­
uerthwart.

† çoçóbras, f. ouerturning, crossing of for­
tune.

† çocodovér, f. a market place in Toledo.

* Cocodríllo, vide Caymán, m.a ser­
pent a Crocodill.

Cocúyo, m.a glo-worme.

* Códa, f. a taile.

* Códa de múla, an herbe called horse­
taile.

* Codáço, vide Codázo, m.

Codáda, f. a blow with the elbow.

Codál, of, or belonging to a cubit, a grin.

Codáles de carpintéro, cubits in mea­
sure.





* Codazo, m.a blow or stroke with the
elbow.

Codeár, to strike or push with the el­
bow.

Codéra, the scab on the elbow, or a broken
sleeue at the elbow.

Codícia, f. couetousnes, greedines, desi­
ring still to gaine, or to haue more.

Codiciár, to couet, to be greedie of gaine,
to seeke still to haue more.

* Codicilo, or Codicíllo, m.a little
booke, a small writing.

Codicillo de testaménto, a codicill, or
addition of some bequeaths, or altera­
tion that a man before his death ad­
deth to his last will, after that it was
written.

* Codiciosaménte, couetously, gree­
dily.

Codicióso, m.couetous, greedie, gripple
on the world, one that thinketh he shal
neuer haue enough.

* Codizíllo, vide Codicílo. 

Códo, m.an elbow, a cubit.

* Codonéro, m.a quince tree.

Codorníz, f. a quaile, the king of quailes.

* Coéla, id est Con élla, with her, or
with such a thing.

* † Coéte, m.a squib made of gunpow­
der.

* Cófa, vide Cófia, f. a coife or ker­
chiefe.

Cófia, or Cóffia, a vaile or couering of a
womans head that hanged downe to
their shoulders. Also a womans coife or
caule.

Cofin, m.a basket, a pannier, a fraile.

Cofráde, m.a brother, a frier.

Cofradia, f. brotherhood, a frierie, a com­
panie of friers, a guild or corporation.

Cófre, m.a cofer, a deske, a chest, a casket.

Cofrezito, a little cofer or chest.

Cogedízo, m.that is gathered togither,
that is brought from here and there,
that is leuied or gathered vp, that is
exacted or gotten by force.

Cogedór, m.a gatherer togither, a taker
vp, an exactor or leuier by force, a col­
lector.

* Cogécha, vide Cohécha. 

Cogér, yo Cójo, to gather, to take vp, to
leuie, to get as he can, to catch, to exact
or make to giue, to collect.

* Cogído, m.gotten togither, gathered,
caught vp, leuied, exacted.

* Cogimiénto, m.getting togither, leuy­
ing, catching, collecting.

* Cogomélo, or Hóngo, a mushrom, or
toadstoole.

Cogolládo, m.hooded as moonks and
nunnes are, budded.

† Cogóllo, m.a hood, such as moonks or
friers weare, a bud of a tree.

Cogolmádo, m.heaped vp, increased,
laide on.

* Cogómbro, or Cohómbre, m.a cu­
cumber.

Cogombríllo, or Cohombríllo, m.a
little cucumber.

† Cogóte, m.the pole of the head, the
hinder part of the head, the nape, the
noddle.

* † Cogúlla, f. a cowle or hood such as
moonks weare.

† Cogujáda, f. a larke, a bird so called.

* Cohechádo, m.bribed, complotted to­
gither, hauing occupied togither, or
gotten goods togither.

† Cohechár, to plow ground togither, to
gather goods togither, to take bribes, to
complot togither.

Cohechazón, f. plowing or breaking vp
ground.

* † Cohécho, m.a bribe taken, complot­
ting, occupying togither.

Cohécho de juez, bribing to peruert
iustice, a bribing the iudge.

* † Cohéte, m.a squib made of gun­
powder to flie in the aire.

† Cohollítos, m.small colewoorts, or the
budding out of any herbes.

† Cohombrál, m.a place of cucumbers.

† Cohombríllo, or Cogombríllo, m.a 
little cucumber.

† Cohómbro, or Cogómbro, a cucum­
ber.

† Cohondér, to confound, to corrupt, to
marre.

† Cohondimiénto, m.corruption, con­
fusion.

* Cohondír, to corrupt, to marre or con­
found.

* çohorí, vide Zohorí, m.a diuer, a
ducker.

* Cohórtes, m.certaine bands or compa­
nies of soldiers, the gards of a king,
prince or president, garrisons, the trains
or gardes of noble men or magistrates
to garde them into another countrie.

* † Cohujáda, f. a kinde of larke with a
crest on the head.

* Coja, Cójo, vide Cogér. 

* Cojecha, f. vide Cosécha.

* Cojedízo, vide Cogedízo, m.

* Cojér, vide Cogér. 

* Cojimiénto, vide Cogimiénto. 

* Cójo, m.lame.

Cojónes, m.cullions, the stones of a man
or beast.

* Cojón de pérro, an herbe called rag­
woort.

* Cotto, or Coýto, m.carnal copulation.

Coiónda, or Coyúnda, f. the yoking of
horses or oxen togither.

* Coiúndra, or Coyúndra, idem. 

Cojúdo, m.he that hath great cullions or
stones, that which is not gelded but hath
his stones.

Cól, or Berça, f. a colewoort. Also a stalk.

Cóla, f. a taile, the yard of a man, &c.
Also glue, pitch.

Cóla, vide Caçón. 

* Cóla del arádo, the plough taile or
handle.

Cóla de cavállo, an herbe called horse­
taile, or shauegrasse.

* Cóla pece, an herbe called fishtaile.

* Cóla en grúdo, glue, pitch.

Colación, f. beuer, drinking togither,
nunchions, breakefast, eating after
supper, a portion that is due, a besto­
wing of some preferment.

Coláda, f. whiting, bleaching.

Coláda de paños, whiting or bleaching
of clothes, bucking of clothes.

Coladéro, m.a strainer, a sieue, a colen­
der.

* Coládo hiérro, iron as it is cast at the
mine not hammered.

* Coladúra, f. straining, clensing, whi­
ting of clothes.

† Colámbre, f. a dicker of leather.

Colár, to straine, to clense as they doe
milke, &c. to white clothes.

Colár páños, to whiten clothes, to buckle
cloathes, to bleach clothes. Also to
wring clothes being wet.

Colár benificio, to bestow a good turne,
to do one a pleasure.

* Colatáres, vide Colaterál. 

Colaterál, collateral, not of a right line,
pedegree, or descent downewarde, but
on the right or better side, as one the fa­
thers side.

† Colcédra de plúmas, a featherbed.

* † Colcédra, f. a bedde of wooll or of
flockes, a mattres to lie on.

Cólcha, a quilt couering for a bed.

* Colchádo, made like a quilt or mat­
tresse.

* † Colchéro, m.a quilt maker or seller,
an vpholster, a mattresse maker.

* Colchón, a bed of wooll or featherbed.

* † Colchonchíco, or Colchoncíllo,  
m. a little mattresse, a little quilte to
lie on.

* Cóle yérva, vide Cól. 

Coleár, to wagge the taile.

* Colegación, f. a gathering togither, a
congregation, an assembly.

* Colegádos, m.gathered togither, dra­
wen to a congregation, confederate to­
gither.

* Colegár, vide Congregár, to gather
togither, to assemble, to bring togither.

Collegiál, pertaining to a college, being
of a societie, liuing togither, belonging
to a fellowship, or companie.

Colégio, m.a college, a place where stu­





dents or other doe liue togither obser­
uing like orders.

* Colegir yo Colíjo, to gather or bring
togither, to gather by proofe or by rea­
son, to forecast, to perceiue, to know, to
vnderstande, to take vp, to deeme or
iudge by reason or proofe.

Cólera, f. choler.

Cólera négra, melancholie.

Colérico, m.one that is full of choler,
cholerike, hastie, giuen to anger.

Coléta, f. the haire of the head being
rounde: lynnen whereof they make
doublets in Spaine.

* Coletico, m.a little leather ierkin.

Coléto, m.a leather ierkin.

* Colgadéro, m.that which hangeth
dangling downe.

Colgadizo, or Colgájo, that which 
hangeth dangling, as grapes does in clu­
sters.

Colgádo, m.hanged downe, hanged by,
fastned to, tied.

Colgadúra, f. a hanging dangling down,
hanging by, or at, depending vpon, fa­
stening to, or tying.

Colgajo, or Colgadízo, m.that which
hangeth by, or dangleth downe as clu­
sters of grapes, and such like things,
that which dependeth.

Colgájo de úvas, a bunch or cluster of
grapes.

Colgár, Præs. yo Cuélgo, 1. Præt. yo
Colgué, to hang downe, to hang at or
by a thing, to depend vpon a thing, to
fasten to, to take, or to tie.

* Colho, or Vérça, a colewoort.

Cólica, f. a disease called the collicke.

Cólico, m.he that hath the collicke.

* Coligádo, m.bounde togither, confede­
rate togither.

* Colíja, Colijo, vide Colegír. 

* Colína, f. cabbage seede. Also a place in
a field which is narrow betweene two
vallies.

Colíno, m.a cabbage, when he beginneth
to growe a cabbage.

* Coliséo, m.a theater where comedies
are represented.

* Collá de viénto, a gale of winde.

* Collá, vide Acullá, there, or in that
place.

Collación, f. a banket, a warde in a citie.
Vide Colación.

† Colláço, m.one that sucketh of the
same milke, a nurst-fellow, a foster
brother.

Colládo, m.a little hill, a heape.

Collár de vestído, the collar of a gar­
ment.

* Collár de hómbros, a collar of golde,
such as great nobles vse to weare as an
ensigne of honor, a chaine of golde, a
carcanet, a necklace, or a tablet.

* Collaríco, id est, Collár rico, a rich
necklace or chaine of golde, a rich car­
canet or tablet.

* Collatáres, vide Colateráles, collate­
rall, on the right side, not direct down­
ward.

* Collázo, a nurse-fellow, a foster bro­
ther, one that sucketh the same milke.

* Colléga, m.a fellow partner, one that
liueth in a college, place, or office obser­
uing orders of that societie.

* Colléra de béstia, the collar or yoke, or
such like for a beast to draw with.

* Collocado, vide Colocádo, m.pla­
ced.

* Cólma, f. a heape, the top or heigth of
any thing.

* Colmádo, m.heaped vp.

Colmadúra, f. a heaping vp.

Colmár, to heape or fill vp.

* Colmeár, vide Colmenár. 

Colména, f. a bee hiue.

Colmenár, m.a place for bee hiues.

Colmenéro, m.he that keepeth bees.

Colmíllo, m.a tuske.

Colmillos, m.the tuskes of a bore or of
any other wilde beast. Also the fore­
teeth.

Cólmo, m. the top of any thing.

* Colobrina, f. a culuerine peece of ordi­
nance.

* Colocación, f. a placing or bestowing.

* Colocádo, m.placed, bestowed, setled,
seated.

Colocár, Præs. yo Colóco, 1. Præt. yo
Coloqué, to place, to settle, to bestowe.

† Colódra, f. a horne to drench beastes.

Colodríllo, m.the pole of the head, the
noddle or hinder part of the head.

* Colombíno, m.of or pertaining to a
doue, like a doue, doue colour.

* Colómna, a piller, a columne.

* Colónia, f. a kinde of silke ribband.

* Colónia, a colonie of people sent to in­
habit a countrey gotten by conquest.
It was deuised by the Romans for a
recompence of olde soldiers, who hauing
spent the flower of their age in the ser­
uice of their countrie, were afterwarde
rewarded with land of inheritance.

* Coloqué, vide Colocár. 

Coloquintida, f. a kinde of wilde bitter
gourd so called.

* Colóquio, m.conference, talke, commu­
nication, speech togither with others.

Colór, m. orf. colour, hue.

* Colór falso, a counterfeit colour.

* Colór cardéño or de plómo, blacke
and blew colour.

* Colór lléno, a deepe colour, a full co­
lour.

* Colór muérto, a fading, pale, dead co­
lour.

* Colór florecído, a bright light colour.

* Colór en água, a waterish colour.

* Colór de paja, a straw colour.

* Colór báço, or pardo, brown or swart
colour.

* Colór porsiádo, a durable sure colour
that will last.

Colorádo, m.coloured, red.

* Colorár, to colour, to die red, to paint.

* Colorir, idem. to set foorth in colours.

* Colóstro de leche, thicke milke that
is milked from a cow when she hath
newly calued.

* Columbíno, vide Colombíno, of or
pertaining to a doue.

Columpiár, to swing with a coard with a
crosse sticke to stretch the armes.

Colúmpio, m.swinging with a coard
and a crosse sticke.

Colúna, vide Colómna. 

* Coluña rolliza, a rowler to roule and
make smooth and plaine any ground,
grasse-plot, or corne ground.

* Coluña, vide Colómna. 

Colusión, f. collusion, fraude, deceit, craf­
tie cosenage in bargaining.

* Colzédra, vide Colcédra. 

Comádre, f. a she-gossip.

* Comadrégia, vide Comadréja, f. a
weesell.

† Comadréja, f. a weesell.

* Comadréra, f. a woman that goeth a
gossipping abroad among her compani­
ons carrying of tales and newes. A co­
nie berrie or hole.

Comárca, f. the borders or confines of a
countrey, the diuision betweene coun­
trey and countrey.

Comarcáno, m.bordering, a borderer,
one that dwelleth on the borders,
bounds or diuision betweene two shires
or countries.

Cómba, f. around swelling comming of a
fall. Also a crooked thing, a kinde of
scoope to cast out water.

* Cómba pequéña y dúra, a swelling 
in the finger, called a fellon.

* Combádo, or Conbádo, m.crooked,
bending round and crooked.

* Cómbas, m.a round and crooked thing.
Also vide Compás. 

Combáte, m.a combate, a battell, an as­
sault, a conflict, a skirmish.

Combátible, assaultible, battable.

* Combatído, m.assaulted, set vpon,
fought withall, beaten.

* Combatidór, m.a cumbater, a fighter,
an assaylant, a combatant, a cham­
pion.

* Combatiénte, fighting, assayling set­
ting vpon a champion.

* Combatimiénto, m.a fight, a combat.





Combatir, to fight, to assault, to set vpon,
to assaile, to combate, to beate.

* Combidadór, m.one that inuiteth or
biddeth guests.

Combidádo, m.a guest bidden, inuited,
mooued, intreated to do any thing.

Combidár, to inuite, or bid to a feast.

* Combinación, f. combining, conioy­
ning, setting togither.

Combinár, to combine, to ioin or set togi­
ther, to compact, to plot, to deuise togi­
ther, to enter into association togi­
ther.

Combíte, m.a feast, a banket, a guest­
meale.

Combléça, f. a concubine, a competitor, or
riuall with an other woman for the
loue of a man.

Combléço, a riuall, a competitor, a fel­
low-louer, a corriuall, one that striueth
or runneth with another for one and
the same prize.

* Começón, the itch, tetter or ring­
woorme.

Comedéra cósa, any thing to bee ea­
ten.

* Comedéro, that which may be eaten,
eatable. Also a place where meate is
eaten.

* Comédia, f. a comedie, a play, an enter­
lude.

* Comediánte, m.a player, a comedi­
an.

Comedído, m.premeditated, discreete,
measured, well mannered or nurtured,
ciuill, of a temperate behauiour.

* mal Comedído, m.vnmannerly, ill
nurtured, vnciuill, distempered in be­
hauiour, ill brought vp.

* mas Comedído suplíco, good wordes,
I pray you, more quietnes, &c.

Comedimiénto, m.premeditation, dis­
cretion, good manners, behauiour.

Comédio, in the meane while, set in the
middest, put in arbitrement.

Comedír, yo Comído, to premeditate,
to measure, to stint, to moderate.

Comedór, or Comilón, m.a great ea­
ter, a glutton, a greedie gut.

* Començádo, m.begun, commenced.

Començár, yo Comiénço, to begin.

* Comendádo, m.commended.

Comendadór, a commaunder, a lief­
tenant, one that hath commandements
giuen him in charge.

Comendár, yo Comiéndo, to com­
mend, to praise, to set foorth, to extoll.

* Comendéro, vide Comendadór, also
one that committeth or commendeth to
ones charge.

Comensál, a fellow-boorder, a fellow-
guest, a fellow-commoner, a compani­
one of the table.

* Comenzár, vide Començár. 

Comér, to eate, to dine.

* Comér vn bocádo sin assentárse, to
eate a snatch and away, to eate a bit
standing.

* Comér de górra, to dine or eate at any
others coast.

* Comércio, m.commerce, entercourse of
merchandise togither, trafique.

Cométa, f. a comet, a blazing star.

* Cometedór, m.a committer of causes
affaires to any man, a layer of wa­
gers.

Cometér, to commit, to set vpon, to ende­
uour, to impose, to lay a wager, to bet.

* Cometér, or encomendár, to commit,
to recommende or giue in charge, to
leaue in trust, to appoint, to assigne, to
depute, to deliuer.

* Cometido, committed, recommended,
left in trust, assigned, deputed, a com­
mittie, an arbitrator, an vmpier.

Cometidór, a committer, vide Come­
tedór. 

Cometimiénto, m.setting vpon, com­
mitting.

Comezón, f. the itch, a tetter, scurfe, a
ringworme.

* Comfétes, m.comfets.

Comída, f. meate, dinner. Also a drin­
king before meales, a light beuer.

* Comíde, Comído, vide Comedír. 

* Comiénçe, Comiénço, vide Començár. 

* Comiénde, Comiéndo, vide Comendár. 

Comiénço, m.a beginning, an entrance
to any worke.

Comígo, with me.

* estas Comígo, o no? are you with me
or on my side, yea or no?

Comilón, vide Comedór. 

* Comínchos, the herbe cumin.

Comíno, m.cumin seede.

* Comínos, seedes of cumin.

Comissário, m.a commissarie, a com­
missioner, an officer chosen and assig­
ned to that place, an executor of a
dead mans will.

Comissión, f. a commission directed to
any for seruice to be done, or otherwise
to some other purpose.

Comissúra, f. a ioyning togither, a ioin­
ter, a closing togither of boords.

* Cómite, vide Cómitre. 

† Cómitre, m.the boateswaine in a ship,
he that correcteth disorders, and hath
charge of the booke. Also the masters
mate.

* Commitíva armáda, f. a fleete or na­
uie of ships committed to ones charge.
Also a fleete accompanying another
fleete.

Cómo, as, seeing, that, when as, how,
euen as, why.

* Comodaménte, commodiously, profi­
tably, conueniently, fitly.

* Cómoda occasión, f. a conuenient
occasion, a fit opportunitie, an easie
way, a readie meanes.

Comodidád, f. commoditie, ease, leasure,
occasion, fitnesse, opportunitie, meanes,
way.

Cómodo, m.profitable, fit, commodious,
easie, at leisure.

Comoquiéra, howsoeuer it be, howsoe­
uer, in what manner you will.

* Comoquiéra que, howsoeuer.

* Comovér, yo Comuévo, to mooue,
to stirre vp, to incense, to trouble, to
animate, to prouoke.

* Comovído, m.stirred vp, exasperated,
mooued, kindled, incensed, prouoked,
vrged, enforced, egged on.

* Compadecér, yo Compadésto, or
Compadescér, to suffer with others.
Also to haue compassion.

Compradrázgo, m.gossopship, gossoping,
gossops meeting.

* Compádre, m.a hee gossop, a compeere.

Compáñas, f. a companie, a multitude.

Compañéra, f. sociable, giuen to keepe
companie.

Compañéro, m.a fellow, a companion, a
mate, a cheating companion.

* Compañía, f. a companie, a fellowship,
a meeting, a knot or crew of good fel­
lowes, societie.

Compañónes, m.the stones, testicles.

Compañónes de pérro, standergrasse,
dog cullions.

* Comparáble, comparable, to be mat­
ched, equalled.

Comparación, f. comparison.

* Comparádo, m.compared, matched,
equalled, valued, prized.

* Comparadór, m.a maker of compari­
sons.

Comparár, to compare, to match.

* Compartír, to impart, to diuide, to be­
stowe, to distribute, to deale abroad.

Compás, m.a paire of compasses.

Compassár, to measure with a compasse,
to compasse about.

Compassión, f. compassion, pitie, commi­
seration.

* Compassívo, pitifull, mercifull, full of
compassion and mercie.

* Compelér, to vrge, to force, to compell, 
to constraine, to prouoke, to induce.

* Compelído, m.vrged, forced, compel­
led, constrained, prouoked, egged for­
ward.

* Compéndio, m.a breuiate, compendi­
ous, breuitie, a short way.

Compensár, yo Compiénso, to reward,





to recompence, to requite.

* Competéncia, f. competencie where
two sue for one office, corriualitie, suffi­
ciencie, conuiencie.

Competér yo compíto, to be meete for,
to agree with, to sue with another for
any thing, to contend or striue for anie
suite, office or dignitie.

Competición, f. the sute that is prose­
cuted after such manner.

Competidór, m.a ryuall, a competitor,
one that contendeth with another for
the same gole, a concurrent.

* Competidór reál, a royall riualitie,
when one is competitor or corriual with
a king.

Competír, yo Compíto, vide Com­
petér. 

* Compiénse, Compiénso, vide Com­
pensár. 

* Compíte, Compíto, vide Compe­
tér. 

* Complacéntia, a pleasing or delighting
with.

* Complacér, vide Complazér. 

* Complaçimiénto, vide Complazi­
miénto. 

Complazér, to please, to gratifie, to de­
light, to sooth, to content.

* Complazído, m.pleased, delighted
with, content.

* Complazimiénto, vide Compla­
céncia, a pleasing, a delighting with.

Complessión, f. the complexion.

Complétas, complines, one of the seauen
seruices that they sing in the Church.

* Que os cómple, which is fit and need­
ful for you.

* Complido, m. furnished, accomplished,
performed, fit, conuenient, compleat.

Complimiénto, m.performance, com­
plement, conuenience.

Complír, to fit, to furnish, to accomplish,
to performe.

* Complisión, vide Complessión. 

Componedór, m.a maker, a composer,
an attonement maker.

* Componér, Præs. Indicat. Compón­
go, compónes, compóne, 1. Præt. 
Compúse, compúsiste, compúso.
Fut. Compondré, compondrás,
compondrá, or Comporné, com­
pornás, comporná. Sub. Præs.
Compónga, Imperfect. Compusié­
ra, compondría, or Compusiésse,
Fut. Compusiére, to make, to com­
pound, to frame, to endite, to compose,
to agree, to appoint, to accord, to dresse,
to set in order, to redresse, to settle, to
repaire, to dight, to make handsome, to
order well.

* Componér discórdes, to compounde,
controuersies, to end and take vp suites,
to accord men at variance.

* Componga, Compóngo, vide 
Componér. 

* Comporne, Comporna, Compor­
nia, vide Componér. 

* Comportáble, tollerable, comportable,
indifferent, to be borne withall.

Composición, f. agreement, composition,
accord, attonement making.

Compostúra, f. anie compounde mat­
ter.

Cómpra, f. a buying, a purchace, a bar­
gaine, a hansell.

Compradór, m.a buier, a purchaser, a
bargainer, a chapman.

Compradizo, m.that which is bought or
purchased, or bargained for.

Comprár, to buie, to purchase.

* Comprehendér, to comprehende, to
conteine, to contriue, to conceaue, to
vnderstand, to comprise.

* Compressión, a comprising, conteining,
conceiuing, a retaining, a comprehen­
ding.

Comprometér, to promise with, to com­
promise, to agree, to arbitrate.

Compromisso, m.promised, agreed, ar­
bitrated, compromised.

Compromissór, m.an arbitrator or vm­
pier to compromise a matter, a suretie,
a baile, a pledge, one that giueth his
word for a man with another.

* Comprovár, yo Compruévo, to ap­
prooue, to commend, to allow, to praise,
to warrant.

* Compruéve, Compruévo, v. Com­
provár. 

* Compuérta de forteléza, a gate in a
castle before the maine or principall
gate, in the daie time to be taken vp.

* Compuésto, m.compounded, ordred,
setled, fitted, placed, framed, finished,
furnished, amended, dighted.

* Compulsória, a writ called a Sub­
pena.

* Compunción, f. a pricking forwarde,
a compunction, or pricking of consci­
ence.

* Compúse, Compusiéra, Compusi­
ésse, Compúso, vide Componér. 

* Compusición, or Composición, f. 
a composition.

* Computación, f. a computation, a rec­
koning, a calculation, a casting of ac­
counts.

* Computár, to recken, to cast account, to
calculate, to compute.

* Comvatír, vide Combatír, to com­
bate, to fight.

* Comuéve, vide Comovér. 

* Comvidár, vide Combidár. 

Comulgár, Præs. yo Comúlgo, 1.
Præt. yo Comulgué, to communi­
cate, to common, to receiue the com­
munion, to impart, to reueale.

* Comulgué, vide Comulgár. 

Comunál, the generall good of a coun­
trey, common, meane, indifferent well,
a common popular man, a man of vul­
gar note.

Común, common, vulgar, publike.

Comuneménte, commonly, ordinarilie,
for the most part.

* Comunéros, the factious and muti­
nous people that woulde haue all in
common.

* Comunicádo, m.imparted, communi­
cated, reuealed, disclosed.

* Communicación, f. a communicati­
on, a conference, talke.

* Communicadór, m.he that communi­
cateth, discloseth, or imparteth anie
thing.

* Comunicár, Præs. yo Comuníco, 1.
Præt. yo Comuniqué, to communi­
cate, to reueale, to disclose, to impart,
to bewray.

* Comunidád, f. the communalitie, the
commons. Also a rebellion.

* Comunión, f. communion, fellowship,
communitie.

* Comunique, vide Comunicár. 

Con, with.

* Conáto, m.endeuour, labour, trauell,
paines taken in the pursuite of any
cause.

* Conbádo, vide Combádo. 

* Conbalescér, vide Convalescér. 

* Conbatír, vide Combatír. 

* Conbencér, vide Convencér. 

* Conbeniénte, vide Conveniénte. 

* Conbénto, vide Convénto. 

* Conbersáble, vide Conversáble. 

* Conbersár, vide Conversár. 

* Conbertído, vide Convertído. 

* Conbezíno, vide Convezíno. 

* Conbinación, vide Convinación. 

* Conbidár, vide Combidár. 

* Conbíte, vide Combíte. 

* Concavidád, f. concauitie, hollow­
nesse.

* Concavo, m.hollow, caued, bowed,
crooked.

* Concebído, m.conceiued with childe.

Concebimiénto, m.conception, a con­
ceiuing of a thing.

Concebír, yo Concíbo, or Concevír,
to conceiue with childe, to conceiue with
the minde.

* Concedér, to grant, to giue place, to
consent, to yeeld vnto, to resigne, to af­
foord, to condiscend.

Concedído, granted, yeelded, condi­
scended.

† Concegíl, common, publike.

* Concejál, belonging to the councell.





* Concejéro, vide Consejéro, a coun­
sellor.

Concéjo, or Conséjo, aduise, counsell,
a councell holden, a guilde or corpora­
tion of men in a brotherhood.

* Concénto, a consent, a consort or con­
cordance in musicke.

* Concepción, a conceiuing with childe.

* Concepción, fiesta de María vírgen, 
the feast of the conception of the vigin
Mary.

* Concépto, or Concéto, m.conceiued.
Also a conceit or apprehension of the 
minde.

* Concernér, to concerne or belong vnto.

* Concertádo, agreed, reconciled, righ­
ted, accorded togither.

Concertadór, m.he that maketh the
agreement or attonement, a mediator.

Concertár, yo Conciérto, to agree, to
righten a cause, to condition, to coue­
nant, to bargaine, to promise, to cap­
tiuate, to make a contract, to redresse,
to reforme, to amend.

* Concertár discórdes, vide Compo­
ner discordes. 

* Concertóse para oy, it was concluded
against this day.

* Concéto, or Concépto, a place where
any thing is kept or contained, the
thing conceiued, conception or conceit.

* Concevído, vide Concebído. 

* Concevír, yo Concívo, vide Con­
cebír.

Cóncha, f. a cockle fish, the shell of a fish,
any shell fish, but properly a shell. It
signifieth also a bolle, a trey, a bason,
a pan.

* Cónchas de la már, all manner of shel
fish, as oisters, muscles, cockles, scallops,
&c.

* Conchéta, f. a snaile, a welke, a pery­
winkle.

Conchilla, f. idem. the shell of any small
fish.

* Conchuéla, idem. 

* Concíba, Concíbo, vide Concebír. 

Conciéncia, f. the conscience.

* Conciérta, Conciérte, vide Con­
certár. 

Conciérto, m.a bargaine, an agreement,
a compact, an attonement, an accord,
a consent.

* Conciliádo, m.woon, gotten, procured, 
allured, reconciled.

Conciliadór, m.a winner, a procurer, a
begetter, a reconciler.

Conciliár, to get, reconcile, winne, make
attonement, to gaine.

Concílio, m.councell.

* Consistório, vide Consistório, a con­
sistorie.

* Concíve, Concívo, vide Concevír. 

* Conclávio, the conclaue, a place where
the Popes are chosen. Also a closet.

Conclusión, f. a conclusion, a shutting
vp of a matter.

* Conclúso, m.concluded, ended, finish­
ed, resolued.

Concluýr, to conclude, to finish, to make
an end of.

Concordáble, agreeable, sutable, con­
cordable.

* Concordáncia, f. a concordance, an
agreement, an accord.

Concordár, yo Concuérdo, to concord,
to agree, to accord, to ioine togither.

Concórde, agreeing, assenting.

Concordaménte, agreeingly, louingly.

Concórdia, f. agreement, concord, peace,
vnitie.

* Concubína, f. a concubine, a leman.

* Concubinários, m.such as lie and
keepe companie with concubines.

Concuérda, Concuérdo, vide Con­
cordar. 

* Concurrír, to run togither, to agree, to
flocke togither, to concur.

* Concúrso, m.a concurse of people, or
running togither, a great meeting of
people togither.

Condádo, m.a countie, an earldome, a
shire.

Cónde, m.an Earle, a Count.

Condenación, f. condemnation, sen­
tence, damnation.

Condenádo, m.cast, condemned, senten­
ced, damned.

Condenár, to cast, to condemne, to sen­
tence, to iudge, to pronounce iudgement,
to damne.

* Condescendér, to agree, to condescend,
to consent, to yeeld vnto, to assent.

Condéssa, f. a Countesse, and Earles wife.

Condestáble, m.a conestable.

Condición, f. a state, a condition, a qua­
litie, a fashion, a couenant, an estate.

* ponér en Condición, to put on condi­
tion.

Condicionál, conditional, vpon condi­
tion.

Condicionalménte, conditionally, so 
that.

* Condígno, m.woorthie, condigne,
meete.

* prémio condígno, a condigne, meete or
worthie reward.

* Condolér, yo Conduélo, to grieue
with another, to condole, to bewaile, to
bemoane togither.

* Condolído, m.bewailed, moaned togi­
ther.

Condúcho, accustomed.

* Condúcta, or Condúta, f. a conduct, a
guide, a leading, a charge.

* Condúcto, as sálvo Condúcto,
brought, guided, lead, safe conducted.

* Condúta, vide Condúcta. 

* Condúzgo, Conduzga, vide Conduzír. 

Conduzído, lead, guided, conducted.

Conduzír, yo Condúzgo, to lead, to 
guide, to bring, to conduct.

* Conegéra, vide Conejéra. 

* Conegéro, one that selleth or keepeth
conies, a warrener. Also a warren for
conies.

* Conejéra, or Madriguéra, f. a conie
berrie or boale.

Conejéro, m.a warrener, he that kee­
peth a warren, oor conie-grea for co­
nies.

Conéjo, a conie, a rabbet.

Conejúno, of or pertayning to conies.

* Con el, Con ella, Con ello, Con ellos,
with him, with her, with the, with that,
with those, with them.

* Con esse, Con esso, with him, with that,
with it.

* Con este, Con esto, with him, with
this.

* Confación, f. confection, preseruing
with sugar.

Confacionadór, m.a confectioner, a
comfet-maker.

Confacionadúra, f. confection, making
of sweet meates.

* Confayción, vide Confación. 

* Confaycionár, to confect, to candie,
to preserue with sugar fruite or other
things.

* Confederación, f. a confederacie, a
plotting, a combination.

Confederádos, m.leaguers, confedera­
ted, confederates, combiners, conspi­
rers.

Confederár, to confederate, to make a
league, to enter into association, to agree
togither.

* Conferído, m.compared, matched, be­
stowed, imparted.

Conferír, y Confiéro, to compare, to
match, to bestow, to impart.

Confessár, yo Confiésso, to confesse, to
acknowledge.

Confessión, f. confession.

Confésso, m.a conuert to the christian
religion.

Confessór, m.a confessor.

* Confiadaménte, confidently, boldly,
trustily, assuredly, faithfully.

* Confiádo, trusted, confident, embold­
ned, assured.

Confiadór, m.he that trusteth, commit­
teth to trust or credit, beleeueth or gi­
ueth credit to the promise of another.

Confiánça, f. trust, confidence, credit,
boldnes, assurance, beliefe.

Confiándo, boldly, confidently.





Confiar, to trust, to giue credit.

* Confiére, Confiéro, vide Conferír. 

* Confiésse, Confiésso, vide Confes­
sár. 

* Confición, vide Confación. 

* Confines, m.confines, bounds, limits,
borders, lifts, marks, meere-stones.

Confirmación, f. a confirmation, an as­
surance, an establishing.

Confirmádo, m.confirmed, established,
made sure, approoued.

Confirmár, to confirme, to make sure, to
establish, to settle.

Confirmár en mál, to make obstinate, to
harden and obdurate in mischiefe.

Confiscación, f. confiscation, forfeiture.

* Confiscádo, m.forfeited, confiscate.

* Confiscár, Præs. yo Confisco, 1.
Præt. yo Confisqué, to forfeit, to con­
fiscate lands or goods either vpon capi­
tall or penall crime.

* Confisqué, vide Confiscár. 

Confitádo, m.confited, confected, can­
ded, preserued.

Confitár, to confite, to confect, to pre­
serue, to make comfits.

* Confiteár, idem. 

Confitéro, m.a comfit maker.

† Confites, m.comfits, iuncats, sweete
meates.

Confitúra, f. making comfits, or preser­
uing sweete meates.

* Conflícto, or Conflíto, a conflict, a
battell, a fight, a skirmish, an assault.

Conformación, f. conforming, fashio­
ning, framing.

Conformár, to conforme, to fashion, to
frame, to order.

Confórme, conformable, handsome, 
comely, agreeable, like, orderly.

Conformidád, f. comformitie, handsom­
nesse, order, agreement, consent, comli­
nesse, obedience, likenesse.

* Confortádo, m.comforted, cherished,
relieued, visited, perswaded, counselled,
animated, enticed, &c.

* Confortár, to comfort, to cherish, to
releeue, to visite, to perswade, to coun­
sell, to animate, to entice, to abet.

* Confráde, m.a sworne brother with
one, a fellow or companion with one in
a societie or corporation.

* no ay Confrádes de riñónes, there
are no cosen germaines of the disease
of the reines.

* Confradías, f. brotherhood, societies, fra
ternities, frieries, a conuent where men
liue in fraternitie and societie togi­
ther.

* Confundído, m.confounded, distur­
bed, vexed, tormented in minde, per­
plexed, astonished.

Confundír, to confound, to vexe, to trou­
ble, to torment, to turne topsie turuie all
things.

Confusaménte, confusedly.

Confusión, confusion, trouble, losse, asto­
nishment, perplexitie, distraction.

Confúso, m.confused, confounded, asto­
nished, distracted, troubled, tormen­
ted.

Confutár, to confute, to confound, to abo­
lish, to suppresse.

Congeládo, m.congealed, frozen.

Congelár, to freeze, to congeale.

* Congetúra, f. a coniecture, a supposi­
tion, a surmise, an imagination.

* Congeturár, to coniecture, to surmise,
to imagine, to suppose.

* Congojár, vide Congoxár. 

Congóxa, f. care, anguish, griefe, sorrow,
vexation, trouble of mind.

Congoxár, to vexe, to trouble, to grieue.

Congoxosaménte, carefully, trouble­
somly.

Congoxóso, m.full of care, trouble and
vexation.

* Congregación, f. a congregation, an
assemblie, a meeting togither.

Congregár, Præs. yo Congrégo, 1.
Præt. yo Congregué, to congregate,
to assemble, to gather togither.

* Congregué, vide Congregár. 

* Congréjo, vide Cangréjo. 

Cóngrio, m.a cunger eele.

* Cóngruo, m.fit, agreeable, meete, con­
uenient, proper.

* Conhortár, to exhort togither, to ioine
togither in a request.

Conjectúra, or Conjetúra, vide Con­
getúra, f. 

* Conjecturádo, or Conjeturádo, m.
coniectured, imagined, surmised, dee­
med, supposed.

Conjecturár, or Conjeturár, vide Con­
geturár. 

* Conjugación, f. a coniugation, a de­
clining, a conioyning togither, a cou­
pling, a marriage.

Conjugación de verbo, the coniuga­
tion of a verbe.

* Conjugál amór, the loue that is be­
tweene man and wife.

Conjunción, f. a ioining, a conioyning or
coupling togither, a knitting togither,
a combination.

* Conjúnto, m.ioyned, knitted, conioy­
ned, coupled togither.

* Conjuntúra, f. a ioyning, knitting or
coupling togither.

* Conjúra, f. a conspiracie.

* Conjuración, f. a conspiracie, a coniu­
ration, a trecherie.

* Conjurádo, coniured, conspired, con­
triued.

* Conjuradór, m.a coniurer, a conspira­
tor, a contriuer.

Conjurár, to conspire, to coniure, to con­
triue, to plot.

Cóño, m.a womans priuitie.

Conocér, yo Conósco, to know, to ac­
knowledge, to vnderstand, to wit.

Conoscíble, that may be knowen.

Conocído, m.knowen, an acquaintance,
a friend, a knowen man.

Conocidór, m.one that knoweth, an ac­
knowledger.

Conocidór de pléyto, m.an arbitra­
tor, a iudge.

Conociénte, knowing, witting, acknow­
ledging, vnderstanding, gratefull.

Conociemiénto, m.knowledge, ac­
knowledging, acquaintance.

Conocimiénto de paga, a bill of debt to
paie money, an obligation.

Conortación, f. a request, exhortation,
petition made iointly with others.

Conortádo, m.exhorted, entreated, re­
quested.

Conortár, vide Conhortár. 

Conoscér, vide Conocér. 

* Conoscedór, vide Conocidór. 

Conoscído, vide Conocído. 

Conoscimiénto, vide Conocimi­
énto. 

* Conoscimiénto de pága, a bill of
debt to pay money.

Conosótros, with vs.

* Conpórner, vide Compóner. 

* Conpuésto, vide Compuésto. 

* Con que viénes? with what come
you? what newes bring you?

Conquísta, f. a conquest, a victorie.

* Conquistádo, m.conquered, ouercome, 
vanquished, subdued, brought vn­
der.

* Conquistadór, m.a conqueror, a van­
quisher, an ouercommer.

Conquistár, to conquer, to subdue, to
vanquish, to ouercome.

* Consagración, f. consecration, a dedi­
cation to some holy vse.

Consagrádo, m.hollied, hallowed, conse­
crated, appointed to some holy vse.

Consagrár, to hallow, to consecrate, to
make holie.

* Consálmes de már, a kinde of rounde
blacke muscles.

* Consanguinidád, f. consanguinitie, 
kindred by bloud, neerenes in bloud.

Consazón y tiémpo, in season, in time, 
fitly.

Consegéro, vide Consejéro, m.

* Conseguiénte, following, consequent.

* Conseguienteménte, consequently, by
consequence, by order.

Conseguimiénto, m.a consequence, a
following, an attaining, atchieuing, ob­
taining.





Conseguír yo consigo, to followe, to
attaine, to reach, to obtaine, to get, to
atchieue.

Conséja, f. a fable, a tale, a nouell.

Consejár, to aduise, to counsell, to direct,
to perswade, to aske counsell.

Consejéro, or Concejéro, a counsel­
ler, a director.

* Conséjo, vide Concéjo, counsell, ad­
uise.

* Consentiénte, consenting, agreeing,
assenting, yeelding, a consenter.

Consentimiénto, m.consent, agreement,
assent, accord, a ioyning in opinion.

Consentír yo Consiénto, to consent, to
accord, to agree, to ioyne in opinion.

Consequéncia, f. a consequence, weight,
importance.

* Consérva, f. conserue. Also any kinde
of preserue, conserues, or sauce kept long

Consérva, a consort in shipping. Also a
fellow seruant.

* Conservádo, m.conserued, preserued,
kept, laid vp.

Conservadór, m.he that keepeth or pre­
serueth, a Iustice or keeper of the peace,
an ecclesiasticall magistrate.

Conservár, yo Consiérvo, to conserue,
to preserue, to keepe, to lay vp.

* Conservatória, an vpholding or main­
teining, a kinde of processe, keeping of
the peace.

Consideración, f. consideration, aduise,
premeditation, forecast.

Consideraménte, consideration, ad­
uisedly, deliberately, warily, heedilie,
prouidently.

Considerádo, m.considered, aduised,
warie, heedie, prouident, deliberate,
considerate.

Consideradór, m.he that considereth,
forecasteth, foreseeth, deliberateth.

Considerár, to consider, to cast, to forecast,
foresee, to deliberate, to weigh, to pon­
der, to aduise, to debate, to search.

* Consiénta, Consiénto, vide Con­
sentír. 

* Consierve, Consiérvo, vide Conser­
vár. 

* Consiga, Consigo, vide Consequír. 

* Consignación, f. a directing, an assig­
ning, consigning, appointing, setting
ouer, a resignation, a deliuerie.

* Consignádo, m.consigned, directed, as­
signed, appointed, ordeined, deputed.

* Consignár, to consigne, to appoint, to
direct, to assigne, to ordeine, to depute,
to substitute, to resigne, to deliuer.

Consígo, with him.

Consiguénte, vide Conseguiénte. 

Consiguienteménte, vide Consegui­
enteménte. 

Consiliário, m.a counsellour.

* Consintír, vide Consentír. 

Consistório, m.a consistorie, an assemblie
of the clergie in some place to determine
and set order in causes ecclesiasticall.

Consolación, f. consolation, comfort, re­
freshing.

* Consoládo, m.cherished, comforted, re­
freshed. Also a consulate or office of
Consulship vsed in Rome.

Consoladór, m.a comforter, a cherisher
or cherer vp, a perswader.

Consoladóra cósa, comfortable, any
thing comfortable or cordiall to a weak
stomacke.

Consolár, yo Consuélo, to comfort, to
cherish, to perswade, to cheere vp, to a­
nimate.

* Consolidádo, made whole and sound.

Consonáncia, f. consonancie, agreement,
a harmonie or consent either in voices
or in sounds, conformitie.

Consonánte, consonant, agreeable, meet,
conuenient, befitting, sounding well.
Also a letter called a consonant, confor­
mable.

Consonár, yo Consuéno, to sound to­
gither, to consent, to agree, to conforme.

* Consórte, a companion, a fellow mate, a
consrt.

* Conspiración, f. conspiracie, coniura­
tion, a plotting.

Conspirár, vide Conjurár. 

Constáncia, f. constancie, stedfastnes, sta­
bilitie, staiednes.

* Constáncia, f. a citie in Cipres, and a
chiefe citie in Switzerland in Ger­
manie.

* Constándo, it being manifest.

* Constánte, contant, firme, stayed, sta­
ble, resolute, determinate, assured, sted­
fast.

Constantaménte, constantly, firmely,
stoutly, resolutely, stedfastly, boldly,
couragiously.

* Cónsta la cósa, the matter appeereth
plainely.

* Constár, to be manifest.

Constellación, f. a constellation.

Constitución, f. a constitution, an insti­
tution, an ordinance, a decree, an ap­
pointment, a placing, an assignement.

* Constituýdo, m.ordained, constituted,
appointed, placed, put, set, deputed, a de­
putie, a substitute.

* Constituydór, a constituter, an establi­
sher, or ordeiner. Also any thing to be ap­
pointed or established hereafter.

Constituýr, to appoint, to ordaine, to
place, to set ouer, to constitute, to depute,
to assigne, to establish.

* Constreñír, yo Contríño, to force,
to constraine, to compell, to vrge.

* Constreñído, m.forced, constrayned,
compelled, vrged.

* Constríñe, constríño, vide Constre­
ñír. 

* Consuégro, m.when two fathers mar­
rie their children one to the other, they
are consuegros brothers by marriage.

Consuélda, f. the herbe Larke-foot.

* Consuélda mayór, the herbe Comfrey,
knit-backe, or backe-wort.

* Consuélo, m.comfort, consolation, per­
swasion, helpe.

* Consuéle, Consuélo, vide Conso­
lár. 

* Consuéne, Consuéno, vide Conso­
nár. 

Cónsul, m.a consul, an officer, wherof two
were yeerely chosen in Rome vpon the
deposing of their kings, to gouerne as
well in time of peace, as in matters of
warre. Also a Mayor or chiefe magi­
strate of a citie.

Consuládo, m.the office of Consul­
ship.

Consulár, the consulate, pertayning to the
Consull, he that was Consull.

* Consúlta, f. a counsell, a consultation, a
debating of causes.

* Consultádo, m.consulted, depated vp­
on.

Consultár, to consult with, to debate, to
deliberate, to ponder.

Consumación, f. an ending, a consum­
mation, a finishing, a consuming.

* Consumádo, m.consumed, finished,
comsummate, wasted, spent.

* Consumár, to consummate, to make an
end of.

* Consumído, m.consumed, spent, wa­
sted.

Consumír, to consume, to spend, or waste
riotously, to fall away, to be in a con­
sumption.

Consuno, vide juntaménte. 

* Contáble, accomptable.

* Contadéro, m.a place where they cast
vp accounts.

Contádo, m.counted, reckoned, summed
vp. Also told or reported.

* Contadór mayór, a chauncellor of the
Exchequer.

Contadór, m.an accounter, a teller of the
exchequer. An auditor, a treasurer.
Also a counter to cast withall.

* Contadór de la artillería, an auditor
of the presse or artillerie.

Contaduria, f. the office of a teller. Audi­
torship or the office of a Lord treasu­
rer.

Contagión, f. contagion, infection.

* Contagióso, m.contagious, infecti­
ous.

Contál de cuéntas, a set of counters.

Con tal que, so that, vpon condition that.





* Contaminádo, m.stained, defiled, con­
taminate, polluted, infected, corrup­
ted.

Contaminár, to defile, to corrupt, to pol­
lute, infect, contaminate.

* Contánte, a counter.

Contár, yo Cuénto, to count, to audite,
to recken, to account, to cast account, to
tell, to number, to report.

* Contár fabulas, to tell tales.

* Contecér, yo Contésco, vide Acon­
tescér. 

* Contémos, let vs recken or count, or let
vs tell a tale.

Contemplación, f. contemplation, spe­
culation.

Contempládo, m.contemplated, specula­
ted, beheld.

* Contempladór, m.he that contempla­
teth.

Contemplár, to contemplate, to behold, 
to speculate.

* Contemplatívo, contemplatiue, spe­
culatiue.

Contención, f. contention, debate, wran­
gling, strife.

Contencióso, m.contentious, striuing, 
giuen to debate.

* Contendedór, one that contendeth or
goeth to law with another.

* Contendór, idem. 

Contendér, yo Contiéndo, to contend, 
to debate, to striue, to wrangle.

Contenérse, yo Conténgo, to containe
himselfe, to rule, to bridle himselfe, to
moderate and keepe himselfe within
bounds.

* Contenído, contained, held. Also the
thing contained.

Contentamiénto, m.contentment, sa­
tisfaction.

Contentár, to content, to please, to satis­
fie, to still, to pacifie, to quiet.

Conténto, m.content, pleased, satisfied,
quiet. Also contentment.

Conténto, or Plazér, content, pleasure,
thanks.

Contéra, f. the chape of a sword or dag­
ger.

* Conterráneo, m.a man of the same
countrie or shire with one.

* Contézca, or Contésca, vide Con­
tecér. 

* Contestación, a manifestation.

* pleýto Contestádo, a plea set downe
on a peremptorie day.

* Contezuéla, f. a little paire of beades,
a little account or a litte fable.

* Contías, f. sums of money.

Contiénda, f. a brall, a hurlie burle, a
strife, a contention, a conflict, a com­
bat.

* Contiénde, Contiéndo, vide Con­
tendér. 

Contígo, with thee.

Continéncia, f. continencie of life, cha­
stitie, temperancie.

Continénte, chaste, temperate, moderate,
continent. Also the gesture, the coun­
tenance.

Continenteménte, chastely, tempe­
rately, moderately, continently.

* Contingibile, that happeneth by
chaunce or casualtie.

Contíno, continuall, alwaies, daily.

* Continuación, f. length, continuance, 
encrease.

* Continuadaménte, continually, per­
petually.

* Continuádo, m.continued, lenthe­
ned, prolonged.

Continuaménte, vide Continuada­
ménte. 

Continuár, to continue, to hold on, to
lengthen, to prolong.

* Continuidád, f. perpetuitie.

Contínuo, vide Contíno. 

* Contióso, m.bounde to keepe a great
horse and his furniture to serue the
prince, or a man hauing about 1500.
ducats of reuenue yeerely comming in.

Contonéo, m.moouing, stirring, ietting.

Contórno, round about.

Cóntra, against, ouer against, opposite.

* Contracifra, a countercipher, a cipher
that doth answere and open another
cipher.

* Contrácto, a bargaine, couenant, or
contract.

Contradezidór, m.a gainesaier, a con­
tradictor.

Contradezidóra cósa, gainsaying.

Contradezír, Indic. Præs. Contradígo,
contradizes, contradize, 1. Præt.
Contradíxe, contradixiste, con­
tradixo, Fut. Contradiré, dirás, di­
rá, Subiunct. Præs. Contradíga, Im­
perfect. Contradixéra, contrediría,
or contradixésse, Fut. Contradix­
ére, to contradict or gainsay.

* Contradícho, m.gainsaied, contra­
dicted.

Contradición, f. contradiction, gain­
saying.

* Contradíga, contradígo, vide Con­
tradezír. 

* Contradíxe, contradixéra, contra­
dixésse, contradíxo, vide Contra­
dezír. 

* Contraditór, vide Contradezidór. 

* Contraduéllo, m.a countermaund or
a gainsaying of the lawe of Duello,
which is to combat and fight the listes
for the reputation or honor.

* Contraér, Indicat. Præs. Contráygo,
contráes, contráe, 1. Præt. Contrú­
xe or contráxe, íste, contrúxo, Fut.
Contraeré, rás, rá, Sub. Præs. Con­
tráyga, Imperfect. Contruxésse or
contraxésse, Fut. Contruxére, to
contract, to bagaine, to couenant, to
bring togither.

* Contrafuérte, a counterfort or skonce.

* Contrahága, contrahágo, vide Con­
trahazér. 

Contrahazedór, m.a counterfeiter, an
imitater, an offender.

Contrahazér, Præs. Contrahágo, con­
traházes, contraháze, 1. Præt. Con­
trahíze, contrahíziste, contrahízo,
Fut. Contraharé, rás, rá, Sub Præs.
Contrahága, Imperfect. Contrahi­
ziéra, contraharia, or contrahizi­
ésse, Fut. Contrahiziére, to counter­
feit, to imitate, to deceiue, to suborne,
to doe against.

Contrahazimiénto, m.counterfeiting,
dissembling, deceiuing, imitating.

Contrahécho, m.counterfeited, imita­
ted.

* Contrahezedór, vide Contrahaze­
dór. 

* Contrahíze, Contrahiziéra, Con­
trahiziésse, Contrahízo, vide Con­
trahazér. 

* Contraído, m.contracted, brought to­
gither, purchased.

* Contráiga, Contráigo, vide Con­
traér. 

* Contralór, a controuler.

* Contramaéstre, or Contremaéstre,
a boateswaine in a ship.

Contramína, f. a countermine.

* Contraminádo, m.countermined.

Contraminár, to countermine.

Contramúro, m.a countermure, a coun­
terscarfe.

* Contramúros, rampiers to defende
wals, counterscarfes.

* Contrapélo, against the haire.

* Contrapesádo, m.counterpeized.

Contrapesár, to counterpeize.

Contrapéso, m.a counterpoise.

* Contrapéso, the plummet of a clocke.

Contrapóliça, f. the counterpaine of a
charter partie, a counterbill.

Contraponedór, m.an opposer, one that
setteth against.

Contraponér, Præs. Contrapóngo,
contrapónes, contrapóne, 1. Præt.
Contrapúse, pusíste, púso. Fut.
Contrapondré, or Contraporné,
ás, á, Sub. Præ. Contrapónga, Im­
perfect. Contrapusiéra, contrapusi­
ésse, or Contrapornía, Fut. Contra­
pusiére, to oppose, to set against, to re­
sist, to lay against.

* Contrapónga, Contrapóngo, vide 
Contraponér. 





Contraposición, f. an opposition, a con­
trarietie, a setting against.

* Contrapuésto, m.set against, opposed.

* Contrapunteár, to counterpoint.

* Contrapúnto, a counterpoint, pause, or
rest in musicke.

* Contrapúse, Contrapusiéra, Con­
trapusiésse, Contrapúso, vide, Con­
traponér. 

Contrariár, to oppose, to impugne, to re­
sist, to contrary.

Contrariaridád, f. contrarietie, opposi­
tion.

Contrário, m.contrarie, opposite, a­
gainst.

* Contrarónda, f. a counterround, when
one round goeth one way, and another
another. Also officers that go to visite
the watch of the corps du gard, senti­
nels, or rounde, to see if they be dili­
gent in their watches, or no.

* Contraséño, a priuie token, marke, or
signe betweene two.

* Contrastáble, contentious, apt to con­
tention.

Contrastár, to contend, to withstande, to
resist, to striue against, to wrangle, to
iangle, to braule, to iarre.

Contráste, m.contention, brauling, stri­
uing, iarring, wrangling.

Contratación, f. contracting, bargai­
ning.

Contratár, to contract, to bargaine, to
treate togither.

Contráto, m.a contract, a bargaine.

* Contravénga, Contravéngo, vide 
Contravenír. 

Contravenír, Præs. Contravéngo,
viénes, viéne, 1. Præt. Contravine,
veníste, víno, Fut. Contraverné,
nás, ná. Sub. Præs. Contravénga,
 Imperfect. Contraviniéra, contra­
vernía, or Contraviniésse, Fut. con­
traviniére, to withstande, to come a­
gainst, to oppose, to resist, to trans­
gresse.

* Contravenído, m.resisted, opposed,
withstoode.

* Contravérne, vide Contravenír. 

Contravíne, Contraviniésse, Contra­
viniéra, vide Contravenír. 

* Contráxe, Contraxéra, vide Con­
traér. 

* Contráyga, Contráygo, vide Con­
traér. 

* Contráy, a kind of very fine cloth com­
monly of a red colour.

* Contrazuanéte, the top gallant mast of
a ship.

Contrécho, m.weake, bruised, lamed,
maimed, cripled.

* Contremaéstre, vide Contrama­
éstre. 

Contribución, f. a contribution, distri­
bution, imparting with others.

Contribudór, m.a contributer.

Contribuýr, to contribute, to impart, to
distribute.

* Contrición, f. contrition, penitencie,
remorse, repentance.

* Contríto, m.contrite, sorrowfull, peni­
tent, repentant.

* Controvérsia, a controuersie.

* Contrúxe, Contruxéra, Contrúxo,
vide Contraér. 

Contumaceménte, stubbornely, fro­
wardly, obstinately, wilfully, disdaine­
fully.

Contumácia, f. obstinacie, contumacie,
stubbornnes, wilfulnes, forwardnes,
didainefulnes, contempt.

Contumáz, stubborne, obstinate, wilfull,
selfe-willed, disobedient, head-strong,
froward, disdainefull, scornefull, con­
temptuous.

* Contumélia, f. a reproche, a contume­
ly, a slander, a false imputation, a
wrong suggestion.

* Contumelióso, m.contumelious, slan­
derous, reprochfull.

* Conturbádo, m.troubled, molested,
disquieted, vexed.

Conturbár, to trouble, to molest, to dis­
quiet, to vexe.

Convalecér, yo Convalésco, to recouer
health, to waxe strong, to be in health.

* Convalecído, m.in health, recouered
from sicknes, healthfull.

Convalecimiénto, m.recouery of health.

Convalescér, vide Convalecér. 

Convencér, yo Conviénço, to con­
uince, to conuict, to ouerthrow.

* Convencído, m.conuicted, conuinced,
ouerthrowne.

Convención, f. a bargaine, an agree­
ment, a couenant, a condition.

* Convencionál, belonging to a bar­
gaine, agreement or contract.

* Convenéncia, f. conueniencia, fitnesse,
meetnesse, aptnesse, expediencie.

Convénga, Convéngo, vide Con­
venír. 

* Conveníble, conuenable, meete, fit,
seemely, conuenient, agreeable, expedi­
ent, necessarie.

Convenibleménte, conueniently, fitly,
aptly, conuenably, agreeably, seemely.

* Convenído, m.agreed vpon, conclu­
ded on.

Conveniéncia, vide Convenéncia, a­
greement.

Conveniénte, vide Conveníble. 

Convenienteménte, vide Conveni­
bleménte. 

Convenír, Præs. Convéngo, convié­
nes, conviéne, 1. Præt. Convíne,
viníste, víno, Fut. Converné, nás,
ná, Sub. Præs. Convénga, Imperfect.
Conviniéra, convernía, or convini­
ésse, Fut. Conviniére, to be expedi­
ent, to behooue, to be conuenient. Also
to come or meete togither, to agree to­
gither or iumpe in opinion, to appeere,
to conuent, to cite.

Convénto, m.a couent or house of reli­
gion, a meeting place. Also a couenant,
an agreement, a place of assemblie.

Conventuál, pertaining to the assemblie
of a couent or religious house.

* Conventualménte, after the manner
of an assemblie or meeting.

* Converción, vide Conversión. 

* Convernía, vide Convenír. 

* Conversáble, sociable, conuersant, con­
uersable.

Conversación, f. societie, conuersation,
companie.

* Conversádo, m.conuersant, sociable.

Conversár, to conuerse, to associate, to
companie.

* Conversión, or Converción, f. con­
uersion, change, alteratin.

* Convertído, m.conuerted, changed,
translated, turned.

Convertír, to turne, to conuert, to alter,
to translate.

* Convezíno, m.a neere neighbour.

* Convidár, vide Conbídar. 

* Conviénça, Conviénço, vide Con­
vencér. 

* Conviéne, it behooueth, it is requisite,
it is necessarie.

* Convíne, conviniésse, conviniéra,
convíno, vide Convenír. 

* Conviérte, vide Convertír. 

* Convíte, or Conbíte, vide Com­
bíte. 

* Convinación, a combining, a coupling,
a fitting, an agreeing.

* Convocár, to call togither.

* Con-vosótros, with you, in your com­
panie.

Conúsco, with vs.

Convúsco, with you.

* Conxetúra, vide Congetúra. 

* Como, id est, Cómo, as, how, that, see­
ing.

Cópa, f. a cup, a goblet, a bowle. Also a
hart at cardes.

Cópa, or Redondéz, any round hollow
thing, a round hollow cup.

Copáda, vide Cogujáda. 

Copádo, a little craier or small boate.
Also made after the manner of a cup
round.

Copádo árbol, a bushie tree made or cut
round as a cup.

* Copagórja, f. a priuie, close or pocket
dagger. Also a short sword.





* Copéla, f. a little cup. Also a melting
pot or pan.

Copéro, m.a cupbearer.

Copéte, m.the forebush of the haire, a
locke of haire before.

* Copéte de los cabéllos, the locks of 
womens haires tuffed out before.

* góme de Cópei, a kinde of gum that
comes from the Indies very medicina­
ble.

Cópia, f. abundance, store, leaue, copie,
plentie: a copie, an example, an origi­
nall, a transcript.

Copiár, to copie out, to write out, to dou­
ble.

Copilár, to compile, to gather out of
bookes.

* Copiosaménte, copiously, plentiful­
lie.

* Copióso, m.copious, plentifull, abun­
dant, large.

* Cópla, f. a staffe of verses.

* Copleár, to make rimes or verses.

çópo, maimed, lame, halting.

Cópo, m.a bale or bundle of flaxe, a
tuffe of flaxe or hempe readie for the
spinner, a stake or roule of snow.

* Cópo, or Orçuzélo, a pitfall, springe,
or ginne to catch birdes or beastes in,
or a ginne or net to catch fish.

Cópo para hilár, a distaffe full of flaxe.

* Cópo de niéve, a flake or roule of
snowe.

* Cópo de lána, a locke, flocke, fleece, or
tuft of wooll.

* Copón de cuéro, m.a leather iacke to
drinke in.

* Copredéra, a couer, to couer a cup or 
such like, &c.

Coquíllo, m.a worme that eateth
vines.

* Coquína, vide Alméja. 

Coráça, a corselet, a coate of maile, a
cuirace, a brest plate, a corcelet made
in the manner of a priuie coate, coue­
red with silke or veluet on the out­
side.

Coráça, or Cibolléte, a trusse, a iacket
sleeues, a mandillion.

Coráças, cuiraces, or a corselet in the
manner of a priuie cote plated within,
to bende with the bodie, couered ouer
with silke, veluet, or such like, &c.

Coraçína, vide Corazína, idem. 

* Coraçínas, idem. 

Coraçón, m.the hart, courage.

Coraçoncíllo yerva, an herbe called
Saint Iohns woort.

Coradéla, f. the entralles of man or
beast, the bowels.

Coráge, or Coráje, m.courage, stoutnes,
boldnes, hardines.

Corál, corall, it groweth in the sea like a
shrubbed stumpe, and groweth to ex­
ceeding hardnes, after it is taken out of
the sea.

* Coraládo, m.done with corall.

* Corámbre, a dicker of leather.

* Coráxa entre dos múros, a skarfe
betweene walles, a defence to keepe out
the enimie.

* Corázas, vide Coráças. 

* Corazína, or Coraçína, curaces pla­
ted within after the manner of a priuy
coate couered ouer with silke, veluet, or
such like, &c. vide Coráças.

* Córbe, m.a swelling in a horse called
the curbe.

* Córbo, or Córvo, m.crooked, bent
hooked.

Corbádo, vide Corvádo, crooked.

Córça, f. a faune, a calfe of a hinde, a
yoong hinde.

* çorçál, m.Veldefare, a birde bigger
then a thrush, of the same colour.

* çorçáles de passo, Veldefares that
come and goe to another countrey or
place.

* Corcésca, f. a kinde of weapon like a
halbard.

Córcha, f. corke.

Corchéte de vestidúra, a claspe, a
hooke, a sergeant, a catchpole.

* Corchétes, or Gársios, hookes and eies
to claspe clothes togither with.

Córcho, vide Córcha. 

Córcho de colména, a Bee-hiue of
corke.

* Corçílla, or Corzílla, a roe-bucke, a
little deere.

* Corçíllo, m.yoong venison.

* Córço, m.a deere, venison, a man of
Corsica.

* Córco, vide Córcha. 

Corcóba, f. a bunch in the backe, a
croope, a knob. also a shrimpe.

Corcobádo, m.crooke backe, bunch
backed, full of knobs or kurs, crooked.

* Corcobár, to bow, to bende, to make
crooke-backed.

Corcóbos, m.the lifting of a horse to cast
a man out of the saddle.

* Corcóva, vide Corcóba. 

* Corcovádo, vide Corcobádo. 

* Corcóvos, vide Corcóbos. 

Cordál, the hindermost chock-tooth.

Cordél, or Cordón, m.a roape, a halter,
a string, a hatband, a bow-string.

* Cordelláte, a kinde of course cloth with
great threads in it.

* Cordenáda, f. vide Cordonáda, a
twitch or plucke with a coard, a blow or
lash with a coard.

Cordéra, f. a female lambe.

* Cordería, f. coarding, greate store of
coards. Also a place where lambs are.

* Corderíco, m.a yoong lambe.

Corderíllo, m.idem. 

* Cordéro, m.a male lambe.

* Cordéro ahijádo, m.a sucking lambe.

* Cordezuéla, f. a little roape, a small
coard.

* Cordiaco mórbo, a kind of disease at
the hart.

* Cordiál, cordiall, good for the hart.

* Cordilléra, f. the running along of a
rocke in great length.

Cordójo, m.a hart griefe, sorrow, teene,
trouble of minde.

* Cordón, vide Cordél, m.also the ridge
in a wall made more out then the wall,
running all along.

Cordonáda, or Cordenáda, coarded,
bound with coardes. A blowe with a
string, or lash with a whip.

* Cordonádo, m.idem. 

Cordoncilla, f. a little coard.

* Cordoncíllo, m.idem. 

* Cordonéro, m.a roape-maker, one that
selleth roapes.

* Cordonzilla, f. a little coard.

* Cordonzillo, m.a small coard, a whip­
coard.

* Córdua, vide Cordouán. 

* çapátos de Córdua, Spanish leather
shooes.

* Cordován, cordouan or Spanish lea­
ther.

* Cordúra, f. wisedome, grauitie, discre­
tion.

* Coréa, vide Corréa. 

çoríta, or çuríta, f. a yoong stocke doue.
Also a towne in Spaine. Also the name
of a Historiographer of Aragon.

Córma, f. a little paire of stockes. Also a
clog of wood or such like for horses, or to
put on boyes feete that runne from their
masters.

* Cornáda, a push with a horne of a
beast, &c.

* Cornadillo, a Diminuitiue of Corná­
do, a little small peece of coine.

Cornádo, m.a farthing, or small peece of
money.

* Cornaménta, the horning of any
thing.

Cornamúsa, f. a cornamuse, a horne-pipe,
a bagpipe.

* Cornarína, f. a kinde of blacke Onyx
stone, or a thing made of horne.

Corneadór, m.a pusher with the hornes.

Corneár, to horne, to push with the
hornes, to shocke or but as rams do, to set
hornes vpon ones head.

Cornéja, f. a daw, a rooke, a chough, a
crow. 

Cornerína, vide Cornarína, or made of
horne.

Cornéta, f. a cornet, an instrument





of musicke. Also the ensigne or cornet
which is carried in a troope of horse.

* Cornetíca, f. a little cornet, an instru­
ment so called.

* Cornezuéla, f. a little horne or bu­
gle.

Cornicábra, f. the tree from whence
Turpentine is made, a Turpentine
tree.

* Cornífero, that beareth hornes.

* Cornígero, m.that beareth hornes.

* Corníza, f. garnishing in Masons arte,
or Ioyners arte. Also the cornell or long
cherrie-tree, hounds-tree, dog-berrie-
tree, prick-timber-tree, or gaterisber­
rie tree.

* Cornízolos, haw-berries, gaterisber­
ries.

Cornúdo, m.horned, a cuckold. Also a
kind of fish.

* Córo, m.a quier, a company, the tur­
ning of the saile.

* de Córo, by hart, without booke.

* çorobáro, m.an Island in the Indies.

Coróça, f. a painted hat verie high of pa­
per set on the head of a witch or bawde
riding vp and downe the streetes there­
with on an asse for a punishment.

* Coroládo, m.vide Coraládo, done
with corall.

* Corón, a citie in Africa.

Coróna, f. a crowne, a garland, a miter, a
circlet, a chaplet, a diademe, a compa­
nie, a crue. Also a signe in heauen.

* Coróna de réy, the herbe called Meli­
lot.

Coróna de religióso, a priestes or friers
shauen head or crowne.

Coronación, f. a crowning, a corona­
tion.

* Coronádo, m.crowned, compassed
round.

Coronár, to crowne, to engarland.

* Coronél, m.a Collonell ouer a regi­
ment.

* Coronelía, f. a collonelship.

* Corónica, f. a Chronicle.

* Coronícia, vide Corónica. 

* Coronílla de la cabéça, f. the crowne
or sconce of the head.

* Coronílla, f. a coronet or little crowne,
a chaplet, a circlet. Also a certaine
herbe.

Coronísta, m.a Chronicler, a writer of
chronicles.

* Coróza, vide Coróça. 

Corporál, corporall, belonging to the
bodie.

* Corporál, m.of, or pertaining to the
bodie. Also the boxe of linnen cloth
wherein the priestes keepe or wrappe
their hoste or sacrament.

* Corpóreo, m.corporall, hauing a bo­
die.

Corpuléncia, f. corpulencie, greatnes of
bodie.

* Corpulénto, m.corpulent, bigge, great
of bodie.

* çórra, vide Zórra. 

† Corrál, a yard, a court, a quadrangle
to keepe foule, poultrie, or such like fr
prouision of a house, the backeside of a
house, an oxe stall, or yard where cat­
tell goe, a peece of ground impaled.

† Corrál de gallínos, a henne-yarde, a
court to keepe poultrie in.

* † Corrál, or Cuéva, a vault, a cellar, a
caue, a den, a pit.

† Corrallíllo, m.a little court, yarde, or
backeside.

* Corrámbre, a dicker of leather.

† Corréa, f. a stripe, a scourge, a band, a
girt, a cingle, a latchet of a shooe.

† Corréa de cuéro, f. a strap, a belt, a
stirrup leather, a thong of leather, a
leather girdle.

Correción, f. punishment, correction,
chastisement.

Correctór, m.a corrector, a censor, a pu­
nisher.

Corredéra, f. a race for horses, a horse
race.

Corredíza, f. a sliding knot.

Corredór, m.a runner, a gallerie, a cur­
taine. Also one that selleth old clothes,
a broker, a messenger, a running poste,
a forrager.

Corredór, or Medianéro, a herald, a
messenger, an interpreter, a pursi­
uant, a broker.

Corredór de cása, a gallerie of a house,
standing on pillars or turned poastes,
the lowest gallerie, the higher the Spa­
niard calleth Gallería.

Corredór del cámpo, a forrager, one
that forrageth or runneth about the
countrey for to discouer.

Corredór que córre, a running post.

* Correduría, f. a race or running place,
brokage of a broker betweene partie
and partie, a going on bootehaling.

* Salír a Corredurías, to go on boote­
haling, to go vp and downe robbing
and spoiling the countrey.

* Corregído, m.corrected, amended.

Corregidór, m.a corrector, an amender.
Also an officer in Spaine, the chiefe
Iusticer or gouernour of a towne.

Corregidór oficiál, a iustice, a correc­
tr or gouernour of a towne, a clarke
of the market, one that hath authoritie
to reforme waights, measures, and sun­
drie other abuses.

Corregimiénto, m.a iustices office, oor
authoritie.

Corregír, yo Corríjo, to correct, to a­
mend.

Corregúdo, m.knotgrasse.

* Correhuéla yerva, swines grasse,
knotgrasse, or blood woort.

Correndilla, f. a race for horses.

Corréo, m.a post, a carrier, a bagge for
money.

Corrér, to runne, to flowe, to make asha­
med, to baite a bull, &c.

Corrér a las paréjas, to run alike.

* Corrér sortijas, to run at the ring.

Corrér torós, to baite buls.

* a todo Corrér huýr, to run awaie as
fast as one can.

Correría, f. running, coursing, a going or
running out of soldiers for boote.

* Corrésca, f. a kinde of halbert.

* Correspondéncia, f. answering togi­
ther.

Correspondiénte, answering togither,
that agreeth with, that answereth to.

* Correspondér, to answer togither or
alike, to be correspondent, to be answe­
rable, to agree vnto.

Corretáge, m.brokage money.

* Corretór, a corrector, an amender.

Corrída, f. a course, a running ouer. Also
a shaming or putting out of countenance.

* de Corrída, hastily, runningly, with
speede.

Corrído, m.offended, ashamed.

* Corrído estóy, I am ashamed of it.

Corriénte, running, a small brooke, the
chanell, streame or currant of a riuer.

† Corrihuéla, f. knotgrasse.

* Corríja, Corríjo, vide Corregír. 

Coríllo, m. a companie standing round.

* Corrióla, f. knotgrasse or swines grasse.
Also the greater bindweede or rope­
weede.

* Corrimiénto, m.a running, a shaming.
Also a running of the rheume.

Córro de tóro, a bull baiting.

* Corroborádo, m.strengthened.

* Corroborár, to strengthen.

* Corróça, vide Coróça. 

* Corrolários, m.preambles or forespee­
ches.

* Corrompedór, m.a corrupter. Also a
briber.

Corrompér, to corrupt, to putrifie. Also
to bribe.

* Corrompído, m.corrupted, rotten, pu­
trified.

Corrompimiénto, m.corrupting, spoy­
ling, marring. Also a bribing.

* Corrupción, f. corruption. Also bri­
berie.

* Corruptíble, that may be corrupted.

* Corrúpto, m. corrupted.

* Corsér, m.a courser, a great horse for
armed men.

* Córsia, the orlop of a ship.





* Córta de razónes, short witted.

* Cortabólsas, a cutpurse.

* Cortáda rópa, a garment cut out and
not finished.

* Cortadéro, m.a cutting, a place where
one cutteth. Also a place where men
backbite others.

* Cortádo, m. cut.

Cortadór, m.a cutter.

Cortadóra cósa, f. a thing that cutteth
well.

Cortadúra, f. cutting the iags or outsides
of leaues.

Cortapísa, the furre or lining about the
skirts of a garment.

Cortár, to cut, to take off the barke.

* Cortárse, or Desmayárse, to fall into
a swoune.

Córte, f. a princes court, a stately court
yard, a parliament, a court of alder­
men. Also the edge of a weapon or
knife.

* hazér Córtes, to call a parliament.

* el Córte, the edge of any weapon or
knife.

* Cortéça, vide Cortéza. 

* Corteçón, vide Cortezón. 

* Cortedád, f. shortnes, breuity, niggard­
linesse, pinching.

* Cortepíza, or Cortepísa, the furre or
lining about the skirts of a garment.

Cortesána, f. a woman courtier.

* Cortesanaménte, courteously, with
much courtlinesse or courtesie.

* Cortesanía, f. courtiership.

Cortesáno, m.a courtier.

Córtes, curteous, gentle, meeke, affable.

Cortesía, f. curtesie, kindnesse, mildnesse,
meekenesse, gentlenesse, affabilitie.

Cortesménte, curteously.

Cortéza, f. the barke, the rind, the crust,
the shell of a thing, a paring of anie
thing.

* Cortezón, m.a crust.

Cortína, f. a curteine of a bed, a curteine
of a wall, running leauell from one
bulwarke to another.

* Cortináje, m.belonging to a curteine of
earth, or also to the curteine of a bed.

Cortinál, a yard or court of a house.

† Cortíjo, a hamlet, a farme.

† Cortijos, a field of errable land, a dai­
rie house.

Córto, m.short, weake harted.

* Córto de razónes, short witted.

Córva de la piérna, the hamme.

Corvádo, or Corbádo, crooked.

Corvadúra, f. crookednes.

* Corvár, to bend, to make crooked. also
to stowpe.

* Córve, vide Córbe. 

* Corvéña rása, the plaine ground.

* Corúja áve, f. a howlet.

* Corvíllo, as Miércoles de corvillo, 
Ash-wednesday.

* Corvina, f. a kinde of sea fish.

Corúña, f. a hauen towne within Gali­
zia in Spaine, called the Groyne.

Córvo, or Córbo, crooked.

* Corúsa, vide Corúsca. 

Corúsca, f. an owle.

Córza, f. a roe-bucke.

* çorzál, vide çorçál. 

* Corzílla, vide Corçílla, f. 

* Corzíllo, m.idem. 

* Córzo, vide Córço. 

Cósa, f. a thing, a matter.

Cosário, vide Cossário, a pyrate at sea,
a rouer at sea.

* Coscogíta, vide Coscojíta. 

Coscója, f. a tree whereon Diers graine
groweth.

Coscojár, a groue of such trees.

* Coscojíta, or Coscoxíta, a hoppe vp­
on one legge.

* Coscoxita, idem. 

Cosécha, f. profite, fruit, reuenewe, har­
uest, grape gathering, gathering of
fruit, getting of hony.

Cosedúra, f. sowing togither.

* Coseléte, vide Cosseléte. 

Cosér, yo Cuéso, to sow, to stitch.

* Coshorrón, vide Coxcorrón. 

Cosido, m.sowed togither, stitched togi­
ther.

* Cosidúra, f. sowing, stitching.

* Cosilla, or Cosíta, f. a little thing.

Cosmográfia, f. a description of the
world.

Cosmógrafo, m.a describer of the
world.

* Cóso, m.the bulbaiting place.

Cosoléte, vide Cosseléte, m.a corslet.

* † Cospánço, the paunch, the belly.

† Cosquíllas, f. tickling.

* hazér Cosquillas, to tickle.

* † Cosquillóso, m.ticklish, also skittish
as beastes are.

* Cóssa, vide Cósa. 

Cossário, m.a pyrate at sea, a rouer at
sea.

Cosseléte, a corslet.

Cósso, a place for bulbaiting.

Cósta, f. cost, charge, expence. Also the
sea coast. Also that which shooemakers
vse to driue in vpon the laste to raise
a shooe higher in the instep.

Costádo, m.a flanke, the side.

Costál, m.a bagge, a wallet, a budget, a
cloakebagge, a sacke.

* Costanílla, f. a little side of a hill.

* Costílla, f. a rib.

* Costíllas, the ribs.

* Costosaménte, costly, chargeablie.

Costóso, m.chargeable, costly.

Cóstra, f. a crust, a barke, a skin parched
on a wound.

* Costreñído, m.compelled, constrained.

Costreñimiénto, m.a constraint.

Costreñír, yo Costríño, to constraine.

Costribár, to stuffe, to thrust vp togither.

* Costríñe, costriñésse, vide Costre­
ñír. 

Costúmbre, f. custome, fashion, womens
flowers.

Costúra, f. a seame, a sowing, a mending.
Also a chinke.

Costuréro, m.a botcher, a mender.

Cóta, f. a coate of maile.

* Cotejádo, m.coated, conferred, com­
pared.

Cotejamiénto, m.coating, conferring,
comparing.

* Cotejár, to quote, to compare.

* Cotexár, vide Cotejár. 

Cotidiáno, m.daily.

† Cóto, m.a parke, a warren.

* Cotonía, f. a kinde of cotton.

† Cotrál, cattell drawen from the heard.

* Cotúrno, m.a fashion of startup or
buskin comming to the calfe of the leg.
Also a high soled slipper, moile or pan­
tofle, likewise a loftie and high stile.
Also a tragedie.

* Couárde, m.a coward, a lubberly da­
stard.

* Couárdia, f. cowardise, want of cou­
rage, pusillanimitie.

* Coxár, vide Coxeár, to halt, to limpe,
to goe lame.

* † Coxcorrónes, m.knocks with the
knuckles of the fingers. Also knocks of
the head against the wall.

† Coxeár, to halt.

† Coxedád, f. vide Coxéra. 

* † Coxéra, f. lamenesse.

* † Coxíjo, m.the paine, griefe or vexa­
tion of any thing.

Coxín, m.a cushion, a pillow.

Coxíxos, m.griefes.

† Cóxo, m.lame.

* Cóxo colór, darke yellow colour.

* † Coxorrón, vide Coshorrón, bobs
with the knuckles, or iolts of the head
against the wall.

† Coxqueár, to halt, to go lame.

† Coxquíllas, vide Cosquíllas, tickling.

* † Coxquillosíco, m.somwhat ticklish.

* Coxquillóso, ticklish. Also skittish as
a horse or other beast.

* Coyúnda, f. a yoke for oxen.

* Coyuntúra, f. a ioyning togither.

Cozedízo, m.sodden, to be sodden.

* Cozedór, m.a boiler.

Cozedúra, f. seething, boyling.

Cozér, yo Cuézo, to seethe, to boyle.





* Cóz, f. the kicke of the heele or foote.

Cozído, sodden, boyled.

Cozimiénto, m.seething, boyling.

† Cozína, f. a kitchin.

† Cozinár, to play the cooke.

* Cozinéra, f. a shee cooke.

† Cozinéro, m.a man cooke.


C R
* Crábrio, vide Cábrio, m.a transome
of a house for building.

* Crambonéra, vide Cambronéra. 

* Cráneo, m.the brain-pan.

* Créa, f. a kind of linnen cloth.

Creádo, vide Criádo. 

Crecér, or Crescér, to grow, to increase.

Crecído, or Crescído, m.growen, in­
creased.

* Crédito, m.credit, trust, beliefe, af­
fiance.

* Crédo, m.the beleefe, the creed.

* en ménos que vn crédo, in lesse time
then a man might say his beliefe or
creed.

* Crédulo, credulous, beleeuing quickely.

* Creedéra cósa, f. a thing to be belee­
ued.

Creéncia, f. beleefe, credit.

Creér, to beleeue, to trust verily.

* Crehéncia, f. vide Creéncia. 

* Crehér, vide Creér. 

Creéncha, f. the partition of the haire.

* Créo, I beleeue.

Crescér, to grow, to increase, to waxe, to
flow.

Crescído, m.growen vp.

* Cresciénte, growing or rising as wa­
ter. Also the cressant or halfe moone.

* Cresciénte del rio, the rising of the ri­
uer or water.

* Cresciénte de már, the flood or flow­
ing tide.

Crescimiénto, m.growing, increasing, a
waxing, a flowing.

* Cresciúto, m.vide Crescído, growen great.

* Cresdído, vide Crescído. 

Créspa, f. curling of haire or of fea­
thers.

* Crespadúra, idem. 

Créspa de gállo, a cocks-combe. Also an
herbe so called.

Créspo, curle-headed.

* Crespína, or Guirnálda de séda, a
silke riband, a garland of silke.

* Crespína, or úva spina, a gooseber­
rie.

* Crésta, a crest, a combe of a cocke. Also
a bunch of feathers in a helmet.

* Créta, a chap in the hand, or in the
ground.

Creýble, credible, worthie to beleeued.

* Creýdo, m.beleeued.

Creyér, vide Creér to beleeue.

* Créynte, as Hazér en créynte, to make
to beleeue.

Cría, bringing vp.

Criación, f. the creation.

* Criadílla, f. a little wench, or a kinde of
mushrom growing vnder ground in
Spaine.

Criádo, m.a seruant, a nurse child. Also
bred vp, nurtured.

Criadór, a creator, a nurse, a bringer
vp.

Criánça, f. bringing vp, good manners,
education, ciuilitie.

* Criánza, idem. 

Criár, to create, to bring vp, to growe, to
nourish.

Criár níño, to bring vp, or nurse vp a lit­
tle childe.

Criár la planta, to dress and bring vp a
yoong plant.

* Criatión, f. a creation.

Criatúra, f. a creature.

Criatúra mal parrída, f. a childe borne
before his time.

* Criazón, f. scurffe, itch, scab.

* Críba, vide Críva. 

* Cribár, vide Crivár. 

Críca de mugér, f. the dew-lap in the
priuie part of a maide or virgin.

Crímen, a fault, a crime.

* Criminál, faultie, criminall.

Criminalménte, faultily.

Criminosaménte, idem. 

Criminóso, m.full of faults.

Crín, f. the haire.

Crinádo, m.that hath haire. Also haire
dressed or set as women do.

* Crinár, to combe or dresse the haire.

Crínes, f. haires, the mane of a horse,
mule, or such like beast.

Crísma, f. ointment holie annointing, the
crisme vsed at the christening of chil­
dren.

* Crismádo, m.annointed with the
crysme or holy oile.

Crismár, to annoint with holy oyle.

Crisól, m.a goldsmiths melting pot.

* Crispadúra de los cabéllos, f. a cur­
ling, frizling, crisping, or plotting the
haire.

Cristál, christall.

Cristalíno, m.of christall, christalline,
verie cleere, transparant.

† Cristél, or ayúda, a glister to purge
with.

Cristiandád, f. christianitie, christen­
dome.

Cristiáno, m.a Christian.

Crísto, m.Christ.

* Cristóval, m.Christopher, a proper
name.

* Criticál, criticall, which iudgeth by ob­
seruations written.

* Crítico, criticke, which iudgeth, that
giueth iudgement.

Criva, or çarranca, f. a sieue to sift with.

Crivár, to sift.

* † Criznéjas, f. high standing feathers
in a plume of feathers.

Crocodilo, vide Cocodrílo, a huge
serpent called a crocodill.

* Crómgo, vide Cóngrio, a cungar.

* Crónica, a chronicle, a setting downe
of memorable acts and matters done
with the time expressed.

* Cronicadór, vide Cronísta, m.a
chronicler.

* Cronísta, or Cronicadór, idem. 

* Crosisicár, vide Crucificár. 

* Cróto, m.a feule called a Bittour.

* Crucífero, or Crucígero, a bearer of
the crosse.

Crucificádo, m.crucified.

Crucificár, Præs. yo Crucifico, 1.
Præt. yo Curcifiqué, to crucifie, to
naile to a crosse.

Crucifique, vide Crucificár. 

* Crucifixo, m.crucified, nailed on the
crosse. Also the crucifixe.

* Crudaménte, cruelly, rawly, bloudily.

* Crudéça, vide Crudéza. 

Crudéza, rawnes.

Crúdo, m.raw, bloodie, crude. Also cruel,
fell, moodie.

* Cruéça, vide Cruéza. 

Cruél, cruel, fell, fierce.

Crueldád, f. crueltie.

Cruelménte, cruellie.

* Cruéro, vide Recuéro, a fodderer of
cattle, a carrier that driueth great
beastes with carriages.

Cruéza, f. crueltie.

Crús, vide Crúz. 

* Crústula, the creame that riseth on
milke, &c.

* Cruxía, f. a yoong crane bird.

* Cruxía, the walke a board a gallerie
betweene the forecastle and the hinder
decke.

Cruxiéndo, crackling, ruffling, or ma­
king a crackling noise.

* Cruxír, to crackle, to ruffle as chamlot,
silkes, apparell, or such like.

Crúz, f. a crosse.

* Cruzáda, f. a kinde of the Popes Bull,
granting the signe of the crosse to those
that tooke the same. Also the signe of
the crosse a man carrieth about him.
Also vide Cruzádo.

Cruzádo, m.a peece of money s called, in
Portingall of the value of a French
crown. Also a crosse way. also crossed.

* Cruzádos los bráços, the armes cros­
sed.





Cruzár, to crosse in going.

Cruzéro en edeficio, a kinde of quar­
tered building.

Cruzezíta, f. a little crosse.


C V
* Cuadernár, to bring into fower quar­
ters or corners, to make of one fower,
t binde bookes.

* Cuadérno, that which is fower fold,
that which hath fower corners, a sheete
of paper turned into fower, as statio­
ners doe in binding their bookes.

* † Cuajádo, m.curded, congealed.

† Cuajamiénto, m.curding, congealing.

† Cuajár, to curd, to congeale.

* Cuájo, a curd or congeling, a runnet for
cheese.

* Cuándo, vide Quándo. 

* çuáne, vide Zuáne. 

* çuanéte, vide Zuanéte. 

* Cuánto, vide Quánto. 

Cuarénta, vide Quarénta. 

Cuárto, vide Quarto. 

Cuátro, vide Quátro. 

* Cuás, sea weedes.

Cúba, f. a tub of wood to hold water or
wine.

Cúba de víno, a tub of wine.

Cúba en que házen vendimía, a tub 
to receiue wine from the presse.

Cubébas, f. a kinde of poisoned herbe, a
fruit so called.

Cubéro, m.a tub maker.

Cubertízo, m.any thing that couereth,
property vsed of the house.

* Cubérta de béstia, a cloth to couer a
horse or beast.

* Cúbica, as Geometrica cúbica a
geometricall cubicke.

* Cúbico pie, a foote by the squire or
rule.

Cubiérta, vide Cobertór, a couer.

* Cubíl, a cup, a tub.

Cubiérto, m.couered.

* Cubiléte, m.a drinking cup of siluer, or
such a cup as iuglers vse to shew diuers
tricks by.

Cubillo, vide Abadéjo. Also a little
turret on a wall or castle.

Cúbo, m.a small water mill, a bucket to
draw water out of a well. Also a nauie
or round stocke of a cart wheele where
the spoakes are fastened.  Also a high
turret in a castle.

* Cúbo geométrico, a Geometricall
square.

* Cubríl, any thing to couer, defende or
shelter.

Cubrír, to couer, to hide.

* Cucarácha, a kinde of spider.

Cubinos, m.yoong pigs.

Cuchára, f. a spoone.

Cucharáda, f. a spoonefull.

* Cuchilla, a chopping knife, a cleauer.

* Cuchilla de montáña, f. a ridge of a
hill.

Cuchilláda, f. a gash with a sword or
knife, a cut.

* aCuchilládas, by cuts, by slashes.

* Cuchillázo, m.a fauchion, a great
knife.

* Cuchilléro, a knife maker.

Cuchillo, a knife.

* Cuchillón, m.a great knife.

* Cuchillos de las álas, the pinnions of
the wings. Also kniues with the marke
of the wing in them.

Cucíta, a voice vsed in calling a little
dog, as in English pusse, pusse.

* Cuclilla, as sentárse en Cuclilla, to
sit on his buttocks, to sit rucking or cow­
ring downe.

Cuclillo ave, m.a cuckow.

* Cudicia, vide Codicia, f. couetousnes.

* Cudiciár, to couet.

* Cuéba, a caue or den in the ground, a
cellar, a vault, a great tub wherein new
wine runnethwhen it is pressed.

* Cuébano, vide Cuévano. 

* Cuéca del ójo, vide Cuénca del 
ojo. 

* çuéco, wooden pattens to weare on the
feete, or high corke shooes to raise one
from the durt.

* Cuélga, Cuélgo, vide Colgár. 

* Cuéllar, a citie in Spaine in the pro­
uince of Estremadúra.

Cuéllo, m.a necke, the collar of a gar­
ment or cape of a cloke.

Cuéllos, m.ruffes.

Cuénca, a round dish of wood or such
like.

Cuénca del ójo, the round hollownesse
wherein the eie is placed.

Cuénta, f. an account, a beade.

* dar en la Cuénta, to vnderstand, to
perceiue, to hit iust on the matter.

* tenér Cuénta con mugér, to haue to
doe with a woman.

* a Cuénta mía, id est, a cárgo mío, on
my credit, on my word.

Cuénte, Cuénto, vide Contár. 

* Cuéntas, a paire of beads, accounts.

Cuénto, m.a number, a poale, ten hun­
dred thousand, a poste to beare vp a
wall, a tale, a historie. The blunt ende
of a staffe or pike.

* Tenér cuénto con algúno, to watch
any one what he doth.

Cuénto, or Razonamiénto, a reaso­
ning.

Cuénto, or Millón, ten hundred thou­
sand.

* Cuéra, f. a Spanish leather ierkin.

* Cuérbo, vide Cuérvo. 

Cuérda, f. a string of an instrument of
musicke, a fishing line, a coard, a roape,
the veine of a bridle, a souldiers match.
Also a wise and discreete woman.

* Cuérda encendida, a lighted match.

Cuérda de vihuéla, the string of a violl.

* Dár la Cuérda, to racke. Also to giue al
and keepe nothing for himselfe.

Cuerdaménte, wisely, discreetly.

Cuérdo, m.wise, discreet.

* Cuerezíco, m.a small bottle.

* Cuernéro, m.one that soundeth a horne,
one that selleth or maketh hornes.

Cuérno, m.a horne.

Cuéro, m.a hide or skin of leather, a bot­
tle made of a goates skin the haire in­
ward dressed with rozen and pitch to
carrie or hold wine in.  Also a drunken
man.

* Cuéro adobádo, m.leather dressed.

Cuéro, or ódre, a bottle to cary wine.

Cuérpo, m.a body, a corps, a volum of a
booke. Also a corporation.

* Cuérpo de guárdia, a court of gard,
the body of the watch.

Cuérvo, m.a rauen, a crow.

* Cuérvo maríno, m.a cormorant, a sea
drake.

* Cuése, Cuéso, vide Cosér. 

Cuésco, vide Cuéxco, craftie. Also the
stone or core of any fruit. Also a fart.

Cuésta, f. a rib, a side of a hill.

Cuésta arríba, vp the hill.

Cuésta abáxo, downe a hill.

* a Cuéstas, f. on the shoulders or backe.

* a Cuéstas, as Sesénta áños a cuéstas,
threescore yeeres old.

* † Cuéva, f. a celler, a vault, a caue in
the ground, a great tub whereinto new
wine runneth when it is pressed, a caue
or den in the ground.

Cuévano de vimbres, a wicker basket.

† Cuéxco de frúta, a stone or coare of a­
ny fruite. Also craftie.

mugéres Cuéxcas, subtle crafty wo­
men.

* Cuéze, Cuézo, vide Cozér. 

* no se le cuéze el pán, he will not tar­
rie, he is in haste, he will not haue pati­
ence, and tarrie till the bread be ba­
ked.

çúfre, m.sulphure, brimstone.

† Cugujáda, vide Cogujáda, or copá­
da, a larke.

† Cugúlla, or Cogólla, f. a coule or hood
such as Monkes and Fryers vse to
weare.

* çuíço, or Suíço, a Switzer.

Cuidádo, vide Cuydádo, m.care.

* Cuidadóso, vide Cuydadóso, care­
full.

* Cuidár, vide Cuedár. 





Cuidosaménte, vide Cuydosamén­
te. 

* çuín, vide Zuín. 

† Cuíta, f. carefulnes, anguish, miserie.

* † Cuitadíllas, f. little carefull soules.

† Cuitádo, carefull, miserable or full of
anguish.

† Culantríllo, & Culántro de pózo, 
an herbe called Maiden haire.

† Culántro, Coriander.

Culár, the gut of a fundament.

Culébra, f. a snake, a serpent, an ad­
der.

Culebrílla, the itch, a tetter, a little
snake.

* Culebrína, f. a peece of ordinance cal­
led a culuerin.

* Cúlibre, m.the roundnes or bignesse of
bullets.

Cúlo, m.the arse, fundament, or taile.

Cúlpa, f. fault, blame.

* Culpáble, blame woorthie, guilty, cul­
pable.

Culpadaménte, faultily.

* Culpádo, m.blamed, found fault with.

Culpár, to blame, to finde fault with.

* Cultivádo, tilled, dressed, manured or
eared.

Cultivár, to till, to dresse, to manure, plow
or to eare the ground.

* Cúlto, as Cúlto devíno, m.godly wor­
ship, worshipping of God.

çumáque, m.an herbe vsed in steed of
barke for to tan leather with.

çumáya, f. a night crow.

* çumbár, vide Zumbár. 

* Cumbléça, vide Combléça. 

* çúmbre, vide Zúmbre. 

Cúmbre, f. the top.

çumíllo, or jarrillo, an herbe called Dra­
gon.

† çúmo, m.iuice, sap, inward moysture.

† çumóso, m.full of iuice.

Cúmple, it must be, it is conuenient.

* me Cúmple ýr, it is conuenient that I
goe, it is requisite that I depart.

Cumpledéro, m.that which is to be ful­
filled.

* Cumplétas, f. a prayer vsed to be saide
after euensong so called.

* Cumplidaménte, fully, completely.

* Cumplidéro, that which is to be com­
pleated and ended.

* Cumplidissimo, m.most accomplished
or perfect.

* Cumplído, m.compleat, accomplished,
or made perfect.

Cumplimiénto, m.accomplishing.

Cumplír, to accomplish, to be conueni­
ent.

* Cun de amór, a sweete herbe so cal­
led.

Cúna, f. a cradle.

Cundír, to creepe, to spread by little and
little.

Cúña, f. a wedge to cleaue wood.

* Cuñáda, f. a sister in law, a brothers
wife, or sister to my wife.

Cuñádo, m.a brother in law, a sisters
husband, or brother to my wife.

* Cuñár monéda, to coine money.

çúñiga, a stocke or kinred in Spaine so cal­
led.

* çúño, vide Zúño. 

Cúño, a coppersmith, or brasiers hammer,
a hammer to stampe or print money.

* Cúpe, Cupiéra, Cupiésse, Cúpo, vide Cabér. 

* el no túvo blánca, en que al ótro no cupiésse su párte, he had not a pennie
in his purse, whereof the other had not
his share.

Cúra, care, a cure of phisicke. Also a curate
of a parish.

Curadería, f. a tutorship, a gardianship.

* Curádo, m.cured or healed. A curatship
of a parish.

Curadór, m.a gouernor, a tutor, a gar­
dian.

* Curadúra de liénços, a whiting of
linnencloath.

† çurána palóma, a stocke-doue.

* Curandéro, m.a bleaching place or
whiting place for linnen cloathes.

Curár, to cure, to dresse, to care for.

* Curár liénços, to whiten linnen clothes.

* çúrdo, better with the left hand then
with the right, left-handed.

* Curéña rása, a plaine stocke or carriage
for ordinaunce. Ponérse a Curéna
rasa, to put himselfe or themselues out
of couert or hold that they may be shot
at by the ordinance.

* Cúria, f. a court for iustice.

* † çuriága, f. a strap of leather to cast a
dart with, or a whip to whip with as
coach men vse.

* Curiál, of or belonging to a court of iu­
stice, an assistant in a court of iustice.

Curiosidád, f. curiositie, nicenes.

Curióso, m.curious, nice, scrupulous,
carefull, diligent.

çuríta, vide çoríta. 

† çurradór, m.a tanner, a currier.

† çurrána, f. a wilde pigeon.

† çurrár cuéros, to currie leather.

çurreár, to hum as a bee or flie doth.

† çurriága, f. a strap of leather to cast a
dart with, a whip or lash of leather to
whip horses.

* † çurriagón, m.the stocke of a whip
that coachmen or carters vse.

† çurrón, m.a leather budget, a scrip, a
shepherds pouch.

† çurroncíllo, or çurronzíllo, a little 
budget or small pouch.

* Currución, f. corruption, putrifaction.

Cursádo, m.commonly vsed.

* Cursár, to vse commonly.

* Cúrso, m.a course, a race.

* † Curtído, m.tanned.

† Curtidór, m.a tanner.

† Curtidúra, f. tanning, steeping.

† Curtír, to steepe, to tan.

Curtír cuéros, to tan hides.

* çurujáno, m.a surgeon.

Curúxa, f. a nightcrow.

* çurzír, vide Zurzír. 

* Custódia, custodie, keeping, charge.

* † çutáno, or Fuláno, m.such a one.

Cutír, to shake.

* Cúxa, f. the rest for the launce.

* Cuxóte, m.armour for the thigh.

Cuydádo, m.thought, care, regard, reue­
rence.

Cuydadóso, m.carefull.

* Cuydár, to thinke, to take care.

* Cuydosaménte, heedfully.

Cuydóso, vide Cuydadóso. 

Cuýo, whose.

Cuýta, f. carefulnesse, anguish, miserie.

* Cuytadíllas, little carefull soules.

Cuytádo, m.carefull, vexed, perplexed,
miserable.

* Cuzína, vide Cozína, f. a kitchin.

* Cuzinéro, or Cozinéro, m.a cooke.

çuzón, m.a stinking herbe so called.



Cýsne, m.a swan.



D

* DAca, giue hither.

* Dáça yerva, a kinde of herbe.

* no se me Da náda, I care not.

* no se le Da náda, he careth not.

* Dácio, taxe, custome, toll.

Dádiva, f. a gift, a bribe, a reward.

Dádivas, f. giftes.

Dadivosaménte, liberally, bountifully.

Dadivosidád, f. bountie, liberalitie.

Dadivóso, m.liberall, bountifull.

Dádo, m.giuen. Also a die.

Dádo, m.a die to play withall.

* Dadór, m.a giuer.

Dádos, m.dice to play withall.

Dága, f. a dagger.

* Dále, giue him, or strike him, or set on
him.

* Dálgo, as híjo Dálgo, a gentleman.

* Dálle, a staffe hauing in it a dagger or
sword blade. Also a kinde of syeth. Also
Dálle, for Dad le, strike him.

Dalphín, m.a dolphin.

* Daltibáxo, id est, de Altibáxo, from
high and lowe, vp and downe.

Dáma, f. a dame, a lady. Als the queene
at chesse play.

* Damascádo, m.apparelled with da­





maske or made damaske wise.

* Damásco, m.damaske silke.

* Damasquillo, m.a little damaske
prune, damaske of China.

* Dameria, f. belonging to ladies.

Dánça, f. a daunce.

* Dançádo, m.daunced.

Dançadór, m.a dauncer.

* Dancánte, one dauncing.

Dançár, to daunce.

* Dañádo, m.damnified, hurt.

* Dañadór, m.one the doth damnifie.

* Dañar, to hurt, to damnifie.

* Dañíno, m.vide Dañóso. 

Dáño, m.losse, hurt, dammage.

* Dañosaménte, with hurt, losse or
dammage.

Dañóso, m.hurtfull.

* Danúbio, the greatest riuer in Europe,
rising out of the hill Arnoba in Ger­
manie, and passing by many countries
keepeth his name.

Dár, Præs. Indicat, Doy, das, da. 1. Præt.
Di, diste, dió, Fut. Daré, rás, rá, Sub.
Præs. Dé, Imperfect. Diésse, daria,
or Diéra,
Fut. Diére, to giue, to strike,
to hit, to yeeld, to rest or stay in a place,
to hit vpon or light vpon.

* Dár puerta segura, to shut the doore
fast, to make all safe.

* Dár caréna, to turne vp the keele or
that part of a ship or vessell that goeth
vnder water to cauke and dresse it for
a new voyage.

* Dár garróte, to strangle.

* sin Dárme párte, vnwitting to me, I 
not knowing of it.

* Dár con éllos, to light or hit on them,
to finde them out.

* Dár bóxes, to crie out, to exclaime.

* Dár en cára, to vpbraid, to cast in the
teeth.

* Dár en los enimígos, to shoote among
the enemies, to light or hit on his ene­
mies.

* Dár de máno, to becken or make a
signe with the hand, or to put aside
with the hand. Also to take leaue.

* Dár del pie, to tread on the foote for a
signe to beware. Also to spurne aside
with the foote.

Daragóncia, f. an herbe called dragons.

* Dardáso, or Dardázo, the blowe or
stroke with a dart.

* Dardillo, m.a little dart.

Dárdo, m.a dart.

* † Dárga, vide Adárga, a buckler.

* Daríco de óro, id est, de Arico de
óro, an earing of gold.

* Dármas, id est, de ármas, as Hom­
bres dármas, armed men.

* Dáseme póco, I little esteeme it.

* Dasermár, vide Desarmár. 

* Dáta, f. as Dia de la dáta, the dating
of a writing.

* Dátil, m.a date, the fruit of the palme
tree.

* Datiládo colór, date colour.

Dativo cáso, the datiue case.


D E
De, of, from, out of.

* De abáxo, de arríba, from beneath,
from aboue.

* De acá, from hence.

De acúlla, from thence.

De allá, from thence.

De allý, from that place.

De allý acá, from that place, hither.

De aqui, from hence.

* De aquí y de allá, from hence and
from thence.

De aqui adelánte, hencefoorth.

De aqui a póco, within short space.

* De arríba, from vpward.

De ay, from to day, from this present.

* De ay adelánte, from this daie fore­
ward.

* De corrída, f. in haste, runningly. Also
shamefully.

De lléno, fully.

De párte de fuéra, outwardly.

Deán, m.a Deane.

Deanádgo, m.a deanry.

* Debájo, below, vnderneath.

† Debálde, vile, nothing woorth, freelie,
without giuing any thing therefore.

Debastía, a generation of kings.

Debáte, m.contention, debate, strife.

Debatir, to striue.

Debáxo, vnder, below.

* Debér, vide Devér. 

Debil, weake, feeble, faint.

* Debelidád, or Debilitád, feeblenesse,
weakenes.

Debilitadaménte, weakely, feebly.

Debilitádo, m.weakened, made feeble.

Debilitár, to enfeeble, to weaken.

* Debódo, a manner of swearing.

* Debolvér, to returne, to restore backe,
to chop and change.

De buéna gána, with a good will.

* Debujádo, painted, pourtraied, dra­
wen.

Debujár, to paint, to pourtray, to drawe.

* Debújo, m.a pourtraiture, Arte of
pourtraying.

Debuxadór, m.a drawer of pictures, a
pourtraytor.

† Debuxádo, m.pourtraied, drawen
out.

† Debuxár, to drawe out a picture, to
pourtray.

† Debúxo, arte of drawing or pourtrai­
ture.

De cada párte, from euery side.

* Década, f. a decade or consisting of ten,
as Titus Liuinus deuided his worke in­
to ten, or Decades.

* Decádo, vide Dechádo, an example
to write by, a patterne, a copie.

* Decálogo, a decalogue containing the
ten commandements of God giuen to
Moses.

* Decáno, or Provisór, m.a Deane.

* Decendéncia, f. posteritie, issue, suc­
cesse.

* Decendído, m.succeeded.

* Decendiénte, one of that race.

Decendiéntes, posteritie, childrens chil­
dren, &c.

Decendimiénto, m.a descent, a pedi­
gree, comming downe, bringing
downe.

Decendir, yo diciéndo, to come downe.

* Decentádo, m.an eating or repast be­
gun.

* Decentár, to begin a repast, or eating
of any thing.

* Decénte, comely, decent, orderly.

* De cérca, neere, hard by.

Decessión, f. a predecessorship, a depar­
ting, a giuing place to.

Decessór, m.a predecessor in an office,
one that goeth away and giueth ouer
his office or place to another.

Dechádo, m.a patterne, example, or
copie.

* Decidír, to decide a matter.

* Deciénda, Deciéndo, vide Decendír. 

* Decifrár, to decipher.

Décimo, m.the tenth.

* Décimo quárto, the fourteenth.

* Décimo quínto, the fifteenth.

* Décimo sésto, or séxto, the sixteenth.

* Décimo séptimo, the seuenteenth.

* Décimo octávo, the eighteenth.

Décimo nóno, the nineteenth.

Decisión, f. a deciding, or determining.

* Decíso, determined, decided.

* Decisório, that is vpon agreement, a
matter of controuersie that is in que­
stion.

Declamación, f. a declaiming, a speech
for to prooue or disprooue a matter.

* Declamádo, declaimed.

Declamár, to declaime or vtter such a
speech.

Declaración, f. a declaring.

* Declarádo, m.declared, vttered forth.

Declaradór, m.a declarer, a manife­
ster.

Declarár, to declare, to manifest.

* Declinádo, m.declined, bowed.

* Declinadór, a bower, a decliner.

Declinár, to decline, to bow.





* De consúno, altogither.

De coraçón, m.from the hart.

Decorár, to make comely.

De corríllo, en corríllo, from one com­
pany of men to another.

De córo, without booke, by hart.

Decóro, comely, seemely.

* Decrépito, m.decrepite with old age,
one foote in the graue.

* deDresciénte de már, the ebbing of the
sea.

* Decréto, m.a decree or statute, an or­
der.

* Decurión, a captaine of ten, a corporall.

Dedál, or Dedíl, m.a thimble.

* Dédalo, Dedalus, a proper name signi­
fying ingenious. Of that name was a
most cuning builder of Athens.

De déntro, from within.

Dedicación, f. a dedication, a consecra­
tion.

* Dedicádo, m.dedicated.

Dedicár, Præs. yo dedíco, 1. Præt.
yo dediqué, to dedicate, to present
with, to consecrate or publish vnder his
name.

* Dedicatória, a dedicatorie epistle.

Dedíl, or Dedál, m.a thimble.

* Dedíque, vide Dedicár. 

Dédo, m.a finger.

Dédo pulgár, a thumbe.

* Dédo índice, the fore-finger.

* Dédo de en médio, the middle fin­
ger.

* Dédo del coraçón, the ring finger.

Dédo meñíque, the little finger.

De dónde, from whence.

* Dédos de los pies, the toes of the foote.

* Deduzír, yo Dedúzgo, to draw out at
large.

* Dedúsga, Dedúsgo, or Dedúzgo, vide 
Deduzír. 

* De espácio, at leisure, leisurely.

Deésa, f. a goddesse.

* deFaltár, to faile.

Defécto, vide Deféto, m.want, defect,
failing.

* Deféctuo, wanting, defectiue.

Defención, f. a defence.

Defendedór, m.a defender.

Defendér,  yo defiéndo, to defend, to
forbid.

Defendído, m.defended, forbidden.

* Defénsa, f. a defence.

* Defensór, m.a defender.

* Defensóra, f. a defendresse.

* Deferír, yo defiéro, to driue off, to put
off.

* Deféto, m.a defect, a failing, a fault.

Defetuóso, m.faultie, failing, defectiue.

* Defienda, Defiéndo, vide Defen­
dér. 

* Defiére, Defiéro, vide Deferír. 

* Deffrutár, to gather or plucke the fruit.

* Defraudár, to defraude, to deceiue.

* Defrénte, ouer against, iust against.

de Fuéra, without.

Defúnto, m.dead, deceased, departed this
life.

* Degaldaménte, vide Delgadaménte, slenderly, thinly.

* Deganádo, one that gathereth vp the
rents for herdes and flockes of cattle.

* Degenerádo, m.growen out of kinde,
become vnnaturall.

* Degenerár, to growe out of kinde, to
degenerate, to become vnnaturall.

* Degolladéro, m.a place where they vse
to behead.

* Degolládo, m.beheaded, killed.

* Degolladór, m.a beheader, a headsman,
a hangman.

Degolladúra, the beheading, the wound
that one maketh in striking off the
head.

Degollamiénto, m.beheading, killing.

Degollár, yo deguéllo, to behead, to kill,
to cut the throate.

* de Gólpe, with a blow or stroake.

Degradádo, m.disgraded, put from his
degree.

* Degradamiénto, disgrading.

Degradár, to disgrade, to disgrace, to put
from his dignitie.

* Degressión, vide Digressión. 

Deguélle, Deguéllo, vide Degollár. 

de Hécho, indeed.

deHendér, yo deHiéndo, to cleaue in­
sunder.

* deHendído, m.clouen insunder.

deHendimiénto, m.cleauing insunder.

Dehésa, or Dehéza, f. a pasture.

Dehésa concegíl, f. a common of pa­
sture.

Dehésa priváda, f. a pasture for one
mans vse.

* Dehiénde, Dehiéndo, vide Dehen­
dér. 

* Dehoadaménte, vide desHogada­
ménte. 

* Dejár, vide Dexár, to leaue, to for­
sake, to leaue of, to let alone.

Dejarretár, to grow out of kind, to become
vnnaturall, to degenerate.

* Dejíto, id est, de Ejípto, of the country
of Egypt.

deImprovíso, vnawares, on a sudden.

Dél, id est de el, of him, of it.

* Del tódo, wholy.

Dela, id est, de la, of hir.

* Dela otra parte, on the other side.

Delantál, m.an apron.

Delánte, before.

Delantéra, f. a settle, a curtaine, a cloth,
the foreward, the forepart of any
thing.

* ponerse en la Delantéra, to exalt
himselfe aboue the residue, or to thinke
himselfe as good as the best.

Delantéra de cása, the forepart or fore­
front of a house next to the streete.

* Delantéra de cáma, a kinde of hang­
ings for to hang downe from the bed­
steede to the ground to keepe from see­
ing vnder the bed.

* Delantéro, m.one going before others.

* Delátor, a promoter, a sollicitor, an in­
former, an accuser, a complainer of
faults.

* Deláunas, vide Lamínas. 

* Delécho, m.vide Helécho, ferne, a
brake.

Delegación, f. appointing.

Delegádo, m.appointed, sent on an em­
bassage, substituted to an office in ano­
ther roome for a time.

* Delegué, vide Delegár. 

Deletreár, to spell.

Deletár, vide Deleytár, to delight.

DeLéxos, from farre.

* Deleytádo, m.delighted.

Deleytár, to delight.

* Deleýte, m.delight, pleasure.

* Deleytóso, m.pleasant, delectable, de­
lightfull.

Deleznáble, slipperie, fraile, weake, that
which is not stable, easie to be subuer­
ted and ouerthrowen.

Deleznadéro, m.a slipperie, weake, and
vnsure place, a place that soone fal­
leth.

Deleznamiénto, m.slipperinesse, vnsta­
blenesse, weaknesse, frailenesse, subiect
to continuall falling.

Deleznár, to make slipperie, fraile,
weake, readie to fall.

* Delezárse, to slide, to slip,  vide Des­
lizár.

Delfin, or Golfín, m.a dolphin.

* Delgadaménte, slenderly, finely.

Delgadéz, f. slendernesse, finenesse.

* Delgadéza, f. finenesse, slendernesse.

Delgádo, m.slender, fine.

Delgazér, or Delgaçár, to make fine, to
make small.

Deliberación, f. deliberation, aduise,
purpose.

* Deliberadaménte, deliberately, adui­
sedly.

* Deliberádo, m.aduised of, delibera­
ted of.

* Deliberadór, m.a man that pauseth or
taketh aduise in his doing.





Deliberár, to deliberate, to take aduise, to
purpose.

Delibrádo, m.deliuered, set at libertie,
made free.

Delibramiénto, m.deliuering, setting
free.

Delibrar, to deliuer, to set free, to set at
libertie.

* Delicadaménte, daintily, delicately.

Delicadéza, f. daintinesse, delicacie.

Delicádo, m.delicate.

* Delicadúra, f. vide Delicadéz, dain­
tinesse, delicacie.

* Delicto, a trespasse, fault or offence.

deLigéro, lightly.

* deLigneaçión, f. a deligneation, a de­
scent.

* Delinquénte, an offender.

* Delinquído, one that hath offended.

* Deliránte, one that doteth.

* Delitár, to dote, to raue, to fable, to be­
come a foole.

* Delirío, doting, rauing, foolishnes.

* Delito, m.a fault, an offence.

* de Lléno, fully.

dÉllas, id est, de éllas, of them, of those
women.

* dÉllo, id est, de éllo, of him, of it.

deLustrár, to make foule.

* De madrugáda, at break of the day.

* de Mañána, in the morning.

* de Man común, togither with much 
helpe.

Demánda, f. a demand, a sute, an asking,
a receiuing.

* morír en la demánda, to die in the 
demand or suit of the matter.

demandádo en Juszío, the defendant.

Demandadór, m.a demander, a sutor, a
plaintife, a beggar.

Demandadóra cósa, f. a matter de­
manded or sued for.

Demandár, to demaund, to require, to
aske, to begge.

De manéra, so as.

deMarcádo, m.marked out.

* deMarcár, Præs. yo deMárco, 1.
Præt. yo demarqué, to marke out.

* Demarqué, vide Demcarcár. 

deMás, more, besides this, moreouer, ouer
and aboue, that which remaineth.

* deMás desto, moreouer than this.

Demasía, f. superfluitie, ouermuch.

* Demasiadaménte, excessiuely.

Demasiádo, m.vnmeasureable, exces­
siue.

deMediádo, m.diuided in two.

deMediár, to deuide in two.

* Deméncia, f. madnes, foolerie.

* Demerácrio piédra, a stone whose pro­
pertie is to cause great libertie of speech
and eloquence.

* Demérito, a desert or demerit.

deMiéntras, in the meane time.

* deMíde, deMído, vide deMedír. 

* Democracía, f. a popular state of go­
uerning a common weale, or a forme of
common weale, where the people haue
the whole authoritie without hauing
any other superiours or gouernours ex­
cept those officers they themselues haue
made, or by them are established.

Demoniádo, m.possessed with the di­
uell.

Demónio, m.a diuell.

* Démenos, id est Démos nos, let vs
giue.

* Demonstración, f. shewing foorth,
setting out.

* deMonstrádo, shewed, set out.

* deMonstrár, to shew, to set out.

deMontón, heapingly togither.

* Demostración, f. shewing foorth,
setting out.

* Demostrádo, m.set foorth, shewed.

Demostrár, yo Demuéstro, to shewe
foorth, to demonstrate.

* deMudádo, m.changed.

deMudár, to change.

deMuéstra, shewing, pointing out.

* deMuéstre, demuéstro, vide deMo­
strár. 

* denCubrír, vide enCubrír, to hide, to
couer.

Dénde, from, since, sithence.

* Dénde en adelánte, from hence for­
ward.

* Dénde la cálle, from out of the streete.

Dénde entónces, since that time.

* Dénde hásta, euen from thence hi­
therto.

* Dénde aquí, from hence.

* deNegádo, m.denied.

* deNegamiénto, m.a deniall.

deNegár, Præs. yo deniégo, 1. Præt.
deniegué, to denie, to refuse.

* Denegrido, m.made blacke.

* Deniegué, Deniégo, vide deNegár. 

* Deñántes, id est, De ántes, a while
agone.

* Denodadaménte, boldly, hardily.

* Denodádo, m.bold, hardie.

* De no náda, a thing of nothing, of no
worth or price.

* Denostádo, m.reuiled.

Denostár, or Afeantár, yo Denuésto, to reuile.

Dentádo, m.toothed.

Dentadúra, f. tuskes.

Dentál de arádo, the plough share.

Dentár, yo Diénto, to file, to sickle, to
make the teeth of a saw.

Dentecér, yo Dentésco, to growe as
teeth.

Dentelláda, f. a biting, a bit.

Dentéra, the teeth being on edge.

Dentón, that hath sharpe teeth, a sharpe
toothed fish.

Déntro, within.

Déntro de si, betweene themselues.

Dentúdo, m.that hath great teeth.

Denuédo, boldnesse, hardinesse.

* Denuéste, Denuésto, vide Denostár. 

Denuésto, m.reuiling, railing, despising.

* de Nuévo, afresh, anew.

Denunciación, f. denouncing, shewing.

Denunciádo, m.denounced, shewed, ta­
ken witnesse.

* Denunciadór, m.a denouncer, a she­
wer.

Denunciár, to shew, to denounce, to take
witnesse.

* De ótra manéra, of another sort.

* De ótra párte, of the other side.

* De párte, de fuéra, on the outside.

* Departír, to distribute, to appoint heere
and there.

* Deplorár, to bewaile, to lament, to com­
plaine, to make an end of weeping.

* dePonér, Præs. dePóngo, depónes,
depóne, 1. Præt. dePúse, depusiste,
depúso, Fut. dePorné, or dePondré,
rás, rá, Sub. Præs. dePónga, Imperf.
depusiéra, depornía or Depusiésse, 
Fut. dePusiére, to lay downe, to leaue
in trust, to lay a wager.

* dePónga, depóngo, vide dePonér. 

* dePórte, contentfull, enioying, ioyfull.

Deposición, f. a deposing, a putting
downe, a depriuing from ones dignitie,
sometime vsed for a thing left in con­
fidence or trust with another.

Depositádo, m.left in trust.

Depositár, to leaue in trust.

Depositário, left in trust.

Depósito, a thing left in trust.

Depravádo, m.depraued, made worse.

* Depravár, to depraue, to make worse, to
marre, to spoile.

* Deprávo, m.a deprauing or making
worse.

Deprendér, to learne.

* Deprésso, depressed, beaten downe.

* de Présto, quickly, readily.

* de Puésto, put downe from any office or
place. Also de puesto en puesto, from
one setling place to another. 

dePúnta, with the point.

* de Púnto, by stitching or sowing with a
needle.

* Depurádo, m.vide Apurádo.

* Depúse, depusiéra, deupusiésse, depú­
so, vide Deponér. 

* Deputádo, one appointed to a charge,
an assigne.

* Deputár, to assigne, to appoint.

* De raýz, from the roote.

Derécha máno, the right hand.

* Derécha, or Derechaménte, tho­
roughly, rightly.





Derécho, right, straight, iust, euen, a
lawyers fees, customarie right, law. Al­
so right handed.

Derécho de entrámbas mános, a plai­
er on both hands.

Derechúra, f. rightnesse, straightnesse.

De repénte, on a sudden.

* Derivár, to deriue.

* Derivación, f. deriuing.

* Derogación, taking from, derogating.

* Derogár, to take from, to derogate.

Derrabádo, m.curtalled, the taile cut off.

Derrabadúra, f. curtalling, cutting off
the taile.

Derrabár, to curtall.

Derramadaménte, scatteringly.

* Derramadéro, a spilling place, a scat­
tering place.

* Derramádo, m.spilled, scattered, shed.

Derramamiénto, m.spilling, shedding,
scattering.

Derramár, to spill, to shed, to scatter.

Derredór, about.

andár al Derredór, to goe about.

Derrengádo, m.broken backed.

Derrengadúra, f. breaking of the backe.

Derrengár, Præs. yo derriéngo, 1.
Præt. y derriengué, to breake the
reines of the backe.

* Derrengue, vide Derrengár. 

Derretído, m.melted, thawed.

Derretimiénto, m.melting, thawing.

Derretír, yo Derríto, to thaw, to melt as
waxe or such like.

Derribádo, m.throwen downe.

Derribár, to plucke downe, to throwe
downe.

* Derriéngue, vide Derrengár. 

* Derríte, derríto, vide Derretír, to
melt, to thaw.

* Derríte, liquor.

Derritído, m.melted, thawed.

* Derritimiénto, m.melting.

* Derrivár, vide Derribár. 

* Derrocádo, m.throwen downe.

* Derrocamiénto, m.throwing downe.

Derrocár, Præs. yo Derruéco, 1. Præt.
yo Deroqué, to throw downe.

* Derroqué, vide Derrocár. 

* Derrostrádo, m.taken from the face,
disfigured.

Derrostrár, to take away from the face,
to disfigure the face.

Derróta, f. a course, a way.

* Derrotéro, m.a booke or mappe shewing
the course or way in the sea.

* Derruéca, Derruéco, vide Derrocár, 
to throwe or hurle downe.

Derrumbadéro, a downefall, a steepe
hill.

* Derrumbádo, m.throwen downe.

* Derrumbár, to throw or hurle downe.

* desAbahádo, or desAvahádo,
cleered from fuming or smoking, let­
ting the fume or smoke quite get out.

desAbahár, or desAvahár, to let the
fuming or smoaking of any place to get
out, to cleere or free a place from fu­
ming or smoake.

* Desabalído, vide Desbalído. 

Desabezár, to vnteach, to growe out of
custome, to forget.

desAbituación, f. growing out of fashi­
on or custome, taking out of his house.

* desAbituádo, m.out of fashion or cu­
stome, taken out of his house.

desAbituár, to grow out of custome, to
take out of his house.

* desAbolládo, m.the batterings, or
brusings of armour, plate, or such like
taken out or made euen, or vnden­
ted in.

desAbollár, to take the batterings out of
armour, or plate.

* desAbotonádo, m.vnbuttoned, vn­
clasped.

desAbotonadúra, f. an vnbuttoning.

desAbotonár, to vnbutton.

desAbrído, m.vnsauorie, of an euill
taste.

* desAbrigádo, m.set in the colde.

desAbrigár, Præs. yo desAbrígo, 1. 
Præt. yo desabrigué, to set in the
colde.

desAbrigúe, vide desAbrigár. 

desAbrimiénto, m.vnsauorines.

desAbrochádo, m.vnlaced, vnclasped.

* desAbrochár, to vnlace, to vnclaspe.

* desAcatádo, m.vnmannerly, without
reuerence.

* desAcatamiénto, m.vide desAcáto. 

* desAcáto, m.an vnmannerlines, a
want of due reuerence or good brin­
ging vp.

* desAcomodádo, m.disprofited, hin­
dred.

* desAcomodamiénto, m.discommo­
ditie.

* desAcomodataménte, discommodi­
ously.

* desAcomodár, to hinder, to take a­
way the profite.

desAcompañádo, m.alone, without
companie.

desAcompañamiénto, m.being alone,
being without companie.

desAcompañár, to leaue companie, to
keepe alone.

* desaConfiádo, m.distrusted.

* desaConfiár, to distrust.

* desAconsejádo, m.disswaded.

* desAconsejár, to disswade.

* desAconchádo, m.taken of the shell
of fish or such like, or put out of order or
place.

* desAconchár, to take of the shell of
fish or such like. Also to put out of
order or place.

desAcordádo, m.forgetfull, disagree­
ing.

desAcordaménte, forgetfully, disagree­
ingly.

desAcordár, yo desacuérdo, to forget,
to disagree, to dissent.

desAcórde, m.disagreeing.

desAcostumbrádo, m.out of custome.

desAcostumbrár, to bring out of cu­
stome.

desAcreditáda persóna, one out of cre­
dit.

* desAcreditadór, m.one that discredi­
teth an other.

* desAcreditár, to discredit, to take a­
way, the credit from another.

* desAcuérde, desAcuérdo, vide des­
Acordár. 

desAcuérdo, m.forgetfulnes, discorde,
dissention.

* desAdár, vide desAtár. 

* desAdornádo, m.vngarnished, vndec­
ked.

* desAdornár, to vndecke, to pull off his
cloathes.

* Desafiádo, m.chalenged, defied.

Desiafadór, m.a chalenger, one that de­
fieth.

Desafiár, to defie, to chalenge.

* Desafío, m.a defiance, a chalenge.

* Desaforádo, m.wronged, iniured, dealt
withall without all right and equitie.

desAfforádo, or dezAforrádo, ill clad,
ill apparelled.

desaFuéros, wrongs, iniuries.

desAfuziádo, or desAfuzádo, m.de­
spairing.

desAfuziár, to despaire, to distrust.

* desAgotár, to draine all the water or
other liquor from a place.

* desAgradáble, worthie of displeasure,
like to displease.

* desAgradableménte, displeasantly.

* desAgradár, to displease.

desAgradecér, yo desagadésco, to be
vnthankefull.

desAgradecído, vnthankefull.

desAgradecimiénto, m.vnthankeful­
nes.

* desAgraviadór, m.an ender of contro­
uersies, a righter of wrongs.

* desAgraviár, to ende controuersies, to
reforme wrongs.

* desAgrávio, m.the righting of wrongs.

desAguadéro, m.a conduict, a pipe of
lead.

* desAguisádo, m.vide Agrávio. 

Desagunadaménte, grieuously, with mo­
lestation and vexing.

* desAhogadaménte, cleerly, freely, not
mutteringly in the throate as though





one were in strangling or drowning.

desAhogádo, m.free, cleere, not stran­
gled or choaked.

* desAhogár, to rid or cleere, to powre
out.

desAhuziádo, m.distrustfull, despaire­
full.

* desAhuziár, to distrust, to despaire.

* desAhuzído, vide Desasusiádo. 

* desAiudár, vide desAyudár, to let, to
hinder.

desAlabádo, m.dispraised.

desAlabár, to dispraise.

* desAlbardádo, m.vnsadled.

desAlbardár, to vnsaddle an asse.

desAlavár, vide desAlabár. 

* desAlvardádo, vide desAlbardádo. 

desAlentádo, m.breathlesse.

* desAlentárse, yo desaliento, to be out
of breath.

Desalfojrár, to put out of a wallet.

* desAliénte, vide Desalientárse. 

* desAliñáda mugér, a woman without
rule or gouernment, a sluttish woman, a
slatter-bag. Also vnhansome, ill atti­
red.

desAliñádo, m.ouerturned, foolish, vn­
fit, put out of order, vnhandsome, slo­
uenlike attired.

desAliñár, to ouerturne, to ouerwhelme,
to put out of order.

desAliño, m.giddines of the head, foolish­
nes, vnfitnes, vnhandsomnes, slouenli­
nes, sluttishnes.

desAlmádo, m.without soule, without
life, or one caring little for his soule, a
wicked man without conscience, a lewd
liuer, one giuen ouer to all wickednes
and villanie.

* desAlmáldo, id est des Almád-lo,
take away his soule from his bodie, or
kill him.

* desAlojádo, m.dislodged, raised, row­
zed.

* desAlojár, to dislodge, to raise, to
rowze.

* desAloxár, idem. 

desAmádo, m.hated.

desAmár, to hate.

* desAmodorriár, to free from giddines,
or lethargie in the head.

* desAmorádo, m.hating amorousnes,
or vtterly misliking of loue.

desAmparádo, m.forsaken, left, caste
off.

desAmparadór, m.a forsaker, a leauer, a
caster off.

desAmparár, to forsake, to cast off, to
leaue.

desAmpáro, m.leauing, forsaking, ca­
sting off.

* deSangrádo, m.without bloud.

* desAnimádo, m.without life, discou­
raged.

* desAnimár, to discourage, to put out of
hart.

* desAñudádo, m.vnknit, vntied.

desAñudadúra, f. vnknitting, vntying.

desAñudár, to vnknit, liuely, strong.

* desAñubládo, m.without clouds.

* desAñublár, to be cleere weather, to be
free from clouds.

* desAparecér, to vanish away, to hide
ones selfe, not to appeare.

* desAparejádo, m.vnprepared.

* desApressionadaménte, without pas­
sion, resolutely.

* desApassionádo, m.resolute, quiet.

* desApazíble, vnpeaceable.

* desApegádo, vnfastened, vnloosed,
vnstucke, not cleauing to. Also not en­
tangled with loue.

desApegár, to vnloose, to vntie, to vnfa­
sten.

desApercebidaménte, vnaduisedly.

desApercebído, m.vnaduised, vnpre­
pared.

* desApercevído, idem. 

* desAperrochár, to go or depart out of
the parish he dwels in.

desApiedádo, m.without pittie.

* Desapiedár, to be without pittie.

desAplazible, vnpleasant.

* desApoderádo, m.without power, di­
spossessed, depriued, vnable.

* desApollilládo, m.vnmotheaten, not
eaten with moths.

* desApretár, yo desApriéto, to loose,
to slacken that which is streighte or
harde bound.

* desApriéte, vide desApretár. 

* desAprisionár, to take out of prison.

desAprovechadaménte, vnprofita­
blie.

desAprovechádo, m.hindered, disprofi­
ted, letted.

desAprovechár, to disprofite, to hinder,
to let.

* desApuntádo, m.disappointed. Also
the point of any thing taken away.

desApuntár, to disappoint, to take awaie
the point or pricke of any thing.

desArmádo, vnarmed.

desArmadúra, f. vnarming.

desArmár, to vnarme.

* desArraigádo, m.plucked vp by the
rootes.

desArraigamiénto, m.plucking vp by
the roote.

desArraigár, Præs. yo desArraígo, 1.
Præt. yo desArraygué, to plucke vp
by the roote.

desArraygué, vide desArraygár. 

* desArrebolvér yo desarbuélvo, to
vndoe, or vnwind that which is wound
vp or entangled togither. Also to wind
one out of an intricate law matter, or
such like.

* desArrebuélva, vide desArrebolvér. 

* desArrugádo, m.smoothed, wrinkles
made plaine.

desArrugadúra, f. smoothing, making
plaine of wrinkles.

desArrugár, Præs. yo desArrúgo, 1.
Præt. yo desarrugué, to smooth, to
make smooth, to take out wrinkles.

* desArrugué, vide desArrugár. 

desAsído, m.vnfastened, hold let gone,
let slip that which one had fast holde
on.

* desAsír, to let go ones holde, to let slip
that which one had hold on.

desAsnárse, to speake more wisely than
of custome.

* Desasossegádo, m.vnquiet, without
rest, rough, not calme.

* desAsossegár, Præs. yo Desasossiegó.
1. Præt. yo Desasossegué, to disquiet,
to trouble, to make rough, to distem­
per.

* Desasossiégo, m.vnquientes, troubling,
roughnes, distempering.

Desasossiégo, Desasossegué, vide 
desAsossegár. 

Desastrádo, m.vnfortunate, vnluckie.

Desástre, m.misfortune.

desAtacádo, m.vntyed, vnbound, vn­
trussed.

desAtacár, Præs. yo desatáco, 1. Præt.
yo desataqué, to vntie, to vnbinde, to
loosen, to vntrusse the points.

* desAtádo, m.loosed, vntying, dissol­
uing.

desAtapádo, m.opened, vnstopped.

desAtapadúra, f. opening, vnstopping.

desAtapár, to vnstop, to open.

* desAtaque, vide desAtacár. 

desAtár, to loose, to vntie, to dissolue.

* desAtaviadaménte, vnhandsomly.

desAtaviádo, m.vnfit, vnhandsome.

desAtavío, m.vnhandsomnes, vnfit­
nes.

* desAtentadaménte, vnaduisedly,
rashly.

* desAtentár, yo desAtiénto, to doe
a thing vnaduisedly, at hap hazarde
without consideration.

* desatiénte, desatiénto, vide desA­
tentár. 

* desAtiénto, m.rashnes, vnaduised­
nes.

desAtinadaménte, rashly, vnconside­
rately, rauingly, foolishly.

desAtinádo, m.stammering, stumbling,
rash, inconsiderate, rauing.





desAtinár, to stammer, to stumble, to
misse, to faile.

desAtíno, m.stumbling, rashnes, inconsi­
deratenes, folly.

desAtravessár, yo desAtraviésso, to
take away any thing that lieth crosse
the way.

* desAtraviésse, vide desAtraves­
sár. 

* desAvahádo, or desAbahádo. 

desAvahár, vide desAbahár. 

* Desavalído, vide Desabalído. 

* desAvénga, desAvéngo, vide desA­
venír. 

desAvenír, Præs. yo desavéngo, desa­
viénes, desaviénte, 1. Præt. Desa­
víne, viníste, víno, Fut. Desaverné,
or Desavendré, rás, rá, Sub. Præs.
Desavénga. Imperfec. Desaviniéra,
Desavrernía, or Desaviniésse. Fut. 
Desaviniére, to disagree.

* desAverne, vide desAvenír. 

* desAvezindár, to goe away or leaue a
neighbourhood or parish to dwell else­
where.

desAvíne, desAviniésse, desAvíno, 
vide desAvenír. 

* desAutorizádo, m.out of authori­
tie.

* desAutorizár, to put out of authori­
tie.

* desAvezár, vide desAbezar. 

* desAvituár, vide desAbituár. 

desAyudár, to leaue without helpe.

* desAyunár, to breake the fast.

desAzerse, vide desHazérse, to be vn­
done, to vndoe himselfe.

desAzído, vnfastened, let goe.

* desAzír, to vnfasten, to let goe hold.

deSazonádo, m.out of season.

Desbalídas ovéjas, straying sheep, blea­
ting sheepe.

desBalído, m.straying.

* desBalijár, vide desValijár. 

desBallestár, to shoot out of a crosse-bow.

* desBánes, vide desVánes, garrets or
cocklofts of a house.

desBanecído, vide desVanecído, in a 
swoune, vanished.

* desBarahustár, to rush into a throng
among weapons, and to strike them
downe, one while on one side, another
while on another.

desBarár, vide desVarár. 

desBaratádo, m.put to flight.

desBaratadór, m.a putter to flight.

desBaratár, to put to flight.

desBaráto, m.putting to flight.

desBarbádo, m.beardlesse.

* desBarrigár, 1. Præt. yo desBarrigué,
to paunch, to pull out the guts or gar­
bage.

* desBarrigué, vide desBarrigár. 

* desBastádo, m.pared, shauen downe.

desBastadúra, f. paring, shauing downe.

desBastár, to pare, to shaue downe.

* desBavádo, m.standing gaping, and
driueling with the mouth, letting the
slauer fall from him.

* desBentúra, vide desventúra, f. 

* desBergonçádo, vide desVergon­
çádo, m.shamelesse.

* desBivár, to burle cloath, to picke out
small knots in cloath.

* desBiznár, to lighten, to ease one of a
great weight or burden.

* desBoblár, vide Despoblár, to dispeo­
ple, to leaue without people.

Desbocádo, m.headstrong, lauish of
speech.

* desBordádo, m.presumptuous. Also
the gilt or gold of a thing gilded taken
of. Also the edge or outside of any thing
taken away.

* desBravár, to make gentle, tame or milde.

desCabeçádo, m.beheaded.

desCabeçamiénto, m.beheading.

desCabeçár, to behead.

Descabelládo, m.bald, hauing no haire
left on his head.

Descabestrár, to vnhalter.

descabullírse, to slip away.

Descaecér, yo Descaésco, to fall away,
to slide away.

Descaecér de la memoría, to slip out of
remembrance.

Descaecemiénto, m.a falling away, a
slipping out of remembrance.

* Descajamiénto, vide Descaxami­
énto. 

* Descalabaçúdo, m.a hastie frantike
foole.

Descalabrádo, m.he that hath a broken
head.

Descalabradúra, f. breaking of the head.

Descalabrár, to breake ones head.

desCalçádo, m.vnshod, vnhosed.

desCalçár, to vnshoo, to put off the shooes
or hose.

* Descálço, vnshod, bare footed, without 
shooes.

* Descálços, without hosen or shooes.

* Descalzádo, vide desCalçádo. 

* Descálzo, vide desCálço. 

* Descálzos, vide desCálzos. 

desCaminádo, m.out of the way, not
right, counterfeit, not allowed.

desCaminár, to go out of the way.

desCampar lluvia, to be faire weather.

* Descán, vide Descánso. 

desCansadaménte, quietly.

desCansádo, m.resting, quiet.

desCansár, to rest.

desCánso, m.rest, quietnes.

desCaperuzádo, m.bareheaded, the cap
off.

* desCapilládo, m.without a Spanish
cloake, hood, or without a friers coule or
hood.

desCapillár, to take away the hood of
a Spanish cloake or a friers hood or
coule.

desCaradaménte, shamelesly.

desCarádo, m.shamelesse, impudent.

* desCargádo, m.discharged, vnbur­
thened.

desCargár, 1. Præt. yo desCargué, to
discharge, to vnburthen.

desCárgo, m.discharge, vnburthening.

desCargue, vide desCargár. 

* desCarriádo, m.astray, without aide
or helpe.

* Descariaménte, m.a wandering, a
straying.

* Descariár, to go astray, to wander.

* Descarilládo, m.the cheekes torne a­
sunder.

Descarilladúra, f. tearing of the cheekes
in sunder.

desCarillár, to teare the cheeks in sunder.

* Descarnádo, the flesh plucke from the
bone, the flesh plucked off.

* desCarnár, to take or plucke the flesh
from the bone.

* desCarnído, m.vide desCarnádo. 

* Descarriár, to go astray, to wander.

* desCartár, to discarde.

* desCasádo, m.diuorced.

desCasamiénto, m.diuorcement, procu­
ring of a diuorce.

Descasárse, to diuorce, to breake off a
marriage.

* Descascarádo, the rinde, pill, or skin of
fruit pulled off.

* Descascarár, to pul or take off the husk,
rinde, pill, paring or outward shell or
part of any fruit.

* Descáto, vide Desacáto. 

* desCavalgádo, m.alighted from horse­
backe.

desCavalgadúra, f. alighting from
horse.

desCavalgár, 1. Præt. yo Descaval­
gué, to alight from horse.

* Descavalgué, vide desCavalgár. 

* Descaveçár, vide Descabeçár. 

* Descavelládo, vide Descabelládo. 

Descavestrár, vide Descabestrár. 

desCaxár, to take out of the shell.

desCaxamiénto, m.taking out of the
shell, folly.

* Descendído, descended, come downe.

* Descendír, to descend or come downe.

* desCeñído, m.vngirded.

desCeñír, yo desCíño, to vngirde.

* descepár, to cut off, to pull out by the
rootes.

* Descerbigár, vide desCervigár. 





* desCercádo, m.the siege raised.

desCercadór, m.one that raiseth a
siege.

desCercár, 1. Præt. yo des Cerque, to 
raise a siege.

desCérco, m.the raising of a siege.

desCerque, vide desCercár. 

desCerrajár, to vnbolt, to vnlocke.

desCervigádo, m.the necke being stric­
ken off.

* desCervigár, 1. Præt. yo desCervi­
gué, to strike off the necke.

* Desvervigué, vide desCervigár. 

Descimentádo, m.vndermined, dig­
ged vp.

* desCimentár, to vndermine, to digge
vp a foundation.

* desCiñe, vide desCeñír. 

* Descirvir, vide Deservir. 

desClavádo, m.vnnailed.

desClavár, to vnnaile.

* desCobijár, to vncouer.

desCocár, 1. Præt. yo desCoqué, to
make cleane, to take out wormes.

* Descoqué, vide desCocár. 

desCocotár, to kill with a blowe in the
necke: to clense wheate from cockle.

desCogér,, yo desCójo, to vnfold.

* Descogído, vnfolded.

* desCoja, desCojo, to vnfold.

* desColár, to curtall, to take awaie or
cut off the taile.

desColgádo, m.vnhanged, taken down.

* desColgadór, m.one that taketh down
that which hangeth.

desColgár, Præs. yo desCuélgo, 1.
Præt. yo desColgué, to take downe
that which hangeth.

* desColgué, vide desColgár. 

desColorádo, m.without colour.

desColoramiénto, m.vncolouring,
without colour.

* desColorído, m.without colour.

* desColorír, to take away the colour, to
vncolour.

* desComedídas palábras, vnman­
nerly speeches.

desComedidaménte, vncurteously.

desComedído, m.vncurteous, vnman­
nerly, wicked, lewd.

desComedimiénto, m.discourtesie, vn­
mannerlines.

* desComedír, yo desComído, to be
vnmannerly.

* Descomíde, vide Descomedír. 

desCompadrár, to breake off kindred
and friendship.

* desComponér, Præs. desCompón­
go, desCompónes, desCompóne,
1. Præt. Descompúse, descompusi­
ste, descompúso, Fut. Descompon­
dré or descomporné, ás, á, Subiunct.
Præs. Descompónga, Imperf. Des­
compusiéra, descompornía, or des­
compusiésse, Fut. descompusiére, to
disorder, to set out of order.

* Descompónga, descompóngo, vide 
Descomponér. 

* Descomporne, descompornía, vide 
Descomponér. 

* Descompostúra, f. a disorder.

* Descompuésto, m.disordered.

* Descompúse, descompusiésse, des­
compúso, vide Descomponér. 

* desComulgádo, m.excommunicated.

Descomulgár, 1. Præt. Descomulgué,
to excommunicate.

* Descomulgué, vide Descomulgár. 

Descomunál, vnmeasurable.

desComunión, f. excommunication.

desConcertadaménte, disagreeingly.

* desConcertádo, m.vnfit, not agree­
ing.

desConcertár, yo DesConciérto, to
disagree, to breake a match, to set at
variance.

* desConchár, to take fish out of the
shell, to vnshell. Also to put out of
order.

* desConciérte, vide desConcertár. 

desConciérto, m.disagreement, trouble,
confusion.

* desConfiádo, m.distrusting.

desConfiánça, f. distrust.

desConfiár, to distrust.

* desConfidádo, vide desConfiádo. 

desConformár, to disagree.

desConfortár, to discomfort, to make out
of hart.

* desconocér, yo desConósco, to for­
get, to be vnthankefull.

desconocidaménte, vnthankefully.

desConocído, m.forgetfull, vnthanke­
full.

* desconoscér, vide desConocér, to
forget, to be vnthankefull.

* desConoscidaménte, vide desCo­
nocidaménte, vnthankefully.

* desConoscído, vide desConocído, 
vnthankefull, forgetfull.

desConocimiénto, vide desConoci­
miénto, vnthankefulnesse, forgetful­
nesse.

desConsoládo, m.without comfort, dis­
comforted.

desConsolár, yo desConsuélo, to dis­
comfort.

* desConsuéle, vide desConsolár. 

desConsuélo, m.discomfort.

* desContádo, m.abated, acknowled­
ged to be paide, the reckoning or bill
cancelled or put out.

desContár, yo desCuénto, to abate in
reckoning, to satisfie, to cancell or ac­
knowledge so much of the debt as is
paid.

* desconvénga, vide desConvenír. 

* desConveníble, vnfit, that cannot be
conuenient.

* desConvenibleménte, vnfitly.

desConveniéncia, f. an inconuenience.

* desConveniénte, disconuenient.

desConvenír, Præs. desConvéngo,
desConviénes, desConviéne, 1. 
Præt. desConvine, viniste, vino,
Fut. Desconvendré or Desconvér­
ne, rás, rá, Sub. Præs. Desconvénga,
Imperfect. desConviniéra, descon­
vernia or Desconviniésse, Fut. Des­
conviniére, to disagree, to breake off
a match, to be at variance.

* desConverne, desConvernía, vide 
desConvenír. 

* desConvíne, desconviniéra, des­
convíno, vide desConvenír. 

desConversár, to leaue companie.

* desCoracinár, vide desCorazinár. 

* desCorazonádo, hartlesse, dull, slug­
gish, slow.

* desCorazonamiénto, faintnesse of
hart, dulnesse, sluggishnesse.

* desCorazonár, to be hartlesse, to bee
dull or sluggish.

desCorchár, or desCortezár, to plucke
off the barke or skin.

desCortés, discurteous, churlish, vnman­
nerly, vngratefull.

* desCortesaménte, vncurteously.

desCortesia, f. discurtesie.

desCortéz, vide desCortés, discurte­
ous.

* desCortezadúra, f. a pulling off the
barke.

desCortezár, vide desCorchár, to
plucke off the barke or skinne, to pill or
plucke off the rinde of a tree, to chip
bread.

desCortezía, f. discurtesie.

desCortezménte, vncurteously, chur­
lishly.

* desCosedúra, f. ripping, vnsowing.

desCosér, yo desCuéso, to rippe, to vn­
sowe.

desCosído, ripped, unsowed.

desCostúmbre, or Desúso, want of vse,
want of custome.

desCrecér, yo Descrésco, to decrease,
to grow lesse and lesse.

desCrecimiénto, m.decreasing, gro­
wing lesse.

* desCrédito, m.discredit.

desCreér, not to beleeue.

desCrevír, yo desCrívo, to describe, to
write out.

desCrinár, to take off the haire.

desCripción, or traça, a description, or
setting downe. 





* descrive, descrivo, vide descre­
vír. 

desCubiérto, m.discouered.

desCubridór, m.a discouerer.

* desCubridúra, f. a discouerie.

desCubrimiénto, m.discouering.

desCubrír, to discouer.

* desCuelgamiénto, m.a taking downe
of that which hangeth, an vnhanging.

* desCuélga, desCuélgo, vide des­
Colgár. 

* desCuente, desCuénto, vide des­
Contár. 

desCuénto, satisfaction, rebatement of
the allowance, a cancelling of so much
as is paid of a summe.

desCuésa, Cuéso, vide desCo­
sér. 

desCuidár, vide desCuydár. 

desCúlpa, f. an excuse, a freeing from
blame.

desCulpár, to excuse, to free from blame.

* desCurrír, to discourse, to runne ouer.

* desCuviérto, vide desCubiérto. 

desCuydádo, m.negligent, retchlesse.

desCuydadaménte, negligently, care­
lesly, retchlesly.

* desCuydár, to be carelesse, rechlesse, or
negligent.

desCuýdo, m.negligence, carlessenes,
retchlessenes.

Désde a quí a pócos días, a fewe daies
hence, shortly.

Désde Comiénço, from the begin­
ning.

Désde níño, from a little childe.

Desdén, m.disdaine.

desDenár, to disdaine.

desDeñóso, m.disdainfull.

desDentádo, m.without teeth, tooth­
lesse.

* desDentár, yo desDiénto, to make
without teeth.

desDezír, Præs. Desdígo, desdízes,
desdíze, 1. Præt. desdíxe, desdixíste,
desdíxo, Fut. Desdiré, rás, rá, Sub.
Præs. Desdíga, Imperfect. desdixéra,
desdiría, or desixiésse, Fut. desdixi­
ére, to vnsay, to gainsay.

desDícha, f. misfortune.

desDichadaménte, vnhappilie, vnfor­
tunately.

desDichádo, m.vnfortunate, vnhap­
pie.

* desDichádo de mí, ah vnhappy that
I am.

* desDiénte, desDiénto, vide desDen­
tár. 

* desDíga, desDígo, vide desDezír. 

* desDíre, desDiría, vide desDezír. 

* desDixéra, desDixesse, desDíxo, vi­
de desDezír. 

desDón, m.vncomelines, vnpleasant­
nes.

desDonadaménte, vncomely, vnplea­
santly.

desDonádo, m.vnpleasant in talke.

* desDorádo, m.vngilded.

* desDorár, to vngild, to spoile the gil­
ding.

Deseár, vide Desseár, to desire.

* desEcháda criatúra, a creature reiec­
ted, an abiect among men, a folorne
wretch.

desEchádo, m.cast off, reiected, put a­
way.

desEchár, to cast off, to put away or
from, to thrust away, to reiect.

desÉcho, m.casting off, reiecting, put­
ting away.

desElár, yo desYélo, to thaw that was
frozen.

desEmbaraçár, to rid out of trouble, to
free from incumbrance, to dispatch out
of hand.

* desEmbaraçádo, m.freed from en­
cumbrance, rid from trouble.

* desEmbaraçár la bólsa, to let the
purse strings at libertie, to rid or empty
the purse from all trouhble of money.

desEmbaráço, m.expeditino, or quicke
dispatch, freeing from trouble.

* desEmbarazádo, vide desEmbara­
çádo. 

* desEmbarazár, vide desEmbara­
çár. 

desEmbarázo, vide desEmbaráço. 

desEmbarrár, to open, to vnbar.

desEmbarcádo, m.vnshipped, arriued
on land.

desEmbarcár, 1. Præt. desEmbarqué, 
to vnship, to set on shoare.

* DesEmbargadaménte, freely.

* desEmbargádo, m.freed or set at liber­
tie from arrest, ataching, stopping, or
seizing on.

desEmbargár, Præs. yo desEmbárgo.
1. Præt. yo desEmbargué, to set at
libertie, or free that which was arre­
sted, stopped, atached, stayed or seized
on.

* desEmbargué, vide desEmbargár. 

desEmbarqué, vide desEmbarcár. 

* desEmbaynár, to draw out of the scab­
bard or sheath.

desEmbocár, Præs. yo desembóco, 1.
Præt. yo desemboqué, to come out of
the mouth of a riuer or hauen.

* desEmboltíssimo, m.most lustie, mst
readie, most quicke, most lauish.

desEmboltúra, f. dexteritie, readines, la­
uishnes, too much libertie.

desEmbolvér, yo desembuelvo, to vn­
roll, to let loose.

* deSemboqué, vide deSembocár. 

desEmboscár, Præs. yo desembósco,
1. Præt. yo desembosque, to go out of
the wood.

* desEmbosqué, vide desEmboscár. 

* desEmbotár, to make sharpe.

desEmbravecér, to make tame.

desEmbravecimiénto, m.making tame,
quietnes.

desEmbravelcér, vide desEmbrave­
cér. 

desEmbriagár, to make one that is drunk
to become sober.

desEmbuchár, to keepe nothing in his
mouth, to speake all whatsoeuer.

desEmbuélto, m.lustie, readie, quicke,
lauish, to full of libertie.

desEmbuélva, desEmbuélvo, vide desEmbolvér. 

desEmmudecér, to breake off silence, to
speake.

desEmpachár, vide desEmbaraçár, to
make expedition.

desEmpácho, vide desEmbaráço, m.
expedition.

desEmpalagár, Præs. yo desEmpalá­
go, 1. Præt. yo desEmpalagué, to
take away loathsomenes, to rid the sto­
macke.

* desEmpalagué, vide desEmpala­
gár. 

desEmparejár, to separate, to make vn­
euen.

* desEmpedrár, to take away the stones.

desEmpegár, Præs. yo desEmpégo, 1.
Præt. yo desEmpegué, to separate or
disioyne that which cleaueth to.

* desEmpegué, vide desEmpegár. 

* desEmpeñádo, m.redeedmed from
pledge, had from gage, gotten from
pawne.

desEmpeñár, to redeeme a gage, or
pledge.

* desEmperéza, shaking off of sloth.

desEmperezár, to make lustie, to shake
off sloth.

desEmpolvár, to beate out dust.

desEmpreñár, to be deliuered of child.

desEmpulgadúra, f. vnbending of a
bow.

desEmpulgár arco, to vnbend a bow.

* desEmvaraçár, vide desEmbarcár. 

* desEmvargár, vide desEmbargar. 

* desEmvaynár, vide desEmbaynár. 

* desEmbolvér, to vnfolde, to winde
out.

* desEnbaynár, vide desEnvaynár. 

* desEnbolvér, vide desEmbolvér. 

desEncabestrár, to vnhalter.

desEncadenár, to vnchaine.

* desEncalládo, m.a ship remooued that
was run on grounde.

desEncalladúra, remoouing of a shippe





that was run on ground.

desEncallár, to remoue a ship that was
runne on ground.

desEncantár, to vnwatch.

desEncapotadúra de oréjas, f. setting
vp of the eares, taking the capouch
from the eares.

desEncapotár los ójos, to behold sted­
fastly, to look wide open, to looke
cheerefully, to looke without lowring.

desEncapotár la bavéra, to put vp his
beuer.

desEncasádo, m.put out of ioynt, one
that hath a bone out of ioynt. Also put
or taken out of the house.

desEncasadúra, or desEncasamiénto, 
putting out of ioynt. Also a putting or
taking out of the house.

desEncasár huóssos, to put bones out of
ioint.

* desEncastillár, to take out of a castle.

* desEncavalgár, Præs. yo desEnca­
válgo, 1. Præt. yo desEncavlgué, to
dismount or alight from horsebacke, to
take a peece of ordinance from his car­
riage.

desEncavalgué, vide desEncavalgár. 

* desEncavestrár, vide desEncabe­
strár. 

* desEncaxádo, m.vnioyned, vnfaste­
ned, pulled a sunder or in peeces.

desEncaxadór, m.a taker out of the
ioints of any workmanship, a puller in
peeces of that is iointed or fastened to­
gither.

* desEncaxadúra, f. a taking a sunder
that which was ioynted of fastened to­
gither.

* desEncaxár, to take a sunder or in pee­
ces that which was fastned or ioyned
togither.

* desEnclavádo, m.vnpinned, vnnai­
led.

* desEnclavár, to vnpinne, or vnnaile.

* Desenconár, to take away poyson, to
purge poyson.

* desEndemoniádo, m.one that hath
had a diuell cast out of him.

* desEndemoniár, to cast out diuels.

* desEnfadádo, m.freed from weari­
nes, loathsomnes, irkesomnes, from of­
fence, trouble, or tediousnes.

* desEnfadár, to rid from loathsomnes,
to free from wearinesse, irkesomnesse,
greefe, offence or trouble.

* desEnfádo, m.freeing from loathsom­
nes, wearines, irkesomnes, greefe, of­
fence, trouble, or tediousnes.

desEnfamádo, m.infamous, one hauing
an euill report.

desEnfamár, to defame, to report ill of.

* desEnfrenadaménte, vnbridledlie,
without rule or order.

desEnfrenádo, vnbridled, vnruled, vn­
ordered.

desEnfrenamiénto, m.vnbridlednesse,
vnrulines.

desEnfrenár, to vnbridle.

* desEngañádo, m.not deceiued, freed
from deceite, leauing to bee deceiued,
finding the errr.

desEngañár, to open or perceiue a deceit,
to leaue to be deceiued.

* desEngáño, m.discouerie of a deceit.

* desEngrudádo, vnglued.

desEngrudamiénto, vngluing.

desEngrudár, to vnglue.

desEnhadár, vide desEnfadár. 

desEnhádo, vide desEnfádo. 

desEnhetrár, to deliuer out of a snare,
to vnsnarle silke or threed that is en­
tangled togither.

desEnlazár, to loosen, to vntie, to ridde
from a snare.

* desEnmudecér, to leaue to be dumbe,
to speake and talke.

desEnquadernár, to take away the cor­
ners of anything.

desEnquadernár líbros, to vnbinde 
bookes.

desEnredár, to take out of a net.

desEnsañár, to appease wrath.

desEnsayár, to put off a cassocke, to
leaue for to assay.

desEnseñár, to take out of the bosome.

desEnseñár, to vnteach.

desEnsillár, to vnsaddle.

* desEnterrádo, m.digged out of the
earth.

desEnterramiénto, digging out of the
earth.

desEnterrár, yo desEntiérro, to dig out
of the earth.

* Desentéria, f. the bloodie flux.

desEntonádo, m.discord in musicke.

* desEntonamiénto, m.a being out of
tune.

desEntonár, to sound out of tune.

desEntrañár, to plucke out the bowels, to 
be in choler.

desEnvaynár, to plucke out the sheath
or scabberd.

* Deséo, vide Desséo, desire.

desEredádo, m.disherited.

desEredár, to disherit, to put by his inhe­
ritance.

desEréncia, f. disinheriting.

* Deservício, displeasure, ill liking.

* deServído, or desServído, m.not well
serued, not well pleased.

desEsperación, f. despaire.

* desEsperadaménte, desperately.

desEsperádo, m.desperate.

desEsperár, to despaire.

* desEstimár, not to esteeme, to con­
temne.

* desSeximiénto, m.a taking away the
sexe, a making no difference of sexe.

desFallecér, yo desFallésco, to faint, to
swoune.

* desFallecído, m.fainting, in a swoune.

desFallecimiénto, m.fainting, being in
a swoune.

desFallescér, vide desFallecér, to swoune.

Desfamádo, m.defamed, infamous, of an
euill name.

Desfamár, to defame, to report euill of.

desFavór, m.disfauor, disgrace.

desFavorecído, m.disgraced, out of fa­
uour.

desFavorecedór, m.he that disliketh, he
that disgraceth.

desFavorecér, y desFavorésco, to 
dislike, to disgrace.

* desFaxár un níño, to unswaddle, to
take out of the swaddle cloutes.

* desFigurádo, m.deformed, disfigured.

desFigurár, to disfigure, to deforme, to
mishape, to make ill fauoured.

* desFiuzádo, m.vide desAfiuziádo. 

* desFiuzár, vide desAfiuziár. 

* desFlaquecido, m.made leane or weak.

desFlemár, to purge steame, to scum a
pot, to breake or vtter ones choler.

desFlorár, to disflower.

desFogár, Præs. desFuégo, 1. Præt. yo
desFogué, to take out the heat or bur­
ning, to coole.

* desFogue, vide desFogár. 

desFormár, vide desFigurár. 

desFórme, ill fauoured, deformed, out of
fashion.

desFormidád, f. ill fauourednesse, defor­
mitie, of an vglie fashion.

desFrutár, to gather fruit.

* desFuéga, desFuégo, vide desFogár. 

* desFuerço, id est, de esfuérço. 

desFundár, to beate out the head of a but
or other vessell.

* desGajándo, cleauing asunder, split­
ting.

desGajár, t cleaue asunder, to slit, to
splent.

* desGalaneár, to take away the gal­
lantrie.

* desGañár, to grin or gnash the teeth.

* desGarrádo, m.rent, torne.

* desGarrár, to brag, to braue it, to
breake, renting, tearing.

desGárro, m.brauing, bragging, brea­
king, renting, tearing.

desGarrón, m.a bragging fellow, a
great renting or tearing.

* desGosnár, vide desGoznár, to take
off hinges.

* desGovernádo, m.misgouerned, dis­
ordered.

desGovernár, to misgouerne, to mis­





misorder.

desGoznár, to take off hinges.

desGrácia, f. disgrace, vnpleasantnes,
vncomlines.

desGraciadaménte, vnpleasantly,
without grace.

desGraciádo, m.disgraced, vnpleasant.

desGradár, to take away a degree from
one, to disgrade.

* desGradescído, m.vide desAgra­
descído. 

* desGradescér, vide desAgrades­
cér. 

* desGradescimiénto, vide desAgra­
descimiénto. 

* desgrádo, vide desAgrádo. 

* desGraduár, to take away a gradu­
ateship, to degrade, to take awaie one
degree.

* desGranádo, m.the kernell being ta­
ken out, threshed.

desGranár, to get out the graine, to
thresh.

* desGreñádo, m.the haire plucked
away, without haire.

* desGreñadór, m.one that plucketh a­
way haire, a piller or maker balde.

* desGreñár, to pill or make balde, to
plucke away haire.

desGuarnescér, to vngarnish, to vn­
furnish.

desGustár, to dislike.

desGústo, m.distaste, disliking.

* desHaçér, vide desHazér, to undoo.

* desHaga, desHágo, vide desHazér. 

desHazér, Præs. desHágo, Házes,
Háze, 1. Præt. desHize, Hizíste,
Hízo, Fut. desHaré, rás, rá, Sub.
Præs. desHága, Imperfect. desHi­
ziéra, desHiziésse, or desHaría,
Fut. desHiziére, to vndoo, to vnmake.

desHazimiénto, vndooing, vnmaking.

desHebillár, vide desHevillár, to take
off the claspes.

* desHechár, to vndoo, to cast away.

desHécho, vndone, cast away.

* desHeredádo, disinherited.

desHeredár, to disinherit, to put from his
inheritance.

desHerrádo, m.vnshod, as horses or
beastes.

desHerrár, yo desHiérro, to vnshooe a 
horse, &c.

* desHevillár, to vnbutton, or to vnbuc­
kle.

* desHierre, vide desHerrár. 

* desHiláda, f. a going out of ranke, a
going out of order.

* a la desHiláda, out of ranke, out of or­
der.

desHiládo, m.vntwisted, the threedes
pulled out.

desHiladúra, f. vntwisting, a pulling out
the threedes.

desHilár, to vntwist, to pull out the
threedes.

desHincádo, m.plucked out, vnnailed.

desHincadúra, f. plucking out, vnfaste­
ning

desHincár, Præs. yo desHinco, 1. 
Præt. yo desHinqué, to plucke vp, to
pull out a naile, to vnfasten.

desHinchádo, asswaged where it was
swollen.

desHinchár, to asswage the swelling.

* desHinqué, vide desHincár. 

* desHize, desHiziéra, desHiziesse, vide desHazér. 

desHogadaménte, cleerely, plainly, not
cackingly, as though one were almost
strangled or choaked.

* desHojádo, m.made bare of leaues,
the leaues being taken off.

desHojadór, m.one that taketh away the
leaues.

desHojadúra, f. plucking off the leaues.

* desHojamiénto, a plucking off leaues.

desHojár, to plucke of the leaues.

desHollejár, to pare, to flea, to vnbarke.

desHollinár, to wipe away soote.

* desHonestaménte, vnhonestly.

* desHonestár, to make vnhonest.

desHonésto, m.vnhonest.

desHonór, vide desHónra, dishonor.

Deshónra, f. dishonor.

* desHonrádo, m.dishonored.

desHonrár, to dishonor.

* desHonta, vide Deshónra. 

* desHóra, or des óra, out of time, out
of season.

* desHoxár, vide desHojár. 

desHuziár, or desFusiár, to distrust, to
despaire.

desjarretár, vide dejarretár. 

* Desíde, slothfull.

Desiérto, m.forsaken, a desart or wil­
dernesse.

* deSignál, of marke, of signe.

* Designár, to designe, appoint, alot or in­
tend.

* Desígnios, or Desíños, m.designes,
endeuors, enterprises, appointments, in­
tents.

* Desiguál, vnequall.

Desigualár, to make vnequall.

Desigualdád, f. vnequalitie.

* Desigualménte, vnequally.

* Desildes, or Dezildes, id est, Dezíd
les, tell them, or say to them.

* Desínio, vide Desígno, designes, en­
deuors.

* desInteressáble, not hauing any inte­
rest.

Desiño, a designe, a purpose.

Desír, vide Dezír, to say, to speake.

* deSirve, vide deServír. 

* Desistír, to desist, to leaue of, cease or
giue ouer.

* desLadrillár, to vntile, to take away
the tiles, bricks or pauement.

Deslatár, or Desparrár, to shoote off.

Desláte, shooting off, a iest, a fond speech.

* desLavádo, m.washed off.

desLavár, to wash off.

desLavadúra, f. washing off.

desLeál, vnfaithfull, disloyall.

desLealdád, f. disloyaltie, vnfaithfulnes.

desLechucadór, m.a pruner of vines.

desLechucár vides, to lop or prune vines
to cut off the superfluous branches.

* desLeýdo, m.dissolued, crummed as
bread, digestion.

desLeydúra, f. dissoluing, crumming of
bread, digestion.

desLeýrse, to be dissolued, to crum bread, 
to be digested.

* desLendár la cabéça, vide desLen­
drár. 

desLendrár, to take out nits.

desLenguádo, m.one without a tongue,
one that cannot rule his toong, a prater.

* desLenguamiénto, m.without toong, 
prattling, tattling, babbling without
rule or gouernment of toong.

* Desliádo, vntied, vnfolded.

* desliadár, vide desLiár, to vnbinde, to
vntie.

desLigár, Præs. yo desLígo, 1. Præt.
yo desLigué, to vnbinde, to vntie.

* desLigué, vide desLigár. 

* desLindádo, m.bounded out, marked
out.

desLindadór, m.that marketh or boun­
deth.

desLindadúra, f. marking, laying out of
bounds.

desLindár heredádes, to lay out the
bounds, to marke how farre the inheri­
tance reacheth euery way.

desLizadéro, m.a slipperie place.

* desLizádo, m.slipperie.

* desLizamiénto, m.slipperinesse.

desLizár, to slip, to slide.

desLoár, to dispraise.

desLóma, f. a broken backe.

desLomádo, m.broken backed.

desLomadúra, f. breaking of the backe.

desLomár, to breake the backe.

* desLumbrádo, m.shadowed, darke­
ned, the sight taken away.

desLumbrár, to dazle, to darken, to sha­
dow, to take away the cleere sight of a
thing.

desLuzído, m.darkened.

desLuzír, to take away the glasse of any
colour, to darken.

* Desmádo, m.tithed.

desMajádos, or desMajolados çapa­
tos, shooes vnbuckled, shooes downe at





the heeles.

* desMalládo, m.vnmayled.

desMalladúra, f. vnmayling.

desMallár, to vnmayle.

* Desmán, m.a misdemeanor, an ill beha­
uiour.

desManár, to goe a stray, to stray.

desMandádo, m.disordered.

desMandárse, to be disordered, to goe a­
stray, to misgouerne himselfe.

* Desmánes, misbehauiour, misdemea­
nor.

* desMantelár, to dismantle, to beate
downe the garnishing of a wall or fort.

desMarañár, to vntwine, to vnfold, to rid
from intangling.

desMarrojár, to prune a vine.

* desMayádo, dismayed, discouraged,
made out of hart.

desMaýr, to dismay, to discourage, to put
out of hart, to swoune.

desMáyo, m.dismay, swouning, discoura­
ging.

* desMedído, m.vnmannerly, vnmea­
surably.

desMedrár, to faile, to faint, to empaire,
to goe backeward in thriuing.

* desMédro, m.a going backewarde in
thriuing, an empayring.

desMejorádo, m.made woorse.

desMejorár, to make woorse.

desMelenádo, m.vntrimmed, the haire
all about the eares vntyed.

desMembrádo, m.dismembred, lame of
some lim.

desMembradúra, f. dismembring.

desMembrár, yo desmiémbro, to
dismember, to make lame of the lims.

desMemoriádo, m.out of remembrance,
forgetfull.

* desMenguár, Præs. yo desméngo, 1.
Præt. yo desMengué, to diminish, to
lessen.

* desMentído, m.the lie cast on him, re­
proched with the lie, one thing compa­
red with another being vnequall.

* desMentidór, m.one that giueth the
lie.

desMentír, y desMiénto, to confute, to
giue the lie, to compare an vnequall
thing with another.

desMenuzádo, m.broken in peeces, bray­
ed, powned, minced small.

desMenuzándo, breaking in peeces,
braying, powning.

* desMenuzamiénto, m.breaking in
peeces, braying, powning, mincing
small.

desMenuzár, to diminish, to breake, to
bray or powne in a morter, to mince
small, to set downe in particulars.

desMeollamiénto, m.taking out of the
kernell, taking out of the braine.

desMeollár, to take out the kernell, to
take out the braine or the marrow.

desMerecér, to deserue ill.

desMerecimiénto, m.deseruing ill.

* Desmerojón, vide Esmerojón, an Ea­
gle, a sparrowhawke.

desMesúra, f. want of measure.

desMesuradaménte, or desMezurada­
ménte, vnmeasurably.

desMesurádo, m.vnmeasurable.

desMesurár, or desMezurár, to be vn­
measurable, to be vnruly.

* desMiémbre, desMiémbro, vide desMembrár. 

* desMiénte, vide desMentír. 

* desMigajár, to crum, to crimble.

* desMigeár, to crum.

* desMinuír, to diminish.

* desMiramiénto, m.vnmannerlines.

desMochádo, m.nootted as a sheepe or
beast hauing lost the hornes.  Also mai­
ming.

desMochár, to notte or cut off. Also to
maime.

desMolér, yo desmuélo, to digest meate.

desMontádo, m.grubbed vp.

desMontadúra, f. grubbing vp by the
rootes.

desMontár, to grub vp by the rootes, to
make the ground bearing corne, or pas­
sable.

desMoronár, to pull downe a wall or hill,
to dismure, or lay without wals.

* desmuéle, vide desMolér. 

* desNarigádo, m.one that hath his
nosthrils cut off, cut nosed.

desNarigár, Præs. yo desNarigo, 1.
Præt. yo desNarigué, to cut off the
nosthrils.

* desNatrigué, vide desNarigár. 

desNatár, to skim with a creame boll, or
milkeboll, to take off the creame.

desNaturalizádo, m.banished, out­
lawed.

desNaturalizár, to banish, to outlaw.

desNegamiénto, m.recanting, denying
againe, a recanting of that which was
denied.

desNegár, yo desNiégo, to recant, to
denie againe, to recant that which was
before denied.

desNegrádo, vide Desgreñádo. 

* Desnerbár, vide desNervár, to cut out
sinewes.

desNervár, yo desNiérvo, to cut off
sinewes.

* Desniérve, vide desNervár. 

desNudádo, m.vnclothed, made naked.

desNudár, to vncloth, to make naked.

desNudéz, f. nakednes, want of clo­
thing.

desNúdo, m.all naked, without clo­
thes.

desObedecér, yo desObedésco, to
disobey.

* desObedecído, m.disobeyed.

* desObediéncia, f. disobedience.

desObediénte, disobedient.

desObedienteménte, disobediently.

desObligár, to vnbinde.

desOcupádo, m.vnbusied, at leasure,
vnoccupied.

desOcupár, to forsake, to leaue vnoccu­
pied or vnused.

desollár, yo desuéllo, to flea, to plucke
off the skinne.

desOnestidád, f. dishonestie, filthi­
nes.

desOnésto, m.dishonest, filthie.

desÓnra, vide desHonrá, dishonor.

desÓra, vide desHóra, out of time or
season.

desOpilár, to vnstop the oppilation.

desÓrden, f. misorder.

desOrdenadamiénte, disorderly.

desOrdenádo, m.disordered.

desOrdenaménte, disorderly.

desOrdenár, to misorder.

* desOrejádo, m.the eares cut off.

desOrejár, to cut off the eares.

desOspedádo, m.one that keepeth no
hospitalitie.

desOspedamiénto, m.want of keeping
hospitalitie.

desOssádo, m.without bones.

desOssár, yo desuésso, to take out the
bones.

desOváda gallína, a hen that hath laide
all hir egges.

* desOvár, to lay egges as hens do, to cast
spawne as fishes do.

desOvillár, to vnwinde a bottome or clue
of threed or yarne, or such like.

* desPabesár, vide desPavesár. 

* desPabilár, vide desPavilár. 

Despácio, id est, de espácio, of space,
leisurely.

desPachádo, m.dispatched.

Despachár, to dispatch, to ridde out of
the way.

* desPácho, m.expedition, dispatch.

desPagádo, m.displeased.

desPagamiénto, m.displeasure.

desPagár, to displease.

desPajadúra, f. winnowing of corne.

desPajár, to winnow corne.

* Despáldas, id est, de espaldas, on the
shoulders or backe.

* desPalmádas galéras, gallies trim­
med vp or rigged to be floted.

desPalmár, to trim vp a gallie, to take or
breake boughes from a palme tree, to 





pare the hoofe of a beast to cure his
foote.

desPampanadór, m.a cutter of leaues
from vines.

desPampanadúra, f. cutting of leaues
from vines.

desPampanár, to cut leaues from vines.

* Desparamádo, scattered abroad.

* Desparamadúra, a scattering abroad.

* Desparamár, to scatter abroad.

Desparár, to shoote off.

Desparáte, m.foolishnes.

desParecér, yo desParésco, vide des­
Parescér, to vanish, to hide himselfe.

* desParecído, vanished, hidden.

* desParpajár, to put out of ioint, to set
out of place.

* Desparramádo, scattered abroad.

* Desparramadúra, a scattering abroad.

* Desparramár, to scatter abroad.

* Desparrencádo, stradling, going
stradling.

* desPartído, m.parted.

desPartidór de ruýdo, m.a parter of a
fray, a stickler.

desPartír, to part a fray, to appease a
tumult.

desParzír, vide Esparzír. 

* dEspárto, id est, de Espárto, of a kinde
of hempe in Spaine whereof they make
packthreed shooes to goe in.

* desPavesadéras, vide Despaviladé­
ras. 

desPavesadúra, f. vide Despaviladúra. 

desPavesár, or desPavilár, to snuffe a
candle.

* Despaviladéras, f. snuffers for a can­
dle.

desPaviladór, m.one that snuffeth a
candle.

desPavilár, vide desPavesár, to snuffe
a candle.

* desPaviladúra, f. the snuffing of a
candle.

* desPavorído, m.fearefull.

* desPavorír, to be afraid.

desPeádo, m.surbated.

desPeadúra, f. surbating.

desPeár, to surbate on the feete with go­
ing.

* desPeçár, vide desPedaçár, to teare
in peeces.

desPechádo, m.despited.

desPechár, to despite.

* desPécho, m.despite.

desPechugadúra, f. taking the flesh from
the breast of a birde, opening of the
bosome.

desPechugár, Præs. yo desPechúgo,
1. Præt. yo desPechugué, to take the
flesh off the breast of a bird, to open the
breast.

desPechugué, vide desPechugár. 

desPeçonár, to take away the stalke or
stem of fruit.

desPedaçádo, m.torne in peeces.

desPedaçadúra, f. tearing in peeces.

desPedeçár, yo desPadiéço, to teare
in peeces, to shut out.

desPedída, f. a dispatch, a departure.

desPedído, m.dispatched, departed, sent
away.

* desPedieçe, desPedieço, vide des­
Pedeçár. 

desPedír, yo desPído, to dispatch, to 
send away, to depart, to take his leaue.

desPedrár, or desPedregár, yo des­
Piédro, to plucke out stones.

desPegádo, m.seuered, vnglued, dis­
ioyning.

desPegár, Præs. yo desPiégo, 1. Præt.
yo desPegué, to seuer that which
cleaueth or sticketh, to disioyne, to vn­
glue.

* desPegué, vide desPegár. 

desPeluzár, to haue the haire standing
on end, to take haire or motes from a
garment, &c.

* desPenádo, m.freed from paine.

* desPenár, to free from paine.

Despendedór, m.a spender.

Despendér, yo desPiéndo, to spend.

* Despendído, m.spent.

desPeñadéro, m.a downefall, a steepe
rocke.

desPeñádo, m.throne downe head­
long.

desPeñár, m.to throw downe headlong.

Despénsa, f. expence, charges in money. A
celler, a buttrie.

Despenséro, a butler, a steward, a purser
in a ship.

desPepitár, vide desPoñár. 

* d'Espéra, of demur, of delaying or pro­
longing a suite or such like.

dEsperár, to despaire, to distrust, to be out
of hope.

desPerdiciádo, m.spent, vnthriftily.

desPerdiciadúra, f. spending, vnthrif­
tily.

desPerdiciár, to scatter, to spend vn­
thriftily.

* desPerezár, to rowse from sluggishnes,
roame, to reach his bodie gaping for
sleepe.

* desPerézo, a roaming, a reaching of
the bodie when one is sluggish.

* desPernár, y desPiérno, vide desjar­
retár. 

* Despertádo, m.awaked, raised.

* Despertadór, m.a waker, a raiser vp.

Despertár, yo desPiérto, to waken, to
raise vp.

desPesár, to grieue.

* desPezonár, vide desPeçonár. 

* desPiadádo, m.without pitie.

* desPiadár, to be without pitie.

* desPída, desPíde, desPído, vide 
Despedír. 

* Despidiénte, a dispatcher.

* desPiédro, vide desPedrár. 

* desPiégo, vide desPegár. 

* Despiéndo, vide despendér. 

* Despiérte, desPiérto, vide desPer­
tár. 

Despiérto, m.awakened, raysed.

* Despinsádo, the knaps of cloath taken
out with pincers.

* Despinsár, to take out the knaps of cloth
with pincers.

Despínce, the taking away of the knaps of
cloath with pincers.

* desPiojadór, m.a lowser.

desPiojár, to take away lice.

* desPlaçér, or desPlazér, to displease.

* desPlacíble, vide desPlazíble. 

desPlazér, to displease or displeasure. The
substantiue.

desPlazíble, displeasing.

* desPlegádo, m.vnfolded, without
pleits or folds.

desPlegadúra, f. taking away pleits r
folds, making smooth.

desPlegár, Præs. yo desPliégo, 1. Præt.
yo desPlegué, to vnfolde, to make
plaine, to take away pleits.

* desPlegué, vide desPlegár. 

* desPliéga, desPliégo, vide desPlegár. 

desPlomádo, m.liuely, without lead.

* desPlomár, to make without lead.

desPlumádo, m.without feathers, pluc­
ked.

desPlumadúra, f. plucking off feathers.

desPlumár, to plucke off feathers.

desPoblación, f. dispeopling, leauing
without people.

desPobládo, m.vnpeopled.

* desPobládos ásperos rompér, to
breake the rough and craggie deserts.

desPoblár, to vnpeople, to make deso­
late.

desPojádo, m.spoiled, vnarmed.

desPojadór, m.a spoyler, he that vnar­
meth.

desPojár, to spoile, to vnarme.

* desPójo, or desPójos, m.spoiles.

* desPolvoreár, to beate or take out the
dust of anything.

* desPolvorizádo, or desPolvorisádo, m.beaten to powder.

desPolvorizár, or desPolvorisár, to
beate to dust or to powder.

* desPortádo, m.the doore taken away.

* desPortár, to take away the doore.





* dEsposáda, f. a woman betrothed to a
husband.

* dEsposádo, m.a man betrothed in mar­
riage.

dEsposádos, the betrothed.

dEsposár, to betroth.

dEsposórios, m.the time of betrothing,
betrothings.

* desPosséer, to dispossesse.

* desPosseýdo, m.dispossessed.

* Despoxár, vide desPojár. 

desPreciadaménte, despitefully.

desPreciádo, m.despised.

desPreciadór, m.a despiser.

desPreciár, to despise.

* desPrendér, to vntacke, to vnpin, to
vnstitch, to vnhitch.

* desPrendído, m.vnpinned, vnstitched,
vnhitched, vntacked, loosed.

* Desprésces, citations, summons.

* Després, contempt.

* desProporcionádo, m.vnproportioned.

* desProporcionamiénto, m.ill pro­
portion or fashion.

* Desprobeýdo, vide desProveýdo. 

* Desprobéer, vide desProvéer. 

* desProporcionár, to bring out of fa­
shion.

desProveido, or desProveýdo, m.vn­
prouided, vnfurnished.

* desProvéer, to vnfurnish, to dispro­
uide.

desPuchár, to draw out.

* Despuélas, id est, de espuélas, of
spurres, as móço despuélas, a foote­
man, a lackie.

desPués, afterward.

* desPués que, after that.

desPuntádo, m.made blunt.

* desPuntadór, m.a maker blunt.

desPuntár, to make blunt.

* Desquajádo, or Desquaxádo, vn­
crudded, scattered abroad.

* Desquajamiénto, or desQuaxami­
énto, an vncrudding, a scattering a­
broad.

* desQuajár, vide desQuaxár. 

* desQuartizádo, m.quartered.

desQuartizár, to quarter.

* desQuaxádo, or desQuajádo, m.
vncrudded, scattered.

* desQuaxamiénto, or desQuaja­
miénto, m.an vncrudding, a scatte­
ring abroad.

* desQuaxár, or desQuajár, to vn­
crud, to scatter abroad.

* desQue, from that.

* Desquénten, vide Descontár. 

* desQuiciádo, m.taken off the hookes
or hinges.

desQuiciár, to take a doore off the
hookes.

* desQuido, vide desCuido. 

* Desquixarár, to take out the iawes of
any thing.

* desRaygádo, m.plucked vp by the 
rootes.

* desRaygadór, m.a plucker vp by the
rootes.

* desRaygamiénto, m.plucking vp by
the rootes.

* desRaygár, Præs. yo desRaygo, 1.
Præt. yo desRaygué, to plucke vp by
the rootes.

* desRaygué, vide desRaygár. 

* desRegládo, m.out of rule, a sicke man
that will keepe no diet.

* desRegoládo, m.idem. 

* desRonchádo, scabs plucked ff, a
bough pulled from the tree.

desRonchár, to pull off scabs, to plucke a
bough from a tree.

desSabrído, or deSabrído, m.vnsauo­
rie, of an ill taste.

* desSabrimiénto, m.euill sauoring.

* dessAsiádo, or desAsiádo, challen­
ged, defied.

* dessAsiár, or desAsiár, to challenge, to
defie.

* dessAraygádo, vide desRaygádo, 
pulled vp by the rootes.

* dessAraygamiénto, vide desRayga­
miénto, m.a pulling vp by the rootes.

* dessAraygár, vide desRaygár, to
plucke vp by the rootes.

* Dessa cósa, id est, De essa cosa, of this
this thing.

* Dessas es? id est, de Essas es? Is she
one of those?

Dessaynár, to take out the fat.

* Desse, id est, de esse, of this, of him.

Desseáble, that is to be desired.

Desseableménte, desirously.

* Desseádo, m.desired.

Desseár, to desire, to wish, to faile.

* desSemejádo, m.made vnlike.

desSemejánte, vnlike.

desSemejanteménte, vnlikely.

desSemejár, to be vnlike.

Desséo, m.desire.

Desseosaménte, desirously.

desseóso, m.desirous.

* desServício, m.ill seruice, ill pleasing,
an offence.

* desServído, m.ill serued, ill pleased.

* desServidór, m.one that serueth ill,
one that pleaseth ill.

* desServír, yo desSírvo, to mislike, to
serue ill, to please ill.

* desSírve, desSírvo, vide desServír. 

* Desso, id est, de esso. 

* Déssos es, id est, de éssos es? is he one
of those?

* Dessolación, waste, desolation, ruine.

Dessolár, to make waste, to ruinate, to
make desolate.

desSolládo, m.the paunch taken out, the
skin fleaed off.

desSolladúra, f. taking out of the
paunch, a fleaing off the skin.

desSollár, yo desSuéllo, to take out the
paunch, to flea off the skin.

* dessOllejádo, vide desHollejádo, 
the paring or skin taken off.

dessOllejár, vide desHollejár, to take
off the paring or skin of fruite or such
like.

* dessOllinadór, a chimney sweeper.

* dessOllinadúra, chimney sweeping, or
wiping awaie soote.

dessOllinár, vide desHollinár, to
wipe away soote, to sweepe a chimney.

* Dessótro, id est, de ésso ótro, of this
other.

* desSuéllo, vide desSollár. 

* dEsta manéra, of this sort or fashion.

* Destajádo, tasked, appointed his taske.

Destájo, m.taske worke, worke by the
great.

* aDestájo, by the great.

aDestájo tenér la téla de Penélope, t
haue Penelopes taske in hand.

* desTapádo, m.vnstopt.

* desTapadór, m.an vnstopper of anie
thing.

* desTapamiénto, m.an vnstopping or
opening that is stopped close.

* desTapár, to vnstop.

* Destáxo, vide Destájo. 

* Deste, id est, de este, of this man, or of
this.

desTechadúra, f. vntiling, vncouering
a house.

desTechár, to vntile, to vncouer a house.

* desTejádo, m.vntiled, vnslated, vn­
couered.

* desTejadúra, f. vntiling, vnslating of
a house.

desTejamiénto, m.vntiling, vncoue­
ring.

* desTejár, to vntile, to vnslate, to vn­
couer.

Destelladúra, dropping, distilling.

Destellár, to drop, to distill.

desTempladaménte, intemperately.

desTempládo, m.vntemperate, distem­
pered.

desTemplánça, f. distemperature.

desTemplár, yo desTémplo, to dis­
temper.

desTerrádo, m.banished.

desTerrár, yo destiérro, to banish out
of his countrey.

Desterronáda tiérra, ground that is rol­
led, or balled, where the clods are bro­
ken small.

desTetár, to weane from the teate.

* Destexadúra, vide desTechadúra. 





* desTexár, vide desTechár. 

* desTexér, to vndoe that which is wo­
uen, to vnweaue.

* desTexído, m.vnwouen.

* desTeximiénto, m.vndoing that
which was wouen.

* desTexidúra, f. idem. 

* desTiémple, desTiémplo, vide desTemplár. 

* desTiérre, desTiérro, vide des­
Terrár. 

desTiérro, m.banishment.

* Destiládo, m.distilled.

* Destiladór, m.a distiller.

* Destilamiénto, m.distilling.

* Destilár, to distill.

Destinár, to purpose, to determine.

Destiñár las colménas, to make cleane
hiues.

Destíno, m.destinie, fate, lucke.

* Destituýr, to make destitute.

* Destitúto, voide, destitute, wanting.

* Destizádo, m.vide Deslizádo. 

* Destizár, vide Deslizár. 

* Desto, id est, de esto, of this.

* desTocádo, m.the kerchief or vaile of
a woman pulled off.

desTocár, Præs. yo desTóco, 1. Præt.
yo Destoqué, to pull off the kerchief
or vaile of a womans head.

* Destoque, vide desTocár. 

desTorcér, yo desTuérço, to vn­
wreath.

* desTrabár, vide desTravár. 

Destrál, m.an axe. Also a halter.

Destraléja, f. a hatchet. Also a little
halter.

desTravádo, m.vnplatted, vndone, vn­
crossed.

desTravár, to vnplat, to vndoe, to vn­
crosse.

Destréza, f. dexteritie.

* Destripádo, paunched, the guts pulled
out.

* Destripadúra, a paunching or pulling
out the guts.

* Destripár, to pull out the guts or tripes
of any beast, to paunch.

* Destróça, vide Destroço. 

* Destroçádo, scattered, dispersed, put
to flight, broken in peeces.

Destroçár, to scatter, to disperse, to put to
flight, to make slaughter, to spoyle, to
breake in peeces.

* Destroçár vestídos, to breake in pee­
ces, spoyle, weare out, and marre ap­
parell.

Destróço, m.a scattering, a dispersing, a
putting to flight, putting to the worst,
making slaughter, spoyling, a tearing
in peeces.

* desTroncádo, m.broken off from the
trunke or bodie.

desTroncár, Præs. yo desTrónco, 1.
Præt. yo desTronqué, to breake off
from the bodie, trunke or stocke.

* desTronqué, vide desTroncár. 

* Destrozádo, vide Destroçádo. 

* Destrózo, destruction, putting to flight
or to the worst, spoyling or marring.

Destrución, or Destruición, destru­
ction.

* Destruído, or Destruýdo, m.destroied.

Destruidór, or Destruydór, m.a de­
stroyer.

Destruír, or Destruýr, to destroy.

* desTuérço, vide desTorcér. 

* desValído, vide Desbalído. 

* desValijádo, m.taken out of a cloke­
bag, maile or portmanteaw, robbed,
spoiled.

* desValijamiénto, a taking out of a 
clokebag, maile or portmanteaw, a rob­
bing, a spoyling.

* desValijár, to take out of a maile r
clokebag, to spoile, to rob.

desVán de casa, m.a garret or cockloft.

desVanecér, yo desVanésco, to vanish
away, to be in a swoune.

desVanecído, m.vanished away, come
to naught, in a swouning.

desVanescér, vide desVanecér. 

desVanecimiénto, or desVanescimi­
énto, m.vanishing, swouning.

* desVarahustár, vide desBarahustár. 

* desVarádo, slipped, slidden, fallen to a
dissolute life.

* desVarár, to slip, to slide, to fall to a
loose or dissolute life.

* desVaratár, vide desBaratár. 

* Desvaráto, vide desBaráto. 

desVariadaménte, dotingly, triflingly,
without sense.

desVariádo, a doter, a talker without
sense.

desVariár, to dote, to raue, to tell trifling
tales.

desVarío, m.dotage.

* desVayádo, m.vide desVaýdo, fee­
ble, hartlesse, scarce able to goe on his
legs.

* desVaýdo, m.faint, hartlesse.

desVaynádo, m.drawen out of the scab­
bard or sheath.

desVaynadúra, f. plucking out of the
scabbard or sheath.

desVaynár, to plucke out of the scabbard
or sheath.

* deSúbito, on a sudden.

desVeládo, m.watched, without sleepe.

desVelár, or desVelárse, to be without
sleepe, to watch diligently.

* deSuellacáras, a hangman, a villanous
fellow, that fleaeth off the skin of a dead
mans face, that hee may not be kno­
wen.

* deSuélle, deSuéllo, vide deSollár. 

* desVelládo, m.without downe r
mosse.

* desVelladúra, a taking of the downe or
mosse.

* desVellár, to plucke off the downe or
mosse.

* desVentája, f. disaduantage.

desVentúra, f. misfortune, mishap.

desVenturadaménte, vnfortunately, 
vnhappily.

desVenturádo, m.vnfortunate, vnhap­
pie.

desVergonçadaménte, vnshamefastly,
shamelesly.

desVergonçádo, m.shameles.

desVergonçárse, yo desVerguénço,
to be without shame, to be impudent or
shamelesse.

desVerguénça, f. shamelesnes.

* desVerguénce, desVerguénço, vide 
desVergonçárse. 

* desuesse, vide desOssár. 

* desViádo, m.missing the right way.

desViár, or desViarse, to goe wrong, to
misse the right way.

desVio, m.missing the right way.

* desVios, by-waies, wrong waies.

* desVirgádo, m.defloured, hauing lost
hir honestie.

desVirgamiénto, a deflouring, a disho­
nesting.

desVirgár, Præs. yo desVírgo, 1. Præt.
yo desVirgué, to deflower, or dishonest.

* desVirgué, vide desVirgár. 

* desViznár, vide desBiznár. 

desVñído, m.vnunited, vnyoked, vncou­
pled, seuered, separated.

* desVñidór, m.one that vnyoketh, vn­
coupleth or disuniteth, one that par­
teth, seuereth, or separateth.

* desVnimiénto, an vncoupling, a dis­
uniting, an vnyoking, a seuering asun­
der.

desVñír, to vnunite, to vnyoke, to vncou­
ple, to seuer, to separate.

* desVnzído, vncoupled, vnyoked.

* desVnzír, to vncouple, to vnyoke.

* desVsádo, m.vnaccustomed, growen
out of vse.

desVsár, or desVsárse, to grow out of
vse, to be vnaccustomed, to leaue an vse
or custome.

des&Vacute;so, m.want of vse or custome.

* desYélo, vide desElár. 

* de tal manéra, in such sort as.

* deTán, of so great.

deTenér, Præs. deTéngo, deTiénes,
deTiéne, 1. Præt. deTúve, deTu­
víste, deTúvo, Fut. deTendré, or
deTerné, rás, rá. Sub. Præs. deTén­
ga. Imperfect. deTuviéra, deTernía,
or deTuviésse. Fut. deTuviére, to





hold, to stay, to withhold, to keepe
backe.

deTénga, deTéngo, vide deTenér. 

* deTenído, m.withholden, kept backe.

deTenimiénto, m.withholding, keeping
backe.

deTerminación, f. purpose, determina­
tion.

* deTerminádo, m.purposed, resolved.

* cavalléro determinádo, a resolued
gentleman.

deTerminár, to purpose, to determine,
to resolue, to appoint with him­
selfe.

deTérne, deTernía, vide deTenér. 

* deTiéne, vide deTenér. 

deTiéne buéy, Cammocke, rest-harrow,
whin.

de todo púnto, altogither.

* detractádo, or detratádo, backbited, ill
spoken off, abused behind his backe.

* detractamiénto, or detratamiénto,
backbiting, speaking ill of.

* detractár, or detratár, to backbite, to
speake euill of.

* detractór, or detratór, a backbiter, an
euill toonged bodie, a taker away of an­
others good name.

deTrás, after, behind.

deTravés, a crosse.

* Detúve, vide deTenér. 

* deTuviéra, deTuviésse, vide deTe­
nér. 

deTúvo, vide deTenér. 

* deValér, id est, de Valer, to be of a­
uaile, to be able.

Devanadúra, f. a thing vpon which they
put the skaine of yarne or threed, &c. 
after it is spun and reeled, from which
thing they winde it vp into bottomes
or weauers winde their quils from it.

deVanár, to winde vp, to roll vp, to reele
yarne, &c.

deVaneár, to raue, to talke foolishlie, to
reele or stagger.

* deVaniamiénto, m.rauing, foolish
talking.

* deVanéo, m.rauing, foolish talking.

Deúda, f. debt.

* Deúda, f. a kinswoman.

Deudór, m.a debter.

* Devedádo, forbidden.

deVedár, yo deViédo, to forbid.

deVengár, Præs. yo deVengo, 1. Præt.
yo deVengué, to reuenge.

* deVengué, vide deVengár. 

Devér, Præs. Dévo, déves, déve, 1.
Præt. deví, devíste, devió, Fut. deu­
ré, deurás, deurá, Sub. Præt. déva,
Imperfect. Deviéra, deviésse, or deu­
ría, Fut. Deviére, to owe.

deVéras, indeed, verily, in good sooth.

deVidaménte, duely.

deVído, m.due.

* deViéde, deViédo, vide deVedár. 

deViédo, forbidding.

Deviésso, a kinde of swelling or soare.

Devísa, f. a deuise.

Devisár, to perceiue, to espie.

Devoción, f. deuotion, care of worshipping
God, a religious purpose of the minde.

Devotaménte, deuoutly, religiously.

Devóto, m.deuout, religious, greatly ad­
dicted to serue God.

* deViéra, deViésse, vide Devér. 

* Deuría, vide Devér. 

† Dexádo, m.left, forsaken.

* † Dexamiénto, a leauing, forsaking.

† Dexár, to leaue, to forsake, to leaue off,
to let alone.

Déxo, vide Cabo. 

* Deydád, f. the Godhead.

* Deyuso, id est, de Yuso, below.

Dezidór, m.a speaker, an enditer.

Deziémbre, m.the moneth called De­
cember.

Dezír, Præs. Dígo, dízes, díze, 1. Præt.
Díxe, dixiste, dixo, Fut. Diré, dirás,
dirá, Sub. Præs. Díga, Imperfect. dix­
ésse, dixiéra, or Diria, Fut. Dixiére,
to say, to speake.

* Deziseys, vide Diez y seys. 

* Dezisiete, vide Diez y seite. 

* Deziócho, vide Deiz y ócho. 

* Dezinuéve, vide Diez y nuéve. 

* Dézma, vide Diézma. 

* Dezmádo, vide Diezmádo. 

Dezmár, yo Diézmo, to tithe, to giue
the tenth.

* Dezméro, a tither.


D I
* Di, vide Dár. 

Día, m. a day.

Día feciál, a holy day.

* Día y vícto, sustenance, feeding, liuing,
or victuals, thinges necessarie and no
more.

* muchos días há, many daies past.

Días ha, some daies past.

Diáblo, or Diábolo, the diuell.

Diabólico, m.diuelish.

* diaCatolicón, an apothecarie drug.

* Diácene, a kinde of thorne.

* diaCitrón, m.conserues made of Ci­
trones or Lymons, prouoking to the
lust of the flesh.

* Diacódion, a sirrupe made of water
and poppie.

* Diacódo, a kinde of stone that coniu­
rers vse in their coniurations.

Diaconádgo, a deaconship.

Diácono, m.a deacon.

* Diacorión, a medicine made of Oni­
ons.

Diadéma, f. a diademe, a kingly crowne.

* Diáfano, or Diáphan, transparent,
that may be seene through as glasse,
water, the aire.

* Diafrágma, f. the midriffe, or a muscle
lying ouerthwart the lower part of the
breast, separating the lights and the
hart from the stomacke and other nea­
ther bowels.

* Dialéctica, f. logicke, the art of reaso­
ning schollerlike by probable argu­
ments.

* Dialéctico, m.a logician.

* Diálogo, m.a conference or talking to­
gither.

Diamánte, a diamond.

Diámetro, m.a diameter, a line diuiding
any figure into equall parts, a line go­
ing through the middle point of any
figure.

* Diapantón, a note or rule in musicke.

* Diapasón, a concord in musicke of all
parts, a diapason.

* Diáphano, or Diáfano, transparent,
that may be seene into, as glasse, water,
and aire.

Diaquilón, m.a kinde of Apothecarie
drug so called.

* Diarodón, a sirupe made to mitigate 
paine of the bellie.

Diáspero, m.a Iasper stone.

* Diatóno, a plaine song of two parts.

* Dibujár, vide Dibuxár. 

* Dibújo, vide Dibúxo. 

* † Dibuxádo, vide Debuxádo, m.pain­
ted out, drawen out.

* Dibuxadór, vide Debuxadór, m.a
painter, a drawer of pictures, &c.

* Dibuxamiénto, m.painting, drawing.

* † Dibuxár, vide Debuxár, to paint.

* † Dibúxo, vide Debúxo, painting.

* Dicernír, to discerne.

Dícha, f. lucke, fortune, hap, chance.

Dícho, a saying. Also the participle said.

Dichosaménte, happily, fortunately.

Dichóso, m.happie, fortunate.

* Dicción, or Dición, f. a speech, a say­
ing.

* Diciplína, or Disciplína, f. discipline,
learning, correction, penance.

Diciplinár, or Disciplinár, to teach, to
correct.

* Dicíso, vide Decíso. 

* Dictádo, or Ditádo, giuen as a sen­
tence to be made into latine pronounced
to another, any thing to be written.

Dictadór, or Ditadór, m.a head officer
in Rome so called, who had for halfe a
yeere kingly authoritie.

* Dictadúra, or Ditadúra, the office and
authoritie of a Dictator.  Also a pro­
nouncing of a thing to be written.





* Dictámen, or Ditámen, m.any thing
written by another mans instruction.

* Dictár, or Ditár, to giue a sentence in
English for to be turned into Latine, to
appoint, to call or rehearse to one what
or how he shall write.

* Diégo, m.Iames.

* Diénte, Diénto, vide Dentár. 

Diénte, m.a tooth.

* Diénte de ájo, a head of garlicke.

Diéntes delantéros, the foreteeth.

* Dientíllos de ájo, little cloues of gar­
licke.

* Diera, Diesse, vide Dár. 

* Dierón, they gaue.

* Dimos, we gaue or haue giuen.

* Diestraménte, towardly, handsomly,
cunningly.

Diéstra máno, the right hand.

* Diestréza, f. readinesse, handsomnesse,
cunning, perfection.

Diéstro, readie, handsome, cunning, per­
fect, skilfull.

* Diéstro de entrámbas mános, one
that can play on both hands.

Diéta, a daies iourney, a diet, a palia­
ment, a solemne assemblie.

Díez, ten in number.

* Diez y seys, sixteene.

* Diez y siéte, seuenteene.

* Diez y ócho, eighteene.

* Diéz y nuéve, nineteene.

* Diézma, f. tithe.

* Diezmádo, or Dezmádo, tithed.

* Diezme, Diesmo, vide Dezmár. 

* Diezméro, m.a tither.

* Diez milláres, ten thousands.

Diézmo, the tenth, the tithing.

* Difamádo, m.diffamed.

* Difamadór, m.a diffamer.

Difamár, to diffame.

Diferéncia, f. a difference.

Diferénte, different, discrepant.

Diferenteménte, differingly.

* Diferído, m.deferred, put off.

Diferír, yo Difiéro, to defer, to put off.

* Diféto, vide Deféto. 

Dificil, hard, difficult.

Dificilménte, hardly, difficultly.

Dificultád, f. difficultie, hardnes.

Dificultár, to make hard, to make diffi­
cult.

Dificultosaménte, difficultly, hardly.

Dificultóso, m.hard, difficult.

* Difiere, difiéro, vide Diferír. 

Difinición, f. a definition.

Difinído, m.defined.

Difinír, to define what it is.

* Difinitíva sentencia, a finall iudge­
ment.

* Diforme, vide Deforme. 

* Difrigés, a kinde of ore or minerall
earth that finers and founders vse.

* Difunción, Difunsion, Diffunci­
on, f. dying, departing out of this life, a
buriall.

Difúnto, m.deceased, departed out of this
life.

Difusaménte, diffusedly, vnorderly.

* Difúso, m.diffused, out of order.

* Díga, vide Dezír. 

* Digerído, m.digested.

Digerír, to digest, to brooke.

* † Díges, or jueguítos, rattles and toies
for children to play with.

Digestión, f. digesting, concocting of
meate in the stomacke.

* Digestír, vide Digerír. 

* Digésto, digested, brooked, ordered.

Digéstos, m.bookes of the ciuill law, cal­
led the Digestes.

Dignaménte, woorthily.

Dignidád, f. woorthines.

Digno, or Díno, m.woorthy.

* Dígo, vide Dezír, I say.

* Digressión, f. a digression or going out
of the way.

Dilación, f. deferring, prolonging.

* Dilatáble, that may be deferred or put
off.

Dilatádo, deferred, put off, prolonged.

Dilatár, to prolong, to put off, to deferre.

Diligéncia, f. diligence.

* Diligenciéro de fiscál, a promoter.

Diligénte, diligent.

Diligenteménte, diligently.

Dilúvio, m.a deluge, a great floud.

* Díme, or Dími, tell me.

* Dímelo, tell me it, or tell it me.

Diminución, diminishing, lessening.

Diminuído, m.diminished, made lesse.

Diminuýr, vide Deminuýr, to lessen, to
diminish.

* Dinerál, one that paieth labourers and
workemen their money for their work.

Dinéro, m.money.

* Dinéro cercenádo, clipped money.

* Dinéro corrádo, m.vide Dinéro cer­
cenádo.

* Dinéro contádo, m.readie money.

Dineróso, m.full of money, rich in mo­
ney.

* Díno, or Dígno, woorthie.

* Dió, vide Dár, he gaue.

* no se dió náda, he cared not.

* Diocesáno, one dwelling within the 
diocesse.

Diócesis, f. a bishops diocesse.

Díos, m.God.

Diósa, f. a goddesse.

* Dióses, m.Gods.

* Dipositár, vide Depositár. 

* Diptóto, a nowne hauing but two ca­
ses.

* Dipthóngo, a dipthong, two vowels
pronounced as one.

* Diputádo, m.appointed for a deputie,
in another mans roome.

* Diputádos, m.deputies.

Diputár, to depute, to set in his place ano­
ther.

* † Díque, m.a kinde of causey-way, a
banke of a ditch, a bulwark or rampier
against shot of artillerie.

* Dirá, dirás, diré, vide Dezír. 

* Dirécte, according to order.

* Dirécto, direct, straight, orderly.

* Diría, vide Dezír. 

Dirigición, f. direction.

* Dirigído, f. directed.

* Dirigír, yo deríjo, to direct.

* Dirija, dirijo, vide Dirigír. 

* Disánto, id est, Día Sánto, holy day.

* disApropriár, to alienate, to turne to
another vse.

* disCantádo, m.discoursed of, made
much adoe or many words of.

* disCantamiénto, m.a discoursing, a
making many words or much adoe of
a matter.

* disCantár, to discourse, to make many
words or much adoe of.

* Discifrár, to open a cipher.

Disciplina, or Diciplina, f. discipline,
learning, instruction.

* Disciplináble, that may be taught or
brought vnder correction.

Disciplinádo, well nurtured or brought
vp, learned, corrected.

* Disciplinántes, such as teach, instruct
or correct.

Disciplinár, to teach, to correct, to in­
struct.

Discípulo, m.a scholler, a disciple, a
learner.

Discordár, yo Discuérdo, to disagree,
to be at ods or at discord.

Discórde, disagreeing.

Discórdia, f. discord, controuersie.

Discreción, discretion, wisedome, consi­
deration.

* Discrepáncia, f. disagreeing, iarring.

* Discrepár, to disagree, to iarre.

Discretaménte, discreetly.

Discresción, discretion, iudgement to
discerne.

Discréto, m.discreete, wise to perceiue.

* Discuérda, Discuérdo, vide Dis­
cordár. 

* disCúlpa, f. discharge, freeing from
blame, without fault, an excuse most
properly.

* disCulpáble, vnblameable, one with
whom no fault could be found.

* disCulpádo, discharged, freed from
fault.

* disCulpár, to free from blame, to cleere
from fault.

disCurrír, to discourse.





* Discursívo, m.discoursiue.

* Discúrso, discourse, reason.

* disDícha, vide desDícha, f. mishap,
euill lucke.

* disFamádo, m.defamed, ill reported of.

disFamár, vide Difamár, to diffame, to
report euill of.

disFavór, vide desFavór, m.disfauour,
disgrace.

disFavorecído, vide desFavorecído,  
m. disgraced.

Disferme, deformed, disagreeing in
shape.

disFormidád, f. deformitie.

disFraçadaménte, closely, secretly, with
a maske.

† disFraçádo, m.masked, muffled.

† Disfráz, m.the masking, the muffling.

* Disfrazadaménte, vide Disfraçada­
ménte. 

* Disfrazádo, vide Disfraçádo. 

* disGustár, to distaste, to mislike.

* disGusto, m.a distaste, a disliking, a
misliking in taste.

* Disiniár, to purpose or plot a thing be­
fore.

* Disinio, or Disignio, m.a purpose, a
matter plotted and appointed, a de­
signe.

Dislate, or Deslate, shooting off, a iest, a
foolish speech.

* disMinuýdo, m.diminished, lessened.

* disMinuýr, to diminish, to lessen.

* Disobligár, to free one from that dutie
and obligation he standeth in.

* Disóbligo, no bond nor dutie.

Disparár, to shoote off ordinance.

Disparáto, m.a shooting off, a iest, foolish
speech.

* disParidád, f. vnequalitie.

* Dispénsa, f. vide Dispensación. 

Dispensación, f. dispensation, pardo­
ning, discharging from lawes.

* Dispensádo, m.dispensed with.

Dispensár, to dispence, to mitigate the
vigor of lawes.

* Dispojádo, vide despojádo, spoiled, 
vnarmed.

Dispojár, vide despojár, to spoyle, to
vnarme.

Dispójos, vide Despójos, m.spoyles.

disPonér, Præs. disPóngo, disPónes,
disPóne, 1. Præt. disPúse, disPusí­
ste, disPúso, Fut. disPondré, or dis­
Porné, rás, rá, Sub. Præs. disPónga,
Imperfect. DisPusiéra, disPornía or 
disPusiésse, Fut. disPusiére, to dis­
pose, to order.

* disPónga, disPóngo, vide disPonér. 

* disPorná, disPorné, disPornía, vide 
disPonér. 

Disposición, f. disposition, order, health.

disPuésto, m.disposed.

bien disPuésto, well in health.

* varón disPuésto, m.a tall lustie man.

* disPuntádo, m.without a point, blunt.

* disPuntamiénto, m.a blunting.

* disPuntár, to make blunt, to take away
the point or edge.

disPúnta la mañána, the day beginneth
to breake.

* disPúse, disPusiéra, disPusiésse, dis­
Púso, vide disPonér. 

disPusición, f. disposition, order, health.

Dispúta, f. disputing.

Disputación, f. a disputation.

Disputadór, m.a disputer.

Disputár, to dispute.

* Disque, i. dize que, he saith that, &c.

* Dissanto, vide Disanto, m.a holiday.

Dissención, f. disagreeing.

Dissimulación, f. dissembling.

Dissimuladaménte, dissemblingly, coun­
terfaitly.

Dissimuládo, m.dissembled, counterfay­
ted.

Dissimuladór, m.a dissembler, a counter­
fayter.

Dissimulándo, dissembling, counterfay­
ting.

Dissimulár, to dissemble, to counterfaite.

* Dissignio, vide Disinío, m.

* Dissinio, vide Disinio, a designe, a
purpose.

Dissipación, f. scattering, dispersing.

Dissipadór, m.a scatterer, a disperser.

Dissipár, to scatter, to disperse.

Dissolución, f. dissoluing, loosening.

Dissolúto, m.dissolued, loosened, dischar­
ged, dissolute, carelesse.

Dissonáncia, f. a disagreeing, a iarring.

Dissonánte, disagreeing, iarring.

disSonár, yo disSuéno, to disagree.

* disSuéne, vide disSonár. 

Distáncia, f. distance, space betweene
place and place.

Distánte, distant, asunder one from ano­
ther.

Distillación, f. distilling, dropping
downe.

Distilládo, m.distilled.

Distillár, to distill, to drop downe.

Distinción, f. distinguishing betweene
one and another.

Distinguír, to distinguish.

Distincta, or Distinctaménte, distinct­
ly, seuerally.

Distincto, or Distinto, m.distinct, seue­
rall.

* disTraér, Præs. disTráygo, disTrá­
es, disTáe. 1. Præt. disTrúxe, or
disTráxe, disTruxíste, disTrúxo.
Fut. disTraeré, rás, rá. Sub. des­
Tráyga. Imperfect. disTruxésse, dis­
Traxésse, disTruxéra, or disTrae­
ría, Fut. disTruxiére, to draw aside.

* disTraýdo, m.drawen aside.

* DisTráyga, disTráygo, vide dis­
Traér. 

* disTraymiénto, m.drawing aside.

* disTraería, vide disTraér. 

* disTráxe, disTraxéra, disTraxésse, 
vide disTraér. 

Distribución, f. distributing, seuering, or
diuiding seuerally.

Distribuir, or Distribuýr, to distribute, to
diuide among people their seuerall
parts.

* Distrícto, or Distrítto, m.a straight
or prefixed compas.

* disTrúxe, disTruxéra, disTruxésse,
vide Distraér.

Disturbár, to disturbe, to trouble.

Ditádo, m.a title.

Ditadór, or Dictadór, m.a chiefe officer
in Rome so called, which for halfe a
yeere had a kings power, neuer chosen
but when the common wealth was in
some great danger or trouble, and at
halfe yeeres end vnder paine of treason
yeelded vp his office againe.  Also one
that pronounceth to another a thing to
be written.

* Ditadúra, or Dictadúra, f. a dictator­
ship.

* Ditámen, or Dictámen, any thing
written or set downe as another pro­
nounceth it or giueth instruction.

Ditámo, m.Dittanie or garden ginger.

* Ditár, or Dictár, to appoint schollers ex­
ercises, to giue vulgars to be made into
Latine. To tell, pronounce, or appoint to
one what or how he shall write.

* Ditirámbo, a song made in honor of
Bacchus.

* Ditóno, hauing two sounds or parts in
musicke.

* Díva, f. a goddesse, a she saint.

Diversaménte, diuersly.

Diversidád, f. diuersitie.

* Diversión, f. a turning aside.

Divérso, m.diuers, different.

* Divertído, m.turned aside, turned a­
way.

Divertír, yo Divérto, to turne aside.

Dividido, m.diuided.

Dividír, to diuide.

* Diviérte, Diviérto, vide Divertír. 

* Diviésso, m.a hot swelling of a wounde.

Divinación, f. diuining, prophecying,
soothsaying.

Divinaménte, diuinely, godly.

Divinár, to diuine, to prophecie, to sooth­
saie.

* Divinátoria arte, the arte of soothsay­
ing or diuination.

Divinidád, f. diuinitie.

Divino, m.diuine, holy, a soothsayer.

* Divisa, f. a deuise, a purpose, a toy.





* Divisádo, m. deuised, purposed, be­
thought.

* Divisár, to deuise, to ordaine, to bethink,
to purpose.

Divisible, that may be diuided.

División, f. a diuiding.

Dívo, or Santo, a saint, holy, diuine, a
God.

Divórcio, m.a diuorce, separating of
man and wife.

* Diúrno, m.daily, of the day, continuall,
lasting.

* Divulgádo, published, made knowen,
diuulgated.

Divulgár, Præs. yo divúlgo, 1. Præt. yo
Divulgué, to publish, to make knowne,
to spread abroad.

* Divulgue, vide Divulgár. 

Díxe, Dixéra, Dixésse, Dixo, vide 
Dezír. 

* Dizque, id est, Dize que, he saith that,
&c.

* Dizéno, m.vide Décimo. 

Deziémbre, m.the moneth called De­
cember.

* Diziéndo, saying.


D O
* Do, where.

* de Do, whence.

* aDo, where.

Dóbla, f. a peece of money called a dou­
ble, containing 23. rials and a halfe, of
English money ten shellings ten pence
halfepenie.

Dobladaménte, doublie.

Dobládo, m.doubled, lined.

* veste Dobláda, f. a lined garment.

Dobladúra, f. lyning.

Doblár, to double, to line.

Dóble, double.

* Dóble de campánas, the ringing of
bels.

Doblegáble, that may be doubled, that
may be bent twifold.

Doblegádo, m.doubled, bent twofold.

Doblegadúra, f. bending double.

Doblegár, Præs. yo Doblégo, 1. Præt.
yo Doblegué, to double, to bend two­
fold.

* Doblegué, vide Dobeglár. 

Dobléz, f. the lining of a garment.

* Dóblo, m.a doubling, a folding dou­
ble.

* Doblón, vide Dóbla. 

* Doblón de a quátro, a peece of money
of 47. rials, id est, of twentie and three
shillings and sixe pence.

* Doblón de óro, a peece of 23. rials
and a halfe, in English coine, of tenne
shillings and ten pence halfe penie.

Dócil, fit to be taught.

Doctór, or Dotór, m.a doctor, a teacher.

* Documénto, m.a document, an instru­
ction, a lesson, a proofe, an experiment.

† Dogál, or Cordél, a coard, a rope, an
instrument to hold horses by the nose
with, such as smithes vse.

* Dógana, or Fondáco, a custome house,
a tole house, a store house.

* Dóge, a title that onely the Dukes of
Venice and Genoa haue.

Doládo, m.hewed, squared, smoothed.

* Doladór, one that planeth boords. Also
a plaine to plaine withall.

* Dóla, a carpenters plaine.

Dolár, to plaine timber or boordes.  Also
to smooth or polish.

Doléncia, f. greefe, sicknes, disease, ache.

Dolér, yo duélo, to grieue, to be sorrie.

Doliénte, sicke, sorrie, greeued.

* Dólo, m.deceit.

Dolór, m.greefe, sorrow, paine.

Dolór de ilión, the colicke.

* Dolorcíllo, or Dolorzíllo, a little
greefe.

Dolorosaménte, greeuously, painfully,
sorrowfully.

Doloróso, sorrowfull, payned, full of
greefe.

* Dolorzíllo, vide Dolorcíllo, a little
griefe.

* Domádo, m.tamed, made gentle.

Domadór, m.a tamer, a maker gentle.

* Domadór de cavállos, m.a horsebrea­
ker.

Domadúra, f. taming, making gentle.

Domár, to tame, to make gentle, to ouer­
come, to vanquish.

* Domeñár, to beare rule ouer.

* Domesticádo, m.made familiar, or as
one of the house.

Domesticaménte, tamely, gently.

Domesticár, Præs. yo Domestíco, 1.
Præt. Domestiqué, to make gentle, to
make tame, to make as one of the house.

Doméstico, m.gentle, tame, one of the
house.

* Domestiqué, vide Domesticár. 

Domestiquéza, f. tamenes, gentlenes, be­
ing as one of the house.

* Domicílio, a dwelling or habitation, a
mansion place.

Domíngo, m. Sunday.

* Dominguéros, m.sundaies things, holi­
day things.

* Domínio, m.rule, dominion, power.
Also Lordship.

Dón, m.sir, a gift, a reward.

Donación, f. a gift, a giuing.

* Donadíos, a Gods penie, a free gift.

* Donádo, a Frier which serueth the rest
of the Friers, and is not of their order.
Also giuen.

Donadór, m.a giuer.

Donár, to giue.

Donáyre, m.a iest, a wittie saying.

Dónde, whether, where.

Dónde quiéra, wheresoeuer.

* Dónes, m.gifts.

Dóña, f. mistresse, madame.

* Donosaménte, pleasantly, wittily.

Donóso, m.merrie conceited, pleasant
wittie.

* Donzél, m.a yoong man or childe and a
virgin.

* Donzélla, f. a maide, a virgin.

* Donzélla casadéra, a maide that is
marriageable.

Doráda, f. a kinde of fish.

* Doráde, a fish called a gilihead.

* Doradéra, f. gilt, leafegold.

* Doradílla, f. a fish called a breame. Al­
so an herbe called Walwort, Miltwort,
or Ceterach.

Dorádo, m.gilded, gilt.

Doradór, m.a gilder.

Doradúra, f. gilding.

Dorár, to gild.

* Dórica, one of the fower toongs spoken
in Greece, called Dialects, as the Do­
ricke dialect.

* Dórico, a graue solemne musition re­
presenting grauitie.

* Dório, a musition playing graue mu­
sicke.

* Dormidéra, f. garden Poppie.

* Dormidéra marína, sea Poppie.

* Dormído, m.slept.

Dormidór, m.a sleeper.

Dormilón, m.a sluggard, a great slee­
per.

Dormír, yo Duérmo, to sleepe.

* Dormitár, to nod a sleepe, to take sleepe
by naps, to sleepe by fits or often, to
slumber.

Dormitório, m.a place to sleepe in, a dor­
toir in religious houses.

† Dornájo, m.a hogs trough, a trough to
water cattell at.

Dós, two.

Dos tánto, twise as much.

Dos vézes, twise, two times.

Dos añál, of two yeeres.

* Dosél deséda, m.hanging of silke,
vnder which the kings or great perso­
nages sit.

* D'ósso, of a bear.

* Dotación, a gift bestowed.

Dotádo, m.endowed, enriched.

Dotál, belonging to a dowrie.

Dotár, to endow, to giue a dowrie.

Dóte, f. a dowrie, an endowment.

* Dóto, learned, wise, clarkelike.

Dotór, m.a doctor, a teacher.

Dotrína, f. learning, doctrine, instructi­
on.

Dotrinádo, m.taught, instructed.





* Dotrinallos, id est, Dotrinárlos, to
teach them.

Dotrinár, to teach, to instruct.

* Doy, I giue, vide Dár.

Dóze, twelue.

Dozéna, a dozen, the number of twelve.

Dozeñál, of twelue yeeres old.

Dozéno, m.the twelfth.

Doziéntos, two hundreds.


D R
* Dragánte, a kinde of gumme that bur­
neth.

Drágo, or Dragón, m.a dragon.

Dragúncia, an herbe called Dragons.

Dráma, or Ocháva, f. a dramme in
waight.

Drásgo de cása, Robingoodfellowe, an
imagined spirit.

* Dróga, f. an apothecarie drugge.

* Droguéro, one that selleth drugs.

Dromedário, m.a dromedarie, a kind of
camell with two bunches on his backe,
maruellous swift, and will abide three
daies iourney without drinke.  Also a
caruell or swift barke. Als a kinde of
fish verie swift.


D V
* Duána, f. vide Aduána, a custome
house.

* Dúbda, vide Dúda, f. a doubt.

Ducádo, m.a peece of gold called a Duc­
ket. Also a Dukedome.

* Duçaýna, vide Duzaýna. 

Dúcho, m.accustomed, acquainted.

Dúda, f. doubt.

* Dúda de ámbas partes, a doubtfulnes
on both sides.

Dudár, to doubt.

Dudosaménte, doubtfully.

Dudóso, m. doubtfull, vncertaine.

* Duéle, vide Dolér. 

* Duéllo, m.a single combat.

Duélo, or llánto, sorrow, wailing, lamen­
tation.

* márcio Duélo, paine of a wound.

Duénde de cása, Robin goodfellow.

Duéndo, m.tame. Also a foole.

Duéña, f. a mistres.

* Dueñas, a towne of Castile in Spaine
so called.

Duéño, m.a master ouer seruants.

* Duérme, Duérmo, vide Dormír. 

* Duéya, vide Duéña. 

* Dulçáyna, f. a kinde of trumpet.

Dúlce, sweete.

Dulceménte, sweetely.

Dulçór, f. sweetenes.

* Dulzáyna, vide Dulçáyna. 

* Dulcememénte, vide Dulceménte. 

* Dun, id est, de vn, of one.

* Duplicádo, m.doubled.

* Duplicár, Præs. yo Duplíco, 1. Præt.
yo Dupliqué, to double.

* Dupliqué, vide Duplicár. 

Dúque, m.a Duke.

Duquésa, f. a Duchesse.

Duráble, durable, that will continue.

Duración, f. continuance, lasting, endu­
rance.

Dúra, or Duraménte, hardly.

Duránte, enduring.

Durár, to endure, to laste, to continue.

† Durázno, m.a kinde of peach, or peach
tree.

Duréza, f. hardnes.

* Durmiéndo, sleeping.

Durmiénte, one that sleepeth.

Dúro, m.hard, cruell, niggardly.

* Duzáyna, vide Dulçáyna. 




E
* É, or Hé, I haue.

Ea, go to, oh, holla.

Ea pues, go to then.


E B
* Ébano, vide Ébeno. 

Ébeno, m.a blacke kinde of woode called
Ebanie, or Ebene.

* Ebilla, vide Hevílla, a buckle a claspe.

* Ébto, m.a principall riuer in Spaine
called in Latine Iberus, whereof
Spaine was called Iberia, or Hesperia.

* Ebúrneo, m.that is of Iuorie, faire and
white like Iuorie.


E C
* Ecedér, vide Excedér. 

Ecelénte, excellent, notable, surpassing.

Eceléntia, m.excellencie.

* Ecelentissimo, most excellent.

* Ecelsitúd, f. highnes, excellencie, lofti­
nes, excelsitude.

* Ecélso, high, loftie, noble, excellent.

* Ecénto, m.vide Acénto. 

Ecepción, f. an exception, setting a side,
outsetting, exempting.

* Eceptár, to except.

Ecépto, except.

Eceptuár, to except, to out set.

* Ecessívo, excessiue, immeasurable.

Ecésso, m.excesse, too much.

* Ecéto, except, excepted, saue, sauing.

Echacuérvo, m.a deceiuer, a coosener,
one that goeth from place to place and
liueth by coosening and deceit.

Echadízo, cast out.

* Echádo, m.cast, lien downe.

* Echamiénto, m.a casting or a lying
downe.

Echár, to caste, to throwe, to powre out, to
laie, to lie.

* Echár al palácio, to take all in good
part.

* Echar pásas, to set grapes.

Echar el cuérvo, to deceiue or coosen, to
go vp and downe from one place to an
other to coosen and deceiue.

* Echár suértes, to cast lots.

* Echár a cuéstas, to take vp or cast vp­
on the shoulders.

* Echarle máno, to laie hande on him.

* Echár renuévos, to bud out, to sprout.

* Echár suélas a los çapátos, to sole 
shooes

Echár plúmas, to put out feathers.

* Echárse a dormir, to betake him to
sleepe.

* Echár suéra, to cast out.

* Echenéis, or Echinéis, a little fish that
staieth ships from sayling.

* Echísos, amorous potions, witchcrafts.

* Echizéro, a witch, a sorcerer.

* Echóles, id est, Echó les, he cast on
them.

Écho, a nymph that for the loue of Nar­
cissus withered away, and so came the
hollow voice eccho, or the resounding of
the voice backe againe.

* Eclesiástico, ecclesiasticall of or pertai­
ning to the church.

* Eclipsada lúna, the moone eclipsed.

* Eclipsádo sol, m.the sunne eclipsed.

Eclipsár, to eclipse.

Eclipse, m.an eclipse.

* Eclíptico, pertaining to the eclipse.

* Ecliptica línea, the eclipticke, the cir­
cumference of the circle wherein the
sunne finisheth his yeerely motion, so
called because the eclipses both of the
sunne and moone happen, when as the
moone (either in coniunction or opposi­
tion) is vnder this line, this line is in the
middle of the Zodiack.

* Eco, a resounding or giuing back againe
of the voice, an eccho.

* Economía, the gouernement of a pri­
uate house or familie.

* Econímico, pertaining to the gouer­
ning of a priuate house.

Ecónomo, one that hath the handling
or gouerning of a house, a housekeeper,
the master or stewarde of a house.


E D
Edád, age.

Edificación, f. building, edifying.

Edificádo, m.builded, edified.

Edificadór, m.a builder, one that edifi­
eth.





Edificár, Præs. yo Edifico, Præt. yo
Edifiqué, to build, to edifie.

Edificio, m.a building, an edifice.

* Edifique, vide Edificár. 

* Ediles, officers in Rome that had charge
of looking to the publike buildings, as
churchwardens, or ouerseers of high
waies.

* Editár, or Edictár, to set foorth a pro­
clamation, an act, or statute.

Edíto, or Edicto, m.an edict, a procla­
mation, an act, a statute.

Edito publicár, to proclaime a thing.

* Educación, f. bringing vp, nurture,
manners education.

* Educádo, brought vppe, nurtured, in­
structed, taught.

* Educár, to nurture, to bring vp, to in­
struct or teach.


E F
Efécto, or Eféto, m.an effect or purpose.

Efectuár, to bring to effect or purpose.

* Efectuosaménte, effectually to the
purpose.

* Efectuóso, m.effectual, working effect.

* Efeminádo, m.womanlike, effeminate.

Efeminár, to effeminate, to make like a
woman, to grow womanish.

* Eféto, m.effect or purpose.

* Efetuár, to bring to effect or purpose.

Eficácia, efficacie, substantiall purpose.

Eficáz, or Eficás, effectuall.

Eficazménte, effectually.

* Eficiénte, causing, making, efficient.

* Efigie, a figure, a shape, a picture.

* Efución, or Efusión, a powring out, a
shedding or spilling.

Égloga, f. an eglog, a pastorall dittie.


E L
El, he, the.

* El mésmo, or El mísmo, the same.

El qual, el que, the which, he which, he
that.

* Elacóte, masticke.

Eláda, f. forst, ise.

Eládo, m.frozen.

* Eladúra, f. gellie or iulep, a congealing r
freezing.

Elár, yo Yélo, to freeze.

* Eláto, m.proud, hautie.

* Élche, m.the Moorish worde vsed by
them for a Christian.

* Elcumáto, an aunts childe.

* Eléboro, an herbe good to purge molan­
cholie or madnesse.

* Eléboro blánco, the herbe neesewoort
or lingwoort.

Eléboro négro, an herbe called Beare­
foote bearing reddish leaues. Also tet­
terwoort or tettergrasse.

Eleción, or Elección, choise, choosing.

* Electívo, m.electiue, to be chosen.

* Elécto, vide Eligído, chosen, taken out.

Elefáncia, f. a kinde of leprosie.

Elefánte, a great beast called an elephant.

Elefantíno, m.a little elephant.

Elegáncia, f. finenesse, neatnesse, elegan­
cie.

Elegánte, fine, neate, faire spoken, ele­
gant, gratious.

Eleganteménte, neatly, finely, choisly.

* Elegantissimo, m.most fine, most elo­
quent in speech.

Elegía, f. a mournfull song.

* Elegíaco, of or pertaining to a mourn­
full song.

Elegído, m.chosen, picke out.

Elegír, yo Elíjo, to choose.

Elementál, pertaining to the elements.

Eleménto, m.an element, one of the foure
elements, as water, earth, aire, fire.

* Elevación, f. lifting vp, pride, swelling,
preferment, aduancing.

Elevádo, m.puffed vp, proud, lifted vp.

* Elevamiénto, m.a lifting vp.

Elevár, to lift vp, to raise, to eleuate, to
aduance, to heaue or reare vp.

* Elha, vide Ella. 

* Elho, vide Ello. 

* Elíja, Elíjo, vide Elegír. 

* Elísio, m.a place where the heathen
feigned the soules of the blessed to be
in at rest and ioy, or of pleasure as
poets feigne, where the soules of good
men doe dwell.

Elitrópia, f. marigold ruds, wartwoort,
turnesol or sun-flower, which openeth
at the sunne rising, and shutteth at the
sun-set.

* Elitrópio, a pretious stone called Eli­
tropie, which receiueth the sunne as a
burning glasse.

* Élla, f. shee.

* Éllas, they, them.

* Éllo, it.

* Éllos, m.they.

* Élmo, m.vide Yélmo, a helmet, a cask,
a burgandine.

* Eloéndro, m.the rose bay tree.

Eloquéncia, f. eloquence, grace in spea­
king.

Eloquénte, eloquent, graceful in speech.

Eloquenteménte, eloquently.

* Eloquentíssimo, m.most eloquent.

* Elsíne yerva, a kinde of herbe.

* Eluzéro, m.bright, shining.


E M
* Emanádo, running or descending from
as water.

* Emanár, to come out from, or to runne
from as water.

Emancipación, f. making him free that
was bond.

* Emancipádo, m.made free, freed from
bondage.

Emancipár, to make free one that was
bond.

* Embabucádo, m.made to beleeue any
thing, made a simple foole.

* Embabucadór, one that maketh ano­
ther beleeue a thing which is not, one
that maketh a foole of another.

* Embabucár, Præs. yo Embabúco, 1.
Præt. yo Embabuqué, to make a
simple fellow to beleeue any thing, to
make one a foole.

* Embabuque, vide Embabucár. 

Embaçadór, m.he that maketh browne.

Embaçadúra, f. making browne, asto­
nishment.

Embaçár, to make browne, to astonie, to
maruell.

* Embajádo, vide Embaxádo. 

* Embajadór, vide Embaxadór. 

* Embálde, vide En bálde, In vaine,
without any thing for ones labour.

* Embalsamár, to imbalme dead bodies
with spice, and sweete ointments.

* Embarádo, stiffe stretched out.

Embaraçádo, m.letted, stopped, intan­
gled.

Embaraçár, to let, to stop, to intangle.

Embaráço, m.let, stoppage, intangling.

* Embaraçóso, m.full of lets, stops, or in­
tangling, troublesome.

* Embarazár, vide Embaraçár. 

* Embarázo, vide Embaráço. 

* Embarazóso, vide Embaraçóso. 

Embarbascár, Præs. yo Embarbásco,
1. Præt. yo Embarbasqué, to make
fish drunke, to make a man giddie in
the head, to intoxicate.

* Embarbasque, vide Embarbascár. 

Embarcadúra, f. imbarking, shipping,
laying aboord.

* Embarcár, Præs. yo Embárco, 1.
Præt. yo Embarqué, to imbarke, to
ship in, to lay aboord.

* Embargación, f. arresting, stopping,
attaching.

* Embargádo, m.arrested, stopped stay­
ed, attached.

* Embargánte, letting, stopping, arre­
sting, staying.

No embargánte, notwithstanding, not
staying, not letting.

Embargár, Præs. yo Embárgo, 1. Præt.
yo Embargué, to arrest, to stop, to
stay.

Embárgo, m.arresting, stopping, stay­
ing.

* Embargue, vide Embargár. 

Embarnizadúra, f. a varnishing.





Embarnizár, to varnish.

Embarque, vide Embarcár. 

* Embarrádo, m.dawbed with clay.

Embarradór, m.a dawber with clay.

Embarradúra, f. dawbing with clay.

Embarrár, to dawbe with clay.

* Embarrazár, vide Embaraçár. 

* Embasadór, a tunnell or funnell, such
wherewith they fill drinke into bot­
tles.

* Embáte de la mar, the beating of the
waues of the sea.

* emBatído, m.beaten on the shoare or
rockes as waues do.

* Embatimiénto, m.a beating of the
waues of the sea.

* Embatír, to beat vpon as waues of the sea.

Embaucadór, m.a coosener, a iugler, one
that playeth leger-demaine.

Embaucamiénto, m.leger-demaine,
deceits, delusions. Things seeming to be
that are not.

Embaucár, Præs. yo Embaúco. 1. Præt.
yo Embauque, to coosen, to play leger-
demaine, to vse iuglers craft.

* Embauque, vide Embaucár. 

Embaxáda, f. an embassage.

Embaxadór, m.an embassador.

* Embáxo, vide Abáxo, below, beneath.

Embaydór, m.a deceiuer, a coosener.

Embaymiénto, m.deceit, coosenage.

Embaýr, to deceiue, to coosen, to make a
man beleeue an vntruth.

* Embazadúra, vide Embaçadúra. 

* Embazár, vide Embaçár. 

Embazár, to let, to stop, to hinder, to trou­
ble.

* emBeber, vide Embevér. 

* emBegecído, m.made olde.

* emBegescér, or Embegecér, to waxe
olde.

Embelesado, vide Envelesado. 

* Embeodár, to make drunke.

* Embeodéz, f. drunkennes.

Embermejár, to make red.

Embermejecér, Embermegescér, or 
Embermejescér, to waxe red.

Emberrádo, vide Embarrádo. 

Embevecér, or Embevescérse, to be a­
stonied, to be amazed.

Embevecído, m.astonied, amazed.

emBevér, to drinke in, to suppe vp, to
draw in.

* emBevér el tiémpo, to consume time.

* Embevescér, to astonish, to amaze.

emBevído, m.drunke, supped vp.

Embiadizo, sent in messages still.

Embiádo, m.sent.

Embiár, to send.

Embidár, to vie at cards or other game.

Embídia, f. enuie, emulation.

* Embidiár, to enuie, to haue emulation.

Embidióso, m.enuious, full of emula­
tion.

Embite, m.vying at any game.

Embiudárse, to become a widow.

emBlaquecér, or emBlanquescér, to
whiten, to make pale or white.

emBlanquecimiénto, m.whitening,
making pale.

* Embléma, an embleme, which is small
images, flowers or such like ornaments
set on a plate or other matter. Also
pictureworke of wood, stone or mettall
finely set and painted in diuers colours,
as in Chesse-boords, tiles and tablets,
embossed worke.

* Embobecér, to become a foole.

* Embobecído, m.made a foole.

* Embobecimiénto, m.a becomming to
be a foole.

* Embocadéro, m.a narrow place where
any thing falleth into the mouth of it,
as the sea into a creeke or riuer, &c.

Embocár, to cast in the mouth, to cast a
boule into the hole of an iron ring, to
run as the sea into a creeke or narrowe
riuer.

* Embocár la bóla, to cast a boule into
an iron ring.

Embolsár, to purse vp.

Emboltório, m.a pack, a fardel of clothes
or such like.

* Emboltório de espécias, a wrapping
for spices.

* Emboltório de flóres, a bundle of flo­
wers.

* Emboltório de létras, a packet of let­
ters.

emBolvedór, m.a roller, a wrapper.

emBolvér, yo emBuélvo, to roll vp, to 
wrap vp.

* emBolvér de vándo, to follow a fa­
ction.

emBolvimiénto, m.rolling, wrapping vp

* Emborládo, m.done or dressed with
tassels or fringe.

* Emborladór, m.a maker of tassels and
fringe.

* Emborlár, to dresse or hang any thing
with tassels or fringe.

Emborrachár, vide Embriagár, to make 
drunke.

* Emborriçár, to put floxe into cloth to
make it shew well by deceite.

Emboscáda, or Assechánça, f. an am­
bush, a lying in waite for.

Emboscár, Præs. yo Embósco, 1. Præt. 
yo Embosqué, to lay an ambush, to lie
in waite for.

* Embosque, vide Emboscár. 

embotádo, m.dulled, made blunt.

emBotadór, m.a duller, a maker blunt.

Embotamiénto, m.a making dull or
blunt.

Embotár, to make dull, to make blunt.

Embovecér, or Embovescér, to become
a foole.

emBovecído, m.become a foole.

Embovecimiénto, m.follie, foolishnesse.

Embraçadúra, f. fitting to, or for the
arme.

Embraçár, to make fit for the arme.

Embravecér, or Embravescér, to rage,
to be fierce.

Embravecído, m.fierce, furious.

Embravecimiénto, m.fiercenesse, rage,
furiousnesse.

Embriagádo, m.drunken.

Embriagár, Præs. yo Embriágo, 1. 
Præt. yo Embriagué, to become
drunke.

Embriágo, m.drunken, tipsie.

* Embriague, vide Embriagár. 

Embriaguéz, f. drunkennesse.

* Embrión, the seede receiued in the
wombe, or the childe in the wombe be­
fore it receiueth any shape.

† Embrocadúra, f. powring on, a slip­
ping, or sliding in. ALso a sticking or
setting of shooemakers nailes or tackes
in the shooes, or such like.

† Embrocár, Præs. yo Embróco, 1.
Præt. yo Embroqué, to powre on, to
slip or slide in, to encline, to set or sticke
shooemakers tackes or nailes in shooes.

* Embroque, vide Embrocár. 

Embrutecér, or Embrutescér, to waxe
rude, to waxe brutish.

Embúdo, m.a tunnel, the hopper of a mil.

emBuélto, m.wrapped vp, rolled vp, in­
tangled.

* emBuelve, embuélvo, vide emBol­
vér. 

Embúste, m.coosenage, deceit.

Embutído, m.stuffed.

Embutír, to stuffe.

Emélga, a ridge. Also a kind of fish.

* Emelgár lo arádo, to lay plowed lande
in ridges, to sowe plowed land, and let
it lie.

Emendadaménte, perfectly, wel looked
vnto.

* Emendáble, that may be amended.

Emendádo, amended, redressed, refor­
med.

Emendadór, m.an amender, a redresser,
a reformer.

Emendadúra, amending, a redresse, a
reformation, a correcting.

Emendár, yo Emiéndo, to amend, to re­
dresse, to reforme.

* Emfasí, or Emphasís, an emphasie or
earnestnes, an expresse signification of
that which is intended.

Emiénda, or Eminiénda, f. amendment,
redresse, amends.

* Emiénde, Emiéndo, vide Emendár. 

Emína, f. a kind of measure.





* Eminénte, imminent, apparent, high
in sight, aloft, in view.

Emisphério, m.the hemisphere, halfe the
compasse of the heauens which are in
sight.

* Emissóle, a kinde of dogge fish or sea
hound.

Emmaderadimiénto, m.timber worke.

emMaderár, to timber.

Emmagrecér, or Emmagrescér, to
waxe leane.

Emmarañádo, m.wound vp, rolled.

Emmarañár, to winde vp, to roll.

Emmarchitárse, to wither, to pine.

Emmascarádo, m.masked, wearing a
maske.

Emmascarár, to couer with a maske, to
put on a maske.

* Emmeládo, m.done with honie.

Emmelgádo, m.one that hath his teeth
thing, one standing wide from the other. 
Also thin ridges made in the field to
sowe corne in.

* Emmerdár, yo Emmiérdo, to be­
ray with turds or filth.

* Emmiénda, an amends.

* Emmiénde, vide Emendár. 

Emmocecérse, to waxe a boie.

Emmohechér, or Emmohescér, to
waxe mouldie, to waxe mustie.

* Emoróides, a disease called the He­
morrhoides. Als a kinde of venomous
serpent.

* Émos, hémos, or avémos, we haue.

Emmontáda, f. steepe vp.

* Emmontáda sál, salt lying in great
heapes.

Emmontadúra, f. steepenes, vpright.

Emmudecér, or Emmudescér, to bee
dumbe.

Emmudecído, m.dumbe.

Empachadaménte, troublesomely.

Empachádo, m.troubled, letted, rude,
shamefull.

Empachár, to let, to hinder, to trouble.

Empácho, trouble, let, hinderance, rude­
nes, bashfulnes, shamefastnes.

* Empadronadór, a gatherer of subsidy,
a sessor of taxe, a register.

Empadronádo, m.registered, set in a
booke, taxed for a subsidie man.

Empadronár, to register, to set in a book,
to sesse for the princes subsidies.

Empalagádo, m.loathing.

Empalagamiénto, m.loathsomness.

Empalagár, Præs. yo Empalágo, 1.
Præt. yo Empalagué, to loath, to
make the mouth out of taste.

* Empalague, vide Empalagár. 

emPalár, to set on a pole or stake.

Empanáda, f. a pastie.

Empandár, or Encorvár, to bende, to
bowe.

* empantanádo, m.compassed with
quagmires or bogges.

* emPantanár, to put into quagmires or
bogges.

emPapár, to imbrew.

* Empár, vide Apár. 

* Emparchár, to laie on plaisters.

emParedár, to shut within a wall.

* emParejádo, m.compared.

emParejadúra, comparing.

emParejár, to compare.

* emParentádo, m.or parentage or kin­
dred.

* emParentár, to make parentage or
kindred.

* Empavesáda, f. a galley readie at all
points to fight.

* Empeçádo, m.begun.

Empeçár, yo Empiéço, to begin.

Empecér, or Empescér, vide Dañár, to
hurt, to damnifie.

* Empecíble, a thing that may doe hurt,
hurtfull.

Empeciénte, harmefull.

Empecimiénto, m.harme, hinderance.

Empedernecér, or Empedernescér, to
waxe stonie.

Empedernído, m.stonie.

Empedrádo, m.paued, stoned.

emPedradór, m.a pauer, a laier of stones.

emPedrár, yo emPiédro, to paue.

emPegádo, m.pitched with pitch.

emPegadúra, f. pitching with pitch.

emPegár, Præs. yo emPiégo, 1. Præt.
yo emPegué, to pitch with pitch.

* emPegue, vide Empegár. 

Empellár, or Empuxár, to thrust.

* empellechár, vide Empellejár. 

emPellejádo, m.couered with a skin.

emPellejár, to couer with a skin.

* Empellexár, vide Empellejár. 

* Empellicár, Præs. yo emPellíco, 1.
Præt. emPellique, to play the skin­
ner, to furre with skins.

* Empelliquér, vide Empellicár, to
furre with skins, to play the skinner.

Empellón, or Empuxón, m.a thrust.

* Empéña de çapáto, the vpper leather 
of a shooe.

Empeñádo, m.gaged, pledged, pawned.

Empeñár, to laie to gage, to pawne, to
laie to pledge.

Empeño, m.a gage, a pledge.

emPeorádo, m.impaired, made woorse
and woorse.

emPeoramiénto, m.impaired, made
woorse and woorse.

emPeorár, to impaire, to make woorse
and woorse.

Emperadór, m.an Emperour.

* Emperánte, vide Emperadór. 

Emperatríz, f. an emperesse, an emperors
wife.

Emperchár, to set on a pearch.

Emperezár, to be slothfull.

Emperiál, belonging to the empire.

Empéro, yet notwithstanding.

emPerradaménte, doggedly.

emPerrádo, m.become like a dog, dogged.

* Emperzár, vide Emperezár, to become
slothfull.

Empéyne, the tetter or ringworme, the
itch, the instep of a foote.

Empéynes, the horne in a horse leg on the
inside neere the knees.

Empeynóso, m.full of tetters.

* Empezeár, vide Empeçár. Also t
peece with peeces, to mend.

* Empezible, vide Empeçible. 

* Empezimiénto, vide Empecimi­
énto. 

* Empicár, Præs. yo Empíco, 1. Præt. 
yo Empiqué, to put one to death on
pikes.

Empicotádo, m.set on the pillorie.

Empitocadúra, f. setting on the pillorie.

Empicotár, to set on the pillorie.

* Empiéce, Empiéço, vide Empeçár. 

* Empiédre, Empiédro, vide Empe­
drár. 

* Empiegue, Empiégo, vide Empe­
gár. 

* Empiládo, m.piled vp, heaped vp.

* Empilár, to pile vp, to heape vp.

Empinádo, m.lifted vp.

Empinadúra, f. lifting vp.

Empinár, to lift vp.

* Empírico, m.an empericke or phisition
by practise, which hath gotten all his
skill by practise.

* Emplaçamiénto, m.a summons, a
warning to appeere by a day.

* Emplaçár, vide Emplazár, to summon,
to warne to appeere by a day prefixed.

* Emplastádo, m.plaistered with a plai­
ster.

Emplastár, to lay a plaister or searecloth
on a sore or swelling.

* Empláste, m.vide Emplásto. 

* Emplásto, m.a pilaster or searcloth.

Emplastradúra, f. a fomentation, plaiste­
ring.

Emplastrár, vide Emplastár. 

Emplástro, vide Emplásto. 

Emplazadór, m.a summoner, a citer, a
bailife that warneth to sessions, &c.

Emplazamiénto, m.a citation, a sum­
mons.

emPlazár, to summon, to cite by an ap­
pointed time.

Empleádo, m.imploied.

Empleár, to imploy.

Empléyta, or Emplénta, a mat, a hurdle.

emPlumádo, m.feathered.

emPlumár, to feather.

emPlumecér, to begin to haue feathers.





EmPobrecér, to begin to be poore.

* Empoçár, vide Empozár. 

emPoderár, to obtaine, to win, to get into
his power.

* emPodrecér, to waxe rotten.

* emPodrecído, waxed rotten.

Empólla, f. a blister.

emPolládo, m.an egge that hath a chicke.
Also one that is full of blisters.

* Empollamiénto, a hatching or brin­
ging forth chickens.

emPollár, to breede chickens.

emPolvár, yo emPólvo, to cast dust on.

emPolvorádo, m.full of dust, all dustie.

emPolvoramiénto, m.a bedusting, a
couering ouer with dust.

emPolvorár, to couer ouer with dust.

emPonçoñádo, m.poisoned.

emPonçoñár, to poison.

* emPonçoñóso, venemous.

* emPonér, Præs. emPóngo, emPó­
nes, emPóne, 1. Præt. emPúse, em­
Pusiste, emPuso, Fut. emPondré, or 
emPorné, ás, á, Sub. Præs. enPón­
ga, Imperfect. emPusiéra, emPon­
dria, or emPusiésse, Fut. emPusiére,
to teach, to instruct, to put vpon.

* Empónga, emPóngo, vide emPo­
nér. 

* emPorná, emPorné, vide emPonér. 

Empós, after.

emPozár, to put into a ditch.

emPrehendér, vide emPrendér. 

emPreñár, to get with childe.

* emPreñárse, to bee gotten with childe.

emPrendedór, m.an enterpriser.

emPrendér, to enterprise, to take in
hand.

Emprendído, enterprised, taken in
hand.

Emprensádo, m.pressed.

Emprensár, m.to presse cloth or such
like.

Emprénta, f. a print.

Emprentár, to print.

Emprésa, or Empressa, an enterprise.

emPrestádo, m.lent, borrowed.

emPrestár, to borrow, to lend.

emPrestído, m.borrowed, lent.

* Empréza, an enterprise.

emPringár, Præs. yo emPríngo, 1.
Præt. yo emPringué, to baste, to
drop with hot bacon grease.

* Empringue, vide emPringár. 

* emPudrecér, vide emPodrecér. 

Empujamiénto, vide Empuxamiénto. 

* Empujár, vide Empuxár. 

* Empujón, vide Empuxón. 

emPulgadúra, f. bending of a bow.

emPulgár árco, to bend a bow.

emPulguéras, f. the nockes of a bow.

emPuñadúra, f. a haste or handle of a
sword, rapier, &c.

emPuñár, to gripe in the fiste.

* emPúse, emPúso, vide emPonér. 

* emPusiéra, emPusiésse, vide emPo­
nér. 

emPutecér, yo emPutésco, to become
a harlot.

emPuxádo, m.thrust, pushed.

† emPuxár, to push, to thrust.

* † emPuxamiénto, m.pushing, thru­
sting.

† Empuxón, m.a thrust.

* Emvasadór, a tunnell, or funnell, wher­
with they fill drinke into bottles of such
like.

* Emvasár, to put liquor into vessels.

* Emulación, emulation, enuie in seeking
to exceed or outpasse another, a lau­
dable grudging.

Émulo, he that enuieth, or striueth to ex­
ceed another.

* Emvotár, vide Embotár. 

* Emvuélto, vide Embuélto. 

* Emvúste, vide Embúste. 

* emXarráco, or Xarráco, a certaine
sea fish with hornes called of some a sea
toade, of some the sea diuell.


E N
En, in, by, of.

* Ena, gaping and reaching for sleepe.

enAgenádo, m.estranged, alienated.

* enAgenadór, an estranger, one that
maketh away his possessions, &c.

enAgenamiénto, m.alienation, estran­
ging, making away.

enAgenár, to alienate, to estrange, to
make away.

* enAgrír, to make sharpe.

enAguaçár, to water.

* enAguazár, idem. 

* EnAjenádo, m.estranged, alienated.

* enAjenamiénto, m.alienation, an
estranging.

* enAnejár, to alienate, to estrange.

* enAlbardáda béstia, a beast saddled
with a pack-saddle.

* enAlbardádo, m.saddled with a pack-
saddle.

enAlbardár, to set on a pack-saddle.

* enAlbayaldádo, vide enAlvayal­
dádo. 

* enAlmagrádo, done with oaker.

* enAlmagrár, to marke or doe with
oaker.

* enAvardáda béstia, a beast saddled
with a packesaddle.

* enAlvardádo, m.saddled with a pack-
saddle.

* enAlvardár, to saddle with a packe-
saddle.

* enAlvayaldádo, whited, painted with
ceruse.

* Enamentár, to aime at.

* Enamoráda, f. a paramour, a sweete
hart.

Enamoradaménte, amorously.

Enamorádo, one that is in loue.

Enamoramiénto, m.loue, inamouring.

Enamorár, to be in loue.

* Enamoriscádo, vide Enamorádo. 

Enamoriscár, vide Enamorár. 

* Enána, f. a she dwarffe.

* Enáno, a he dwarffe.

enArbolár, to set vp an end a pike, or an
ensigne right vpward as a tree. Also to
set vp or raise a maste of a ship.

enArcádo, m.put in a chest, or made
crooked like a bow.

enArcadór, m.a putter into chest.

enArcár, Præs. yo enÁrco. 1. Præt. yo
enArqué, to put into a chest, to make
crooked like a bow.

enArque, vide Enarcár. 

* enArvolár, vide enArbolár. 

Enaspár el cuérpo, to reach with lazi­
nes.

enAstádo, or enHastádo, m.headed
with yron.

enAstadúra, f. heading with yron.

enAstár lánça, to point a launce.

* enAyúnas, fasting.

Enaziádo, m.a cloudie day, a runna­
gate.

* Enbacár, to make browne, to astonish.

* Enbálde, vide emBálde, in vaine, for
no purpose, without reward.

* enBaraçar, vide Embaraçár. 

* enBarazár, idem. 

* Enbarcár, vide Embarcár. 

* Enbargánte, vide Embargánte. 

* Enbárgo, vide Embárgo. 

* Enbasadór, a tunnell.

* Enbasár, to put liquor into vessels.

* Enbavucár, to deceiue.

* Enbazár, vide Embaçár. 

* Enbidár, vide Embidár, to vie at any 
game.

* Enbídia, vide Embídia, enuie.

* Enbíte, m.a vying at a game.

* enBiudár, vide Embiudár. 

* enBolvér, vide emBolvér, yo Embu­
élvo.

* enBravecér, or enBravescér, to rage,
to be fierce, hot or hastie, to waxe
rough or furious.

Enbutir, to stuffe.

enBuélve, enbuélvo, vide enbolvér. 

* Encabeçamiénto, a taxe payed by a
whole towne or corporation to the
king.

enCabelládo, m.long haired.

enCabellecérse, to haue long haire.

enCabestrádo, m.haltered.

enCabestrár, to halter.

* enCabezár, to taxe the people for sub­





sidie to the Prince, or to put on the
headstraine of a horse.

enCadenádo, m.chained, linked in.

enCadenadúra, f. chayning.

* enCadenamiénto, m. idem. 

enCadenár, to chaine.

* enCajár, vide enCaxár. 

* enCalabriádo, m.pearced into the
braines, as drunkennes.

enCalabriár, to pearce into the braines, 
as drunkennes.

* enCaládo, m.plaistered, pargetted.

enCaladór, m.a plaisterer, a pargetter.

enCaladúra, f. plaistering, pargetting,
curious feeling.

enCalár, to plaister or parget a house, to
wash with white lime.

* enCalládo, m.run or striken on ground.

* enCallándo, striking on ground.

enCalladúra, f. idem. 

enCallár la náve, to runne a ship on
ground.

enCallecér, to waxe hard as brawne.

enCallecído, m. growen hard.

enCalmádo, m.calmed.

enCalvár, to make balde.

enCalvecér, or enCalvescér, to waxe
balde.

enCámbio, change.

* enCaminádo, m.directed, or set on
the way.

Encaminadúra, f. a direction on the
way.

enCaminár, to direct on his way.

* enCamíno, m.a direction on the way.

* enCamisáda, f. a Camisada in warre
in the night when soldiers put on shirts
on their armor in doing an exploite,
that they may knowe one another of
their owne companie, least in the darke
they might kill one another in steede of
the enimie.

* enCamisádo, m.one that hath put on a
shirt on his armor.

* enCanastádo, m.put or hanged in a
basket.

* enCanastádo soldádo, or Centiné­
la, a soldier that stood sentinell hanged
in a basket, because he slept when he
should haue kept due watch, to shame
him or disgrace them.

* enCanastár, to hang out in a basket.

* enCandíla, f. a light to dazle the eies
with.

Encandiládo, m.dazeled with sudden
light.

* Encandiladór, m.one that dazeleth
the eies of birds with light.

* enCandilár, to dazle birdes eies with
light.

enCanecér, or Canescér, to waxe hoa­
rie or gray headed.

enCanecído, m.hoarie or gray headed.

enCañonárse las áves, birds beginning
to be pen feathered.

* Encantación, f. enchantment.

enCantádo, m.enchanted.

enCantadór, m.an enchanter.

* enCantadóra, f. an enchantresse, witch,
or sorceresse.

enCantamiénto, m.an enchantment, a
charme.

enCantár, to enchant, to charme.

* enCantidád, in heapes, in great quan­
titie.

enCantír, vide Encantár, to enchant.

enCapacetádo, m.armed with a hel­
met.

enCapachár, to put in a maund.

enCapádo, m.cloaked, couered with a
cloake.

* enCaperuçádo, m.the head couered
with a hood or capouch.

enCapotádo de ójos, one that hath
great eiebrows, lowring lookes.

enCaptádo de oréjas, one that is ban­
gled eared.

enCapotadúra, f. a lowring counte­
nance.

enCapotár los ójos, to lowre with the
eies.

Encaramádo, m.raised.

Encaramadúra, f. raising vp to a top.

Encaramár, to raise vp to a top.

* enCarár, to set face to face.

* Ençarçamiénto, m.a putting among
briers.

* Ençarçár, to put among briers.

enCarcaxádo, m.put vp in a quiuer.

Encarceládo, m.imprisoned.

enCarcelár, to imprison.

* enCarcerár, idem. 

enCarecér, yo enCarésco, or enCa­
rescér, to make deere, t extoll, to am­
plifie, to augment.

* Encarecído, made deere. Also ampli­
fied, extolled, augmented.

* enCarecimiénto, a making of things
deere, an augmenting, an amplifying.

enCargár, Præs. yo enCárgo, 1. Præt.
yo enCargué, to giue in charge, to
charge, to giue commandement.

* enCargué, vide enCargár. 

Encarnación, f. incarnation, growing to
flesh.

enCarnáda, a carnation colour.

enCarnádo, as ráso enCarnado, car­
nation coloured sattin.

Encarnár, to become flesh.

* enCarniçádo, m.fleshed, hartened,
bloodie minded, a hangman.

enCarniçamiénto, m.a fleshing, a har­
tening in blood.

enCarniçár, to flesh or harten in blood.

* enCarnizár, idem. 

enCartación, f. banishing, outlawing,
proscription.

enCartádo, m.banished, proclaymed as
an outlaw.

enCartár, to banish, to proclaime an out­
law.

* ençarzar, vide ençarçár. 

enCastelládo, m.shut in a castle.

enCastellár, to shut in a castle.

enCavalgár, Præs. yo enCaválgo, 1.
Præt. yo enCavalgué, to mount ar­
tillerie, to put a musket or harquebusse
in the stocke.

* enCavalgar la artillería, to lay the or­
dinance on carriages.

* enCavalgue, vide enCavalgár. 

* enCaxádo, m.put into a boxe or cas­
ket.

* enCaxadúra, f. putting into a box or
casket.

enCaxár, to put into a boxe.

enCáxe, or enCaxadúra, putting into a
boxe.

Encella, or Cesta, a chest, a satchell.

enCenagádo, durtie, mirie, muddie.

enCenegamiénto, m.durtines, mirines,
muddines.

enCenagár, Præs. enCenágo, 1. Præt.
yo enCenague, to beray, to make
foule, to make durtie.

* enCenague, vide enCenagár. 

* EnCencerádo, that carrieth a bell, as
a cow or sheepe.

Encendér, yo Enciéndo, to kindle, to set
on fire.

Encendidaménte, hotly.

Encendído, m.kindled, set on fire.

Encendimiénto, m.kindling, setting on
fire.

enCenizár, to strow with ashes.

Encensár, to taxe.

Encensár tiérra para plantár, to set 
graffing stockes.

enCensário, a censar.

enCensiár, to perfume with Franken­
sence.

enCénsios, m.Wormewood.

enCénso, m.vide Cénso, taxing, subsi­
die.

Encentádo, assayed, taseted on, begun to
be eaten or drunken.

Encentadúra, setting abroach, assaying
or beginning to eate or drinke anie
thing.

enCentár, yo Enciénto, to set abroach,
to assay or begin any meat or drinke.

* enCerádo, m.bewaxed or besmeared
with waxe.  Also a searecloath.

* enCerrádo, shut vp, locked or bolted
in.

enCerár, to waxe, to do with waxe.

enCerrár, yo enCiérro, to shut in, to
locke in.

* enCerramiénto, m.shutting or loc­





king in.

* enChamarrádo, m.cloathed with a
furred cassocke or ierkin, after the ma­
ner of the low countries.

Enchamarrár, to cloath with a furred
cassocke or ierkin after the manner of
the low countries.

Encháque, vide A cháque. 

* Enchiridión, f. a manuell or little por­
table booke that may be carried in ones
hand.

* Enchúdas, or Enchúgas, anchoues.

Encías, f. gums.

* Enciénde, enCiendo, vide enCen­
dér. 

* Enciensár, vide Encensiár, to perfume
with Frankensence.

* Enciensário, m.that wherein the in­
cense is burned.

Enciénso, m.incense, Frankencense.

* Ençillár, vide Ensillár, to saddle.

* Enciénte, vide enCentár. 

* Enciérre, Ençiérro, vide Encerrár. 

Encíma, vpon, on the top.

Encimár, to set on a top.

* Encína, f. a holme oke or French oke.

Enclavádo, m.fastened, nailed fast.

enClavádo cavállo, a horse pricked
with a naile.

enClavadúra, f. nailing, pricking with a
naile.

enClavár, to naile, to pricke with a naile,
to fasten with a naile, &c.

* enClavellinádo, m.full of gilliflow­
ers.

* enClavijádo, m.clinched as fingers one
within another, wound vp or wrested
as pegs or pins of an instrument, any
thing pinned or fastened with great
pins of wood or iron.

* enClavijár, to pin or fasten any thing
with great pins or pegs of wood or iron,
to winde vp or wrest the pegs of an in­
strument.

enClavijár los dédos, or los mános, to
clinch the hands togither by putting the
fingers one within another, to crosse,
wring, or winde vp a peg or pin of an
instrument.

* enCobádo, or enCovádo, m.put in a
caue, made crooked.

enCobadúra, or enCorvadúra, a ma­
king crooked, or a putting in a caue.

enCobár, or enCovár, to put in a caue,
to make crooked.

* enCobrír, to couer.

enCogér, yo enCójo, to withdraw, to
draw togither, to shrinke, to shrinke vp
as cloth.

enCogído, m.drawen togither, with­
drawen, shrunke vp as cloth.

enCogimiénto, m.withdrawing, draw­
ing togither, a shrinking, a shrinking vp
as of cloth.

* enCója, enCójo, vide enCogér. 

enCojár, or enCoxár, to giue a blowe on
the leg, to lame one, to make one lame.

Encoládo, m.glued.

Encoladúra, f. a gluing.

enColár, to glue.

* enCombrádo, m.set on the top.

* enCombrár, to set on the top.

* enComençádo, m.begun.

* enComençár, yo enComiénço, to
begin.

enComendádo, m.recommended, com­
mitted to his charge.

enComendár, yo enComéndo, to re­
commend, to commit.

* enComiénce, enComiénço, vide 
enComençár. 

enComiénda, f. a recommendation, com­
mendations, a dignitie so called, a pre­
sentation to a bishoprike, abbie, or such
promotion.

* enComiéndas, commendations, re­
commendations.

* enComiénde, enComiéndo, vide 
enComendár. 

* Encómio, a song in commendation of a
mans vertue.

* Enconádo, m.putrified, festered, in­
fected.

Enconamiénto, m. festering, putrifying,
infecting.

Enconár, to putrifie, to fester, to infect.

Encontinénte, presently.

enContradízo, meeting.

* enContrádo, m.met with, encoun­
tered.

enContiár, yo enCuentro, to encoun­
ter, to meete with.

* Encontrón, m.an encountring, a mee­
ting with.

enCoraçádo, m.armed with Coráças,
id est, curets or priuie coates plated
within.

* enCorádo, m.couered with skin or lea­
ther.

enCorár, to couer with skin, to couer with
leather.

* enCorbádo, m.made crooked.

* enCorbadúra, f. crookednesse.

enCorbár, to make crooked.

* enCórdio, m.swelling in the head or
flanke, a botch.

* enCordonádo, m.made or done with
strings or cords.

* enCordonár el cabéllo, to plat or
twist the haire.

enCoroçádo, m.one that weareth a pa­
per on his head for an offence.

* enCoroçár, to weare a paper on the
head for some offence.

* enCorozár, idem. 

enCorporádo, m.incorporated, made a
member of a towne, enfranchised.

enCorporár, to incorporate, to make a
member of the bodie, to infranchise.

enCorváda, f. axwoort.

enCorvádo, m.made crooked.

enCorvadúra, f. crookednesse.

enCorvár, to make crooked.

enCostradúra, f. making crustie, or hard
as on a wound.

enCostrár, to make crustie or hard as on
a wound.

enCrespádo, m.curled.

enCrespadúra, curling.

enCrespár, to curle.

enCrestádo, m.crested.

enCrudecér, or enCrudescér, to waxe
rawe, to waxe cruell.

enCruelecér, yo encrueleésco, or en­
Cruelescér, to waxe cruell.

* enCruelecído, or enCrueliciádo, m. 
made or waxen cruell.

enCruzádo, m.crossed.

enCruzijáda, f. a crosse way.

enCuadernación, or enquadernaci­
ón, f. binding of bookes.

enCuadernadór, or enquadernadór,
a booke binder.

enCuadernár, or enQuadernar li­
bros, to binde bookes.

enCubérta, f. a couering, the vtter sheete
of a letter.

enCubertádo, m.couered.

enCubertaménte, couertly.

* enCubiérto, m.couered.

enCubredízo, secret.

enCubridór, m.a couerer, a hider.

enCubrimiénto, m.couering, hiding.

enCubrír, to couer, to hide.

* enCuención, vide encuéntro, a mee­
ting, an encountering.

* enCuéntre, enCuéntro, vide en­
Contrár. 

enCuéntro, m.an incounter, a meeting
with.

enCumbrádo, m. lifted vp on high.

enCumbrár, to lift vp on high.

* Ende, there, on that side.

* Endéble, weake, feeble.

Endecasillabón, a verse consisting of
eleuen syllables.

Endechaderás, women mourners at bu­
rials for the dead.

Endéchas, f. mournings.

* Endechár, to mourne at funerals.

* enDedúra, vide Hendadúra, f. a
clift, a cleauing asunder.

* Endéjas, vide Endéchas, mournings.

* enDamasiáda, too much.

enDemoniádo, m.possessed with a diuel.

enDentecér los niños, to haue teeth.

enDereçár, to direct, to make straight.

enDeredór, round about.

* enDiabládo, m.possessed with a diuell,





diuelish.

Endibia, or Endívia, Endiue, an herbe.

enDoléncias, in sicknesse, in anguish and
greefe.

* enDressár, vide endereçár. 

* Endrína, a damson.

* Endríno, a damson tree.

* Endríno montesíno, vide Andrí­
nas. 

* enDúda, f. in doubt.

enDulçadúra, f. a sweetening, or making
sweete.

enDulçár, to sweeten, to make sweete.

Endulgéncias, f. pardons.

* enDulzár, vide enDulçár. 

* enDurár, to suffer. Also to make harde
and niggardly.

enDurecér, or enDurescér, yo enDu­
résco, or enDurézco, to waxe harde.

enDurecimiénto, m.hardening, waxing
hard.

enDurecído, m.hardened.

* enDurésca, enDurézca, vide endu­
recér. 

* enDuzár, vide enDuçár, to sweeten.

Enéa, f. an herbe wherewith they make
mattes, a kinde of rush, or flagge.

Enébro, ginébro, or Zímbro, Iuniper.

* Enecháda criatúra, a forlorne crea­
ture.

Enechádo, m.a childe laide out, an or­
phan.

Enechár, to lay abroad a yoong childe, to
set out, to cleanse wheate.

* enEféto, or enEfécto, m.in effect.

* Enel, id est, en El, in it.

Enéldo, an herbe called dill.

* Enemicícia, f. enimitie.

Enemigáble, hatefull.

Enemigableménte, like an enimie, hate­
fully.

Enemigár, to make enimies.

Enemígo, m.an enimie.

Enemistád, f. enimitie, hatred.

Enemistár, to beare enimitie.

* Enerboláda saéta, or Xára, f. a shaft
or arrow poisoned.

* Enerboládo, m.poysoned with poyso­
nous herbes.

enErizádo, m.stiffe, rough, bristled, or
standing vp as bristles.

enErizamiénto, m.standing vp of the
haire, bristling of the haire.

enErizár, to waxe stiffe, to waxe rough, to
stand or bristle vp as haire.

Enéro, m.the moneth Ianuarie.

enErtárse, to waxe rough.

* enErvoládo, vide enErboládo. 

Enessár, to couer with morter.

* Eneste, Enesto, id est, En este, en esto, 
in this, in that.

Enfadádo, m.wearied, tired, offended.

Enfadár, to grieue, to offend, to tire, to be
lothsome.

* Enfádo, m.irkesomnesse, tediousnesse,
wearinesse.

Enfadóso, m.tedious, wearisome, loth­
some.

enFamádo, m.famous, infamous.

* Enfánte, m.vide Infánte. 

* Enfardelár, to make vp a packe or bun­
dle.

* Enfasí, vide Emfasí. 

* Enfastidiádo, m.wearied, troubled,
molested, disdained.

* Enfastidiár, to loath, to abhorre, to con­
temne with disdaine.

* Enfengidos ójos, bleared eies.

Enfermár, to be sicke, to be weake, to be ill
at ease.

Enfermedád, f. sicknesse, infirmitie.

Enférmo, m. sicke, weake, ill at ease.

Enfermeria, f. an hospitall, a spittle for
the diseased.

* Enferméro, m.one that healeth diseases
in hospitals.

Enfin, id est, En fin, in the end.

Enflaquecér, or Enflaquescér, to be
weake or feeble, to be leane.

Enflaquecido, m.weakened, made leane.

* Enfonsádo, freed frm ordinarie taxe
and dutie.

Enforrádo, m.furred, lined.

Enforrár, to furre, to line.

* Enfórro, m.a furring or lining.

Enfotádo, m.encouraged, set on.

Enfotár, to encourage, to set on.

Enfrascár, to sticke fast, to be intangled,
to intermeddle himselfe.

Enfrenádo, m.bridled, restrained.

Enfrenár, to bridle, to restraine.

enFrénte, ouer against, afront.

Enfriadéra, f. a cooling place, a vessell to
coole wine with snowe water vsed in
Spaine.

Enfriádo, m.cooled.

Enfriar, to cool, to make cold.

* Enfundadúra, f. a putting vp in a case.
Also an arming of pikes with cloth,
veluet, &c.

Enfundár, to put vp in a case, to arme
pikes with cloth, veluet, &c.

Enfurecér, or Enfurescér, to be mad, to
be furious.

Enfurecído, m.furious, raging.

* Enfurtír, to thicken cloth at the fulling
mill.

Engáço, m.a rake.

Engañádo, m.deceiued, beguiled.

Engañadór, m.a deceiuer, a beguiler.

Engañár, to deceiue, to beguile, to vnder­
mine, to abuse by deceite, to deale frau­
dulently, to coosen, to shift cunninglie
with, to play on both hands.

Engáño, m.deceit, fraude, beguiling, coo­
senage, cunning, shifting.

Engañosaménte, deceitfully, fraudu­
lently, like a shifting or coosening com­
panion.

Engañóso, m.deceitfull, fraudulent, one
that plaieth false or with both handes,
giuen to coosenage.

* Engarrafádo, m.caught with a grap­
ple, or with a hooke.

Engarrafár, to grapple, to catch with a
hooke.

* Engasgár, vide Asír, or Engarrafár. 

Engastádo, m.set in, as a stone in a ring,
inlaied, chipped worke.

Engastadór, m.one that setteth stones in
rings, one that inlaieth bone or timber,
a maker of chipped worke.

Engastár, to set a stone in a ring, to make
inlaied worke, as chipped worke or
checker worke with bone, or tim­
ber.

Engáste, chipt worke, checker worke, in­
laying of stones in rings, &c.

* Engastonádo, m.set in as a stone in a
ring, inlaied, chipped worke.

* Engastonár, to set a stone in a ring, to
make chipped worke or checker worke
with bone or timber, to make inlaide
worke.

* Engaveládo, m.enrolled or appointed
to pay a tribute or custome to the king.

* enGavilládo, m. bound vp in fagots or
bundles.

* enGavillár, to binde vp in fagots or
bundles.

Engendrádo, m.begotten, engendred, 
bred, hauing had his originall.

* Engendradór, m.a begetter, an engen­
drer, one from whence came the of­
spring or first originall.

Engendrár, to beget, to breed, to engen­
der, to procreate.

Engeñéro, an enginer, one that plotteth
or maketh instruments with strange
deuises, to effect rare and difficult
matters withall, a cunning worke­
man.

Engéño, or Engénio, an engine or cun­
ning instrument, a craftie or politike
inuention, a scaffold in building, a fra­
ming or workemanship, a place ouer the
scaffolde whence some angell appee­
red.

* Engerído, m.grafted in.

* Engerír, to graft into.

* Engíe, a fish called a Lamprey.

* enGolfádo, m.launched out into the
deepe, put to sea.

enGolfár, to launch into the deepe, to put
to dea, to insinuate, to venture on.

EnGordádo, m.fatted, become or made
grosse, waxed foggie and greasie.

enGordár, to fatten, to make fat, to
make grosse, to grow foggie or vn­





wilsome.

Engórra, f. staie, delaie, tarriance, pro­
longing of time, deferring from time
to time.

Engorrándo, by delaies, demurring, dri­
uing off from time to time, prolonging.

Engorrar, to staie, to delay, to demurre, to
driue off time, to prolong from time to
time.

Engorróso, m.full of delaies or demurs,
one that loueth to prolong or driue off
from day to day.

* enGrandecedór, m.one that maketh
great, one that extolleth or magnifieth,
an aggrauater of matters.

enGrandecér, or enGrandescér, to
make great, to magnifie, to extoll, to ag­
grauate.

enGrandecído, m.made great, aggra­
uated, extolled, magnified.

enGrandecimiénto, m.making great,
magnifying, extolling, aggrauating.

* Engrasádo páño, gummed cloth, to
make it deceitfully thicke.

* enGrossádo, m.made fatte, waxed
grosse.

engrossár, yo enGruésso, to wax grosse,
to make fat.

enGrudamiénto, m.a pasting or gluing
any thing with paste.

enGrudár, to paste, to glue, to sodder, to
ioyne, to close vp with paste.

enGrúdo, m.paste of flower and water,
to paste or sticke things togither.

* Engrúdo de cóla, glue, such as cutlers
and fletchers vse.

Engrudóso, m.gluie, full of paste.

* enGruésse, enGruésso, vide enGros­
sár. 

Engrumecér, to clot, to quarre like colde
bloud, to growe to a ielly, to become
clotted.

* Enguíla, vide Anguílla, f. a fish called
en Eele.

Engullír, to swallow vp, to glut vp, t
deuoure.

Engúrria, a wrinkle in a garment. Also
the strangurie.

Engurriádo, m.pleited, wrinkled, folded.
Also hauing the strangurie.

Engurriamiénto, m.folding, wrinkling,
pleiting.

* Enhadádo, vide Enfadádo, wearied,
tired, offended.

Enhadár, vide Enfadár, to wearie, to of­
fend, to tire.

* enHambrentamiénto, a making hun­
grie.

* enHambrentár, to make hungrie.

* enHastádas Púntas, speare, pointes
headed with iron.

* enHastádo, m.the pike of iron or steele
set to the speare.

* enHastár, to head pikes or launces with
heads of iron or steele.

* enHastiádo, m.loathed, misliked, ab­
horred.

enHastiár, to loath, to abhorre, to mislike,
to be full, to haue enough.

enHastio, m.loathing, mislike, abhorring,
satietie, fulnes, enough.

enHechizádo, m.to bewitch, to fore­
speake, to inchant.

* enHechizadór, m.a witch, an inchau­
ter, a sorcerer.

enHechizár, to bewitch, to forespeake, to
inchant.

* Enhestádo, m.to lift vp, to raise, or set
vp.

Enhestamiénto, m.lifting vp, setting on
ended, raysing vp.

Enhestár, yo Enhiésto, to lift vp, to set
on end, to raise vp.

Enhetrádo, m.entangled, insnarled, trou­
bled, perplexed.

* Enhetradúra, f. entangling, insnarling,
interturbing.

Enhetramiénto, m.vide Enhetra­
dúra.

Enhetrár, to intangle, to snarle in, to trou­
ble by the way, to make in a perplexi­
tie, or at his wits end.

Enhieste, Enhiesto, vide Enhestár. 

* Enhiestadór, one that carrieth a thing
vpright.

* Enhiésto, lifted vp, set vp, lying wide
open with his face vpward.

enHilár, to thread as one threadeth a nee­
dle, to guide by a thread, to cut by a
thread.

enHorcádo, m.hanged vp, crucified,
hanged by the necke. Also a waggish
boy, or a gallow-clapper. Also a roape
of onions or garlicke.

enHorcár, Præs. yo enHórco, 1. Præt. 
yo enHorqué, to hang by the necke, to
crucifie vpon the crosse.

* enHorque, vide enHorcár. 

* enHornádo, m.put into an ouen.

* enHornadúra, f. a putting into an
ouen.

* enHornár, to set in an ouen, to set in
bread to bake.

* Enjaezádo, trapped or furnished as a
horse.

* Enjaezár, to trap or furnish a horse.

* Enjezár, vide Enjaezár. 

* Eniveládo, m.ruled out, directed by a
line.

* Eniveladúra, f. a ruling out, or direc­
ting by a line.

* Enivelár, to rule, as schollers writing
bookes are ruled, or as carpenters vse to
rule timber, to direct by a line.

* Enlaçádo, m.intangled, intrapped,
snared, tyed, fast knit.

* Enlaçadúra, f. an intangling, tying,
snaring, intrapping.

* Enlaçamiénto, m.idem. 

* Enlaçár, to intangle, to snare, to intrap,
to knit, to tie fast.

* Enlardádo, m.larded with bakon.

* Enlardár, to lard, as cookes vse to draw
with lard or bakon.

* Enlatádo, m.done with plates or met­
tall stuffes. Also plated or ribbed as
shippes sides when they are first
made.

* Enlaviár, to deceiue with faire words.

* Enlazádo, or Enlaçádo, m.intrapped,
intangled, snared, fast tyed, knit.

Enlazadúra, f. tying, intangling, snaring,
intrapping, betraying.

Enlazamiénto, idem. 

Enlazár, vide Enlaçár, to snare or in­
trap.

* Enlevádo, vide Elevádo, m.lifted vp,
set vp, exalted.

Enlevamiénto, m.amazednes, giddines
of the head.

Enlevár, to lift vp, to raise vp, to set vp,
to erect.

* Enliriár, to beset with Lillies.

* Enlisár la téla, to make linnen smooth,
to smooth linnen.

Enlizár la téla, to set the threads or yarne
(which is to be wouen vp and downe
with the slay) vpon the loome.

* Enllenár, to fill full.

Enlodádo, m.berayed, mirie, durtie.

Enlodadúra, f. beraying or fouling with
durt, durting.

Enlodár, to make durtie, to beray with
durt.

Enloquecér, or Enloquescér, to make
foolish, to make frantike.

Enloquecérse, to become foolish, to play
the foole for want of wit, to be fran­
tike.

* En los, in them, in those.

Enlosár, to paue.

* Enlozádo, m.paued with pauing tile.

* Enlozár, to paue with pauing tile.

* enLugár, or en véz, in place, in steed.

Enlutádo, m.clad in mourning apparell,
dressed like a mourner.

Enlúto, mourning.

Enluzár, vide Enluzír. 

* Enluzír, to wash a wall with lime, to
whiten a wall.

Enmagrecér, vide Emmagrescér, to
make leane, to cause to pine.

Emmagrecérse, to waxe leane, to pine.

Enmagrecído, growen or waxed leane.

* Enmiénda, f. an amendment.

* Enmobescérse, to make mouldie, to be
hoarie, to be filthie, to be pale, or dead





coloured.

* Enmordazár, vide Amordazár, to
bite.

* Enmudecér, to be mute, to holde his 
peace.

* Enmudecído, mute, dumbe, one that
saith nothing.

Ennegrecér, or Ennegrescér, to make
blacke.

Enniveládo, vide Eniveládo. 

Ennoblecér, or Ennoblescér, to make
noble, to aduaunce to honor, to exalt
vnto nobilitie.

* Ennoblecído, made noble, aduaunced
to honor.

Eñudecér la yérva, to growe in knots as
reedes, corne, grasse, and the stalkes of
many herbs doe.

Enódio, m.the fawne of a stag.

Enojadaménte, angrily, like one offen­
ded or in a rage.

Enojadízo, angrie, waiward,
waspish, bent to much anger. froward.

Enojádo, m.angrie, offended, annoyed,
vexed, in a chase.

Enojár, to anger, to annoy, to offend, to
vexe, to set in a chase, to displease.

Enójo, m.anger, displeasure, vexation,
offence, annoyance.

* Tenér Enójos, to be at variance or
discord with.

Enojosaménte, angrily, discontentedly,
hatefully.

Enojóso, m.angrie, hatefull, troublesome,
offensiue.

* Enóra, id est, En óra, at an hower, at a
time.

* Enóra buéna, or mala, at a good time, 
or at a bad.

* Enórden, id est, En órden, in order,
orderly.

* Enórme, out of rule, out of square, vn­
measurable, exceeding great, enor­
mous, fowle.

* Enosár, vide Enojár. 

* enPantanár, to put into bogs, to betake
them to the bogs or quagmires.

* Emparádo, f. vide Parrádo, made like
the prop of a vine.

* Emparedádo, a religious person of a 
strict life, alwaies penned and shut vp
within two wals.

* Emparejár, to goe iust equall with one,
to goe cheeke by cheeke, or side by side.

* Enpatronizár, to patronize, to take
into protection.

* enPedernído, vide emPedernído, stonie.

* enPeñár, vide emPeñár, to pawne, to
lay to gage.

* Enpezár, to begin.

* Enpicár, to put one to death on pikes.

* enPrestár, to borrow, to lend.

* Enpuxár, to thrust, to put backe, to
grinde as a mill.

* Enquadernádo, m.bounde vp as a
booke. Also the ribs or sides of a ship
set or laid when she is first a making.

* Enquadernadór, a bookebinder.

* Enquadernár, to binde bookes, to set
the ribs or sides of a ship at his first
making vp.

* Enqualquier manéra, howsoeuer it be.

* Enquéntro, m.an incountring or mee­
ting with.

* Enquisición, f. a diligent search.

* enRalecér, or enRalescér, to make
thinne.

* Enrarecér, to make rare.

* Enroscádo, vide Enrroscádo. 

* Enrramádo, m.couered with boughes.

Enrramár, to couer with boughes.

Enrranciárse, to be rustie, to be canker­
fretted, to be mouldie.

* Erredádo, m.taken in a net, made like
a net.

* Enrredadór, m.one that catcheth with
nets.

* Enrredamiénto, m.catching with
nets.

* Enrredár, to catch in a net, to take with
nets.

* Enrrédo, m.a netting, taking in a net.

* Enrrejár, vide Enrexár. 

Enrrexádo, lattised, made with lattises,
grated.

Enrrexár, to lattise, to set or make latti­
ses, to set grates.

* Enrríque, m.a proper name called
Henry.

Enrriquecér, or Enrriquescér, to enrich,
to make rich.

Enrriquecído, m.enriched, made rich,
growne wealthie.

Enrriscádo, m.steepe vp, on the side of a
rocke, dangerous, hard to passe.

Enrriscamiénto, m.steepenesse, the crag­
gie side of a rocke, danger, perill, hard­
nesse.

Enrriscár, to get vp to a mountaine or
steepe rocke, to endanger himselfe, to
venture perilously.

Enrristrár, to put a launce to the rest.

* Enrristre, m.a rest for a launce.

Enrrizár, to ruffle the haire, to shag his
haire.

* Enrrodeládo, m.armed with a target.

* Enrrodelár, to arme with a target.

Enrronquecér, or Enrronquescér, to be
hoarse.

Enrronquecimiénto, hoarsenes.

* Enrroscádo, laide in a rounde circle
like an adder.

Enrroscadúra, f. lying rounde, winding
round about like an adder.

Enrroscár, Præs. yo Enrrósco, 1. Præt.
yo Enrrosqué, to lie trent and rounde
like an adder: to winde ruonde a­
bout.

* Enrrosque, vide Enrroscár. 

* Enrrossáda cósa, a thing very redde.

Enrroxár, to make red, to die in a red co­
lour.

Enrruviár, to make yellow, sometimes to
make reddish.

* enRuviascér, to waxe reddish.

Ensaláda, f. a sallet of herbes.

* ensAlçádo, m.extolled, exalted, set vp
aloft, promoted, lifted vp.

ensAlçamiénto, m.exaltation, extol­
ling, lifting vp, setting aloft.

ensAlçár, to extoll, to exalt, to set vp a­
loft, to promote.

Ensalmadór, m.an enchanter, a char­
mer, one that by spels and wordes ta­
keth in hande to helpe the diseases, an
exorcist.

Ensalmár, to charme, to inchant, to vse
charmes or inchanting wordes, or em­
plaisters.

Ensálmo, m.a charme, an inchantment.
Also a pannell.

Ensálmo de béstia, a pannell for a beast.

* Ensambladór, m.a ioyner.

* Ensamblár, to ioyne as Ioyners vse in
their trades.

Ensanchamiénto, m.enlarging, ampli­
fying, setting out at large.

Ensanchár, to amplifie, to inlarge, to set
out to the full, to expresse at length.

* ensAngostádo, made streight or nar­
row, lessened.

* ensAngostár, to streighten, to bring to
a narrowe plot, to lessen.

* ensAngostamiénto, m.streightening,
bringing to a narrower roome.

enSangrentádo, m.embrued with
bloud, all on a goare bloud.

* enSangrentadór, m.one that embru­
eth with bloud, a bloudshedder.

enSangrentamiénto, m.imbruing or
defiling with bloud.

Ensangrentár, to imbrue or defile with
bloud, to make all on a goare bloud.

enSañádo, m.angred, offended, gree­
uously vexed.

* enSañamiénto, m.anger, vexation, of­
fence, molestation.

enSañárse, to be angrie, to be offended, to
take in ill part.

enSartár, to put on a string, as men vse to
put beades or pearles. To file vp wri­
tings or records.

Ensayádo, m.assaied, tried, made proofe
of.

* Ensayadór, a taster, an assayer, a proo­
uer.

Ensayár, to trie, to assaie, to make proofe
of, to put on a cassocke.





Ensáyo, m.an assaying, a triall.

* Ensebádo, m.tallowed, greased.

* Ensebadúra, f. a tallowing, a greasing.

* Ensebár, to tallow, to annoint with tal­
low, or grease.

* Ensenáda, f. a putting into the bosome,
an entrance of the sea into a creeke.

Ensenádo, f. put into the bosome.

Ensenár, to put into the bosome, or the sea
to come into a creeke.

* Enséña, f. a signe to a house, an ensigne
in warre, called also in Spanish Van­
déra, or Bandéra.

Enseñádo, m.taught, instructed, lear­
ned.

Enseñamiénto, m.an instruction, a tea­
ching, a bringing vp, nurturing.

Enseñança, f. teaching, to teach, to bring vp,
to nurture.

Enseñár, to instruct, to teach, to bring vp,
to nurture.

* Enseñár, or Señalár, to marke, to giue a
token.

enSeñoreár, to beare lordship, to haue
rule or authoritie.

* Ensénsio, vide Encénsios, the herbe
Wormewoode.

* Ensiládo, m.put in a garner.

Ensilár, to put in a garner.

Ensilládo, m.saddled, furnished with a
saddle, and other furniture fit for a
horse.

enSillár, to saddle, to furnish a horse for
to be ridden.

* Ensoalçádo, m.lifted vp, exalted, ex­
tolled.

* Ensoalçár, to lift vp, to extoll, to ex­
alt.

enSobervecér, or enSobervescérse, to
waxe proud, to grow arrogant, or high
minded.

* enSolvér, yo ensuélvo, to dissolue, or
to consume.

* Ensolvído, m.dissolued, brought from
the former state, consumed.

Ensordamiénto, m.making or becom­
ming deafe, thicknes of hearing.

Ensordár, to make deafe, to waxe deafe.

* Ensordecér, or Ensordescér, to begin
to waxe deafe.

Ensordedéra, f. red-plum or cats-taile, a
kinde of palme growing on nut trees at
the spring, an herbe that maketh deafe.

* Ensperánça, id est, en Esperança, f. in
hope.

* Enspiritádo, m.possessed with an euill
spirit.

* enSuéño, m.in sleepe, in dreames.

* enSúma, f. in summe, in briefe.

enSuziamiénto, m.making fowle, be­
raying, defiling, sluttishnes.

enSuziár, to beray, to make fowle, to de­
file, to vse sluttishly.

* Entabiádo, m.vide Entibiádo. 

* Entabiár, vide Entibiár. 

* Entabládo, m.boorded, planked.

* Entabladúra, f. a boord or planke, a
boording or planking.

Entablamiénto, m.boording, planche­
ring, laying of planks or boords.

Entablár, to boord, to planke, to plancher,
to pant as the flesh of beasts new killed,
to place in a boord, to set tablemen in
the tables.

Entalláble, that which may be carued or
graued.

* enTalládo, m.carued, graued, cut.

enTalladór, m.a cutter, a grauer, a
caruer.

enTalladúra, f. grauing, caruing, cut­
ting.

enTallár, to graue, to carue, to cut curi­
ously in wood or in mettall.

enTallecér la yérva, to grow to a stalke,
to grow to some stature or perfection.

* enTanto, in so much, so far.

Entanto grádo, so farre foorth, to such a
passe.

enTapiár, to stop vp, to close vp.

* enTapiçár, to hang with hangings of
arras, tapestrie, darnets or such like.

* Entassájos, m.by or in peeces of flesh
salted and hanged, or smoked.

* Entejér, vide enTexér. 

Enténa de náo, the foreyard in a ship, or
rather the maine yard.

* Entenáda, f. a daughter in lawe, the
wiues daughter or the husbands daugh­
ter.

Entenádo, m.a sonne in lawe, the wiues
sonne or husbands sonne.

Entendér, yo Entiéndo, to vnderstand,
to perceiue, to wit, to be informed.

* Entendído, m.vnderstood.

Entendimiénto, m.vnderstanding.

enTenebrecér, or enTenebrescér, to
darken, to make darke, to obscure.

Enteraménte, wholy, thoroughly, afresh,
entirely.

Enteramiénto, m.renewing, taking a­
fresh.

Enterár, to renew, to make whole, to doe
afresh.

Enteréza, f. soundnesse, wholenesse, inte­
gritie.

Enterízo, whole, sound.

Enternecér, or Enternescér, to be ten­
der, to waxe delicate or tender.

Entéro, m.whole, sound, entire.

Enterrádo, m.buried, laide in graue, in­
terred.

Enterradór, m.he that burieth, one that
laieth in graue.

Enterramiénto, m.burying, laying in
graue, interring, a funerall.

Enterrár, yo Entiérro, to lay in graue,
to burie, to interre.

* Entervénga, Entervéngo, vide En­
tervenir. 

* Entervenido, m.happened by the way,
chanced in the meane time.

* Entervenír, Præs. Entervéngo, en­
terviénes, enterviéne, 1. Præt. En­
tervine, viniste, vino, Fut. Enter­
vendré, or Enterverné, ás, á, Subiun
Præs. Entervénga, Imperfect. Enter­
viniéra, entervernía, or entervini­
ésse, Fut. Enterviniére, to happen by
the way, to chance in the meane while.

* Enterverné, Entervernía, vide Enter­
venír. 

* Entervine, Enterviniéra, Entervini­
ésse, Entervino, vide Entervenír. 

Entesamiénto, m.bending, stretching
out, laying abroad.

Entesár, yo Entiéso, to bend as a bowe, to
stretch, to lay out.

* enTexér, to weaue in, to plat.

* Enthiméma, or Entiméma, an vnper­
fect syllogisme, wanting the Maior or
Minor.

enTibiadéra, m.a warming pan, or a pot
to put any thing in for to keepe it luke-
warme.

* enTibiádo, m.made luke-warme,
warmed.

enTibiár, to make luke-warme.

* Entienda, Entiéndo, vide Enten­
dér. 

* Entierre, Entierro, vide Enterrár. 

Entiérros, m.burials, funerals.

* Entiese, Entieso, vide Entesár. 

* Entiméma, vide Enthiméma. 

* Entiscár, vide Enriscár. 

* Entiviár, vide Entibiár, to be luke-
warme.

* Entollár, vide Hentollár. 

Entomecér, or Entomescér, vide Ator­
meçér, to waxe drowsie, vnlustie, or
vnfit to any thing.

* Entonación, a tuning, a setting of
tune.

Entonádo, m.tuned, brought into tune,
set in tune. Also a bragging fellow, a
ietting companion.

Entonár, to tune, to set in tune, to bring
into tune, to set descant. To bragge, to
boast.

Entónces, then, at that time.

Entontecér, or Entontescér, to waxe
foolish, to become a foole.

* Entorcér, yo Entuérço, to turne or
winde as a snake, to bend or bow, to fa­
sten or winde about. To wreath or
wrench.

Entormecér, vide Atormecér. 

* Entormecimiénto, m.or Tremiésga, 
heauines, drowsines, vnlustines, vnapt­
nes to any goodnes.





* Entorneádo, m.vide Entornádo,
wrapped round about, turned or
wound round about.

* Entorneár, to wrappe round about, to
turne or winde round about.

Entórno, round about.

enTorpecér, or enTorpescér, to be a­
stonied, to be dull, to be euen senceles, to
be giuen to no-goodnes.

enTorpecído, m.foule,  vnlustie, asto­
nied.

enTorpecimiénto, m.dulnes, astonish­
ment, heauie sencelesnes.

Entortadúra, f. the putting out of an eie,
squinteiednes, crookednes.

Entortár, yo Entuérto, to be squinteied,
to put out one eie, to make crooked.

* Entosicár, Entossicár, or Entoxicár, 
Præs. yo Entosíco, Entossíco, En­
toxíco, 1. Præt. Entosiqué, Entossi­
qué, Entoxiqué, to poyson, to make in­
toxicate.

* Entosique, Entossiqué, Entoxique,
vide Entosicár. 

* Entraçár, to marke out, to trace out.

Entráda, f. an entrie, a going into a place.
An entrance into a matter, a winning
in.

Entrámbos, both two.

* Entramócos, an herbe called garden
Lupine or Figbeane.

Entrampár, to intangle, to snarle, to folde
in, to catch in a snare or pitfall.

Entrañáble, hartie, entire, inward, from
the hart.

Entrañableménte, hartily, entirely, from
the verie inward parts.

Entráñas, f. the entrailes, the inward parts
the hart strings.

Entrapádo páno, m.cloath dyed in
graine.

Entrapajádo, m.bound about the head,
muffled.

Entrapajár, vide Entrapár. 

Entrapár, to binde about the head with a
cloath.

Entrár, to enter, to come in, to make an
entrance.

* Entrecéjo, m.the place betweene the
eiebrowes.

Éntre, betweene, betwixt, among.

* Entre éllos, among them.

Entre tánto, in the meane while, whilest
that.

Entrecogér, to take vp by the way, to
take before it commeth to the ground.

Entrecortár, to cut off, to make short, t
cut off by the way.

* Entre-cuéro y carne, the dropsie, or
betweene the skin and the flesh.

* entreCuésta, f. a baldrib of a hog, the
forepart of the ribs of a hog taken out
from the side to be salted.

entreDezír, Præs. Entredígo, Entre­
dízes, Entredíze, 1. Præt. Entre­
díxe, Entredixíste, Entredíxo, Fut.
Entrediré, rás, rá. Sub. Præs. Entre­
diga. Imperfect. Entredixéra, Entre­
diria, or Entredixésse. Fut. Entredi­
xiére, to forbid.

entreDía, by day, in the day time.

entreDícho, m.forbidding, charge to the
contrary, an excommunication.

* entreDiéntes, betwixt the teeth.

* Entredíga, Entredígo, vide Entre­
dezir. 

* Entredíxe, Entredixésse, Entrediría,
Entredixo, vide entreDezír. 

Entréga, f. a deliuerie, a yeelding, a re­
storing to the full, a making good a­
gaine.

* Entregádo, m.deliuered, yeelded vp,
restored to the full, giuen to keepe.

* Entregadór, m.he that yeeldeth, deli­
uereth vp or restoreth to the full, one
that maketh good againe.

Entregár, yo Entriégo, to deliuer or
commit vpon trust, to yeeld vp, to re­
store, to make good againe, to giue ouer
quite.

Entrehuélgo, m.intermission, pawsing
vpon a matter, taking deliberation.

* Entrellovér, to raine by the way, all to
bewet with raine.

* Entrelubricáno, m.the twylight, the
light betweene the dawning and sunne
rising, or betwixt the sunne set and the
shutting of the euening.

* Entre lúna y lúna, the change of the
moone, the space betweene the change
and the prime.

* Entremédias, waies or meanes be­
tweene.

Entremés de la tarásca, a hobbyhorse
or such like giant or gawde in a May
game.

Entremetér, to intermeddle, to put be­
tweene, to interpose, to set in the way.

* Entremetído, m.interposed, intermed­
led, put betweene, set by the way, an
intermeddler, a sawcie fellow.

Entremetimiénto, m.intermeddling, in­
terposing, setting by the way, putting
betweene.

* Entremixtúra, f. mingling togither, 
with intermixing, a medley.

* Entremixtúra de colóres, a  medley
colour.

Entreoýr, to ouerhear, to heare vna­
wares, or by the way.

* Entrepapádo, the time while there is no
pope, betwixt one pope and another.

entrePonér, Præs. entrePóngo, entre­
Pónes, entrepóne, 1. Præt. entre­
Púse, Pusíste, Púso, Fut. entrePor­
né, ás, á, Sub. Praes. entrePónga,  Im­
perfect. Entrepusiéra, entrepusiésse,
or Entrepornia, Fut. Entrepusiére,
to put betweene, to set by the way, to
set betweene, to interpose.

* Entrepónga, Entrepóngo, vide en­
trePonér. 

* entrePorné, entrePornía, vide en­
trePonér. 

Entrepostúra, f. putting betweene, setting betwixt.

entrePuésto, interposed, set betweene, put 
betwixt.

entrePunPçadúra, pouncing, pricking,
pricking out of samples, &c.

entrePunçár, to pounce out, to pricke out
as they pricke out samples, &c.

* entrePúse, entrePusiéra, entrePusi­
ésse, entrePúso, vide entrePonér. 

Entresacadúra, f. catching by the way,
getting at vnawares before he thought.

Entresacár, Præs. yo Entresásco, 1. 
Præt. yo Entresaqué, to catch by the
way or vnawares.

* Entresaque, vide Entresacár. 

Entre se, betwixt themselues, among
themselues.

* Entre semána, betweene the weekes be­
ginning and ende, in the weeke time,
while the weeke lasteth.

* Entre si, within himselfe.

Entresíjo de animál, the midriffe which
parteth the bowels from the hart,
lungs, liuer, &c.

Entresuélo, m.a loft, a sollar, an vpper
roume, the chiefe beame in a house.

* entreTalládo, m.grauen, cut or carued
in stone or wood.

* entreTalladúra, f. a picture or image
cut, grauen or carued.

* entreTallár, to graue, cut or carue
imagerie.

* Entretenído, m.entertained, accepted,
welcomed.

Entretenimiénto, m.entertainment,
welcoming, bidding welcome, accepting
in good part.

* entreTenér, Præs. entreTengo, en­
tretiénes, entretiéne, 1. Præt. entre­
Túve, entreTuviste, entreTúvo,
Fut. entreTendré, or entreTerné,
ás, á, Sub. Præs. Entreténga, Imperf.
entreTuviéra, entreTuviésse, or 
entreTernía, Fut. entreTuviére, to
entertaine, to bid welcome, to accept of.

* entreténga, entreténgo, vide entre­
Tenér. 

* entreTerne, entreTernía, vide en­
treTenér. 

entreTexedúra, f. weauing of cloth or
other like things, wreathing or winding
one within another, as in making of
baskets, hurdles, or such like.

entreTexér, to weaue, to wreathe togi­





ther, one within another.

* entreTexído, m.wouen, wreathed to­
gither, or one within another.

* entreTúve, entreTuviéra, entreTu­
viésse, vide entreTenér. 

entreVálo, m.the meane space, the di­
stance betweene.

entreVenimiénto, m.chaunce by the
way, haphazard.

entreVenga, entreVengo, vide entre­
Venír. 

entreVenír, Præs. entreVéngo, entre­
Viénes, entreViéne, 1. Præt. entre­
Víne, entreViníste, entreVíno, Fut.
entreVendré, or entreVerné, ás, á,
Sub. Præs. entreVénga, Imperf. en­
treViniéra, entreVernía, or entre­
Viniésse, Fut. entreViniére, to come
betweene, to chance by the way.

Entreverádo, m.wrought with rods as
baskets and hurdles of diuers colours,
as blacke and white.

* Entreverné, Entrevernía, vide entre­
Venír. 

* Entrevíne, Entreviniésse, Entrevini­
éra, Entrevíno, vide entreVenír. 

Entreuntár, to annoint betweene.

Entricadaménte, intricately, perplexed­
ly.

Entricádo, m.entangled, intricate, per­
plexed.

Entricamiénto, m.intangling.

Entricár, Præs. yo Entríco, 1. Præt. yo
Entriqué, to entangle, to bring into a
labyrinth, to make intricate.

* Entriéga, Entriego, vide Entregár. 

* Entrique, vide Entricár. 

* Entristecído, m.made heauy, made sor­
rowfull.

Entristecér, or Entristescér, to be sad, to 
be heauy.

Entristecimiénto, m.sadnes, haeauynesse,
sorrow.

* Entrodúxe, Entroduxéra, Entrodux­
ésse, Entrodúxo, vide Entroduzír. 

* Entrodúsga, or Entrodúzga vide En­
troduzír. 

* Entroduzír, Præs Entrodúzgo, En­
trodúzes, entrodúze, 1. Præt. En­
trodúxe, iste, Entrodúxo, Fut. En­
troduré, rás, rá,  Sub. Præs. Entro­
dúzga, Imperfect, Entroduxéra, En­
trodurría, or Entroduxésse, Fut, En­
troduxiére, to bring in, to draw on, to
cause to enter, to prepare a way, to make
way.

* Entronizár, to put in a throne, to en­
stall.

* Entuérçe, Entuérço, vide Entorcér, to
turne or winde as a snake.

* Entuerte, Entuerto, vide Entortár. 

Entupecér, to stuffe, to fill againe, to fill
full.

* Enturbiár, to trouble, to make thick or
muddie as water.

Enturviár, idem. 

* Enturviadór, m.a troubler, a distur­
ber.

En vano, in vain.

Envarádo, m.stiffe, starke.

Envaramiénto, stiffnes of the body,
starknes.

Envarár, to be stiffe, to grow starke and
vnable to styrre.

* Envasár, to put into a vessell.

* Envedijádo, m.hauing long lockes, or
shagge haire.

* Envegescér, or Envegecér, to grow in
age, to waxe old, to be of good yeeres.

Envegecído, or Envegescído, m.aun­
cient, old, well striken in yeeres.

Envegérse, vide Envegescér, to growe
olde, to become aged.

* Envejecér, or Envejescér, vide Enve­
gescér. 

* Envejecído, or Envejescído, vide Envegecído, ancient, olde, striken in
yeeres.

* Envelesádo, m.slumbering, at his wits
end, not knowing what to doe.

Envergonçádo, m.made to blush, asha­
med, shamefaste.

Envergonçamiénto, m.shamefastnes,
blushing, bashfulnes.

* Envergonçánte, bashfull, shamefaste.

Envergonçárse, to be ashamed, to blush,
to be bashfull, or shamefaste.

Envernéro, m.a wintering place, a win­
ter house.

Envernár, yo Enviérno, to winter, to
lodge or dwell in the winter.

Enverniégo, m.pertaining to winter, fit
for winter.

* Envers, vide Anvers, or Anvéres, the
citie Antwerpe.

Envés, the inside, the lining.

En vez, sometimes.

Envessár, yo Enviésso, to turne in and
out, to turne the inside out.

Envestído, m.broken in among the ene­
mies, assailed, inuested into another
countrie.

Envestír, yo Envísto, to inuest into ano­
ther countrie or order, to assaile, to
breake in among enemies.

En vez, sometimes.

Enviciár, to growe ranke, to growe out of
order, to surpasse his bounds, to become
vicious.

* Envierne, Envierno, vide Envernár. 

* Envierno, vide Invierno. 

Envilecér, or Envilescér, to waxe vile,
to become little woorth, to become
cheape.

* Envilecído, m.made vile, base, or of
none account.

* Envíste, Envisto, vide Envestír. 

* Enuno, vide Juntos, togither, all in
one.

* † Enxabonádo, m.done with sope, so­
ped.

† Enxabonár, to sope, to doe with sope.

† Enxaguár, to water, to wash, to sprin­
kle with water.

* † Enxálma, f. a charme, an inchant­
ment. Also a panniell for a horse or
beast.

† Enxalmár, vide Ensalmár, to charme,
to inchant.

* Enxálmo, vide Enxálma. 

† Enxalvegár, to white wash a house, to
wash with lime.

† Enxambrár, to swarme as bees doe.

† Enxámbre, m.a swarme of bees.

* Enxebádo, cloth dressed with Xebe,
which is a kinde of chalke to make it
worke well.

Enxergádo, m.he that weareth sacke­
cloth.

† Exerído, m.grassed.

Enxeridór, m.a grasser.

† Enxerír, yo Enxiro, to grasse as men
grasse trees.

* Enxerír d'escudéte, to grasse and cut
the stocke in the fashion of a little
shield, to graft on.

Enxertár, vide Enxerír. 

† Enxérto, or Enxerído, m.grassed.

* Enxíra, Enxíro, vide Enxerír. 

† Enxugár, Præs. yo Enxúgo, 1. Præt.
yo Enxugué, to drie, to wipe the hands
after washing.

* Enxugue, vide Enxugár. 

† Enxúllo de telár, a weauers beame.

† Enxúndia, f. fat, sewet, grease, oynt­
ment for cart wheeles.

† Enxúto, m.drie.

* † Enyessádo, m.seeled, plaistered.

* Enyessadúra, seeling or plaistering.

* † Enyessár, to seele or plaister houses.

Enzías, f. the gums.

* Enzima, vide Ençima. 

* Enzimár, vide Ençimár. 

Enzína, f. the skarlet oake, a holme oake,
or french oake.

Enzinál, a groue of such oakes.


E P
* Epenthesí, or Epenthesís, the putting
in of a letter or syllable in the middest
of a word.

* Ephemerí, day-bookes, or registers of
euerie seuerall day.

Epicúreos, m.Epicures, men delighted in
bellie cheere, voluptuous, giuen to no­
thing but pleasure.

* Epifanía, an appearing or manifesta­
tion. The day or feast of Epiphanie, or





twelfe day.

Epigráma, f. an Epigram or superscip­
tion.

Epilépsia, f. the falling sickenes.

* Epilogo, a conclusion, a finall ende, a
knitting vp of a matter.

Epiphania, vide Epifania. 

Epitáfio, m.or Epitáphio, an Epitaph, or
an inscription vpon a graue in praise of
the man there buried.

Epistola, f. an epistle, a letter sent from
friend to friend.

* Epitáphio, vide Epitáfio. 

* Epithéto, an addition to a noune for
some qualitie.

* Epitóme, an abridgement, a breuiarie,
an epitome.

* Eponamón, m.a name that the Indi­
ans gaue to the diuell.


E Q
* Equibaléncia, vide Equivaléncia, f. 

* Equidád, f. righteousnes, iust dealing,
equitie, vprightnes.

Equinociál, f. the equinoctiall, when day
and night be of a like length.

* Equinócio, idem. 

* Equiparación, comparison, or equal­
ling.

* Equiparár, to equall, to euen, to match,
to compare, to counteruaile.

* Equivaléncia, f. like value, like worth,
like in substance.

* Equívoca, words of diuers significati­
ons, doubtfull which to take, equiuo­
call.

* Equivocación, f. diuersitie of significa­
tion.

* Equívoco, equiuocall, words of diuers
signification.


E R
Éra, f. a yard, a floore, a garden bed, an
account of yeeres by the Empire.

Erál, a steere of a yeere old.

* Erár con cordéles, to leuell out
ground or garden beds with lines.

* Erário, m.the treasurie, a princes exche­
quer, the common treasurie of a citie.

* Erbaçál, or Ervaçál, a place for herbes,
an herbe garden.

* Erbáge, or Erváge, herbage, greene
fodder for horse or other cattell.

* Erbáje, idem. 

* Erbáto, vide Erváto. 

* Erbazál, vide Erbaçál. 

* Erbéro, vide Ervéro. 

Erbolário, an herbarist, one that hath skil
in herbes.

Erbolecér, or Erbolescér, to grow vp as
an hearbe, to growe greene, to beare
leaues.

Eredád, f. heritage, inheritance.

* Eredádo, inherited, possessed.

Eredár, to inherit, to get by inheritance.

Eredéro, m.an heire, an inheritor.

Erége, m.an Heretike, one that holdeth
erroneous and false points touching
faith and matters of saluation.

Eregía, or Erejía, f. heresie, false doctrine,
false opinions.

* Eréje, vide Erége. 

* Eremita, vide Ermíta, a hermitage.

* Eremitáno, or Ermitáno, a hermite,
one that hath forsaken the world and
betaken himselfe to contemplation and
godly life.

Eréncia, f. inheritance, heritage, all the
whole.

Ereticár, Præs. yo Eretíco. 1. Præt. yo
Eretiqué, to become an heretike, to fol­
low false and erronious opinions.

Erético, f. an heretike, vide Erége.

* Eretique, vide Ereticár. 

Erguído, m.raysed vp.

Erguir, to raise, to call vp in the morning,
to arise.

* Eridádo, f. vide Eredádo. 

* Eringio, an herbe called Rocket. Also
Eringos rootes.

Erizádo, m.rough, bristly.

* Erizár, to set vp the haire vpright.

Erízo, m.a hedghog.

* Erízo de már, a deformed shelfish called
a ruffe.

* Erízo de castáña, the huske of a ches­
nut.

Ermadór, m.a waster, a spoyler.

Ermadúra, f. waste, spoyling, depopula­
tion.

Ermána, or Hermána, f. a sister by fa­
ther and mother, a sister.

* Ermanáble, brotherlike, sisterlike.

Ermanableménte, brotherly, sister­
ly.

* Ermandáble, like brothers.

Ermáno, or Hermáno, m.a brother, most
properly a brother by father and mo­
ther.

Ermár, yo yérmo, to make waste, to
spoile.

Ermita, an Hermitage.

Ermitáño, vide Ermitáno. 

* Ermóso, or Hermóso, m.faire, beauti­
full.

Eróyco, or Heróyco, m.valorous, of great
courage, of great exploits.

Erráda, f. in errour, a false opinion, a mis­
taking.

Erradizo, a straggler, a wanderer.

Errádo, m.lost, wandering.

Erredór, m.one that goeth astray, a wan­
derer.

* Erradúra, f. wandering, going astray.

* Erramiénto, m.going astraie, wande­
ring.

* Erránte, wandering, rouing, erring, gad­
ding vp and downe.

Errár, yo yérro, to wander, to go astraie,
to erre, to do, or thinke amisse, to faile,
to transgresse, to mistake, to wander, to
straie.

* Errátas, f. the faults of a booke esca­
ped.

* Errático, m.erronious, wandring, ro­
uing, gadding, erring.

* Erróneo, erronious, false, erring, mista­
king in another sence.

* Errór, m.error, a wrong opinion, false
doctrine, going out of the way, mista­
king, a fault.

† Ervaçál, a place for herbes, an herbe
garden.

Erváge, herbage, greene fodder for horse
or other cattle.

* Erváje, idem. 

Erváto, m.an herbe called Hogge-fennell,
or Maidenweede.

* Ervazál, vide Ervaçál. 

* Erudición, f. instruction, learning,
bringing vp, education, nurture, tea­
ching.

Ervecér, or Ervescér, to growe to an
herbe.

Ervéra, or Hervéra, the throateboll, the
gullet, the paunch. Also a place for
herbes.

Ervéro, m.he that gathereth herbage r
greene fodder for horse. &c. Also the
throateboll.

* Erúga, f. a moath that eateth cloathes.
Also an apothecarie drugge.

* Erviénte, vide Herviénte. 

* Ervilla, vide Hervilla. 

* Ervolário, vide Erbolário. 

* Ervór, vide Hervór. 

* Eruzándo, vide Cruzándo. 

* Erymántho, m.a high hill of Arcadia,
in which Hercules tooke a wilde boare
which destroied all the countrey there-
about.

* Erýnnis, the name of one of the furies
of hell, as the Poets did imagine.


E S
* Esalación, f. an exhaling, or drawing
vp of vapors from the earth, and wa­
ters by force of the sunne, and of the
coniunction of other fierie planets.

* EsAlçár, to lift vp, to raise vp.

* Esaltór, to exalt, to lift vppe, to ad­
uance.

Ésca, f. tinder to catch fire with when it





is stricken.

Escabéche, or Escavéche, m.pickle for
fish, the brine that salt herings, and
other salt fish is kept in.

* Escabél, or Escavél, a stoole to sit on, a
forme to sit on.

Escabélo, or Escavélo, a forme to sit
on.

Escabiósa, f. the herbe called Scabious.

Escabróso, rough, ragged, craggie and
sharpe, froward, wilfull, peruerse, vn­
toward.

Escabullimiénto, m.slipping or sliding
away, escaping or stealing away.

Escabullirse, to slippe or slide awaie, to
escape away, or steale away priuily.

* Escacedád, f. holding fast, sparing, nig­
gardlines.

Escála, f. a ladder, a paire of staires or of
greeses.

* Escaláda, f. a scaling, a getting vp by
ladder, &c.

Escaladór, m.a scaler, a climer by ladders
or otherwise, a pilferer, a michar that
creepeth in at windowes, &c.

* Escálamos, wooden pinnes in a shippe,
&c. wooden pegs.

Escalár, to scale by ladders, to climbe, to
scale fishes, or to scrape off their scales.

* Escaldádo, scalded with hot water.

* Escaldár, to scald with hot water.

esCalentadór, m.a warming pan.

esCalentamiénto, warming.

esCalentár, yo esCaliénto, to warme,
to waxe warme, to make warme.

Escalera, a paire of staires or greeses.

* esCaliente, esCaliénto, vide esCa­
lentár. 

Escalón, m.a step or greese of a paire of
staires.

Escáma, f. a scale of fish or such like.

* Escamádo, m.scaled, the scales being
scraped off.

Escamadúra, f. scaling or scraping off the
scales.

Escamár, to scale or get off the scales of
fish, &c.

* Escambrónas, vide Escambrónes. 

* Escambronéra, f. a kinde of bramble.

Escambrónes, a kinde of white bramble.

Escambróso, vide Escabróso, rugged, 
rough, froward, &c.

Escamóchos, m.fragments, broken meat,
leauings, orts.

Escamondár, to shaue, to make cleane.

Escamonéa, f. scammonie, the iuice of an
herbe vsed to purge choler with.

Escamóso, m.scalie, full of scales, that
beareth scales.

Escampár, to escape, to get away.

* Escáncia, f. skinking, filling of pots,
glasses or cups to drinke out of.

Escanciáno, m.a skinker, a filler of pots,
cups or glasses to drinke out of, a keeper
of the cupboord.

Escanciár, to skinke, to fill out flagons
or great pots, glasses, cups or cruses to
drinke in, to keepe the cupboord of plate.

* Escandelár, a cabbin in the middest of
a galley so called.

Escandalizár, to offend, to giue cause of
offence.

Escandalo, m.an offence, a scandall, a
cause of offence giuen.

Escándia, f. a kinde of fine wheate.

Escantilizár, vide Escandalizár. 

Escáño, or bánco, a bench.

Escantár, vide enCantír. 

Escapár, to escape, to get away.

* Escapulário de fráyle, a friers vpper
attire which hangeth downe loose halfe
behinde and halfe before to the feete. In
Oxford they call it a habite, which is
an vpper attire in that fashion worne
on schollers gownes.

Escáques, m.checker worke of diuers co­
lours as the chesse boord or such like.

* Escaqueár, to play at chesse.

* Escarabájo, vide Escaravájo. 

Escaramúça, f. a skirmish.

Escaramuçár, to skirmish.

Escaramúgos, a kinde of shell woorme
breeding on rocks, and on the sides of
ships, being sharpe toward the top, lym­
pins.

Escaramújo, wilde eglantine, dogbram­
ble.

* Escaravegeár, to scribble in writing.

* Escaravájo, m.a beetle flie, a dore flie
that delighteth in dung.

* Escarbádo, vide Escarvádo, scraped,
scratched.

* Escarbár, vide Escarvár, to scrape, to
scratch.

* Escarcéla, f. a satchell, a powch, a bag.

* Escarcelár, to put in a satchel or powch.

* Escarcelón, m.a pouch, a scrip, a purse.

* Escárcha, f. driuen small snowe.

* Escarchádo, m.driuen as beaten snow.

* Escardadór, m.a raker, a weeder, a
harrower.

* Escardadúra, f. a raking, a weeding, a
harrowing.

* Escardár, to rake, to weede corne, to
weede a garden, to harrow.

* Escárdas, f. weedes that they take out
of the corne or wheate.

* Escardílla, a little rake, a little weede­
hooke.

Escardillo, a rake, a weede-hooke.

Escarlatín, m.scarlet die, graine where­
with cloth is died in graine, scarlet in
graine.

Escarmentádo, m.afraid, warned, scar­
red.

Escarmentár, yo Escarmiénto, to af­
fraie, to admonish, to warne, to skarre.

* Escarmiénto, m.a warning, a scarring,
affraying.

* Escarmiénto, Escarmiénte, vide Escarmentár. 

Escarnecedór, m.a mocker, a scoffer, a
scorner.

Escarnecér, or Escarnescér, to scoffe, to
scorne, to abuse, to deride.

Escarnecído, m.scorned, derided, moc­
ked, abused, flouted at.

Escarnecimiénto, m.mocking, ieering, r
flouting, deriding, skorning.

* Escarnidór, m.a mocker, a scoffer.

Escarnidór de água, an hower-glasse
that runneth with water.

* Escarnído, vide Escarnecído. 

Escárnio, or Escarnescimiénto, skor­
ning, flouting, mcking, gibing, iesting
at Imagerie worke.

* Escárpia, f. a hooke, a tenter hooke.

Escarpin, m.a socke to weare on the
foote, or pumpes.

* Escarpínes, pumpes or sockes.

Escarvadiéntes, a tooth picker, a tooth
scraper.

Escarvadór, Rasadór, or Raspadór, a
shoomakers cutting knife.

Escarvadúra, f. scraping, scratching.

Escarvageár, to scribble, to write ragged­
lie.

Escarva-oréjas, an eare-picker.

Escarvár, to scrape, to scratch.

* Escarvidór, or Hurta-água, a wate­
ring pot full of holes vsed to water gar­
dens.

* Escaséza, vide Escasséza, niggardli­
nes, &c.

Escassaménte, sparingly, neerely, coue­
tously, niggardly.

Escasséza, f. sparingnes, neernes, couetous­
nes, niggardlines.

Escásso, or Escáso, neere, sparing, coue­
tous.

Escatinár, vide çaherír, to ieere or floute
at.

Escáva de árboles, laying open of trees
about the roote.

Escavádo árbol, a tree digged about the
roote and laied open, to make it mre
fruitfull.

Escavár árboles, to lay trees open a­
bout the rootes.

* Escavéche, pickle or brine for fish.

* Escavél, vide Escabél. 

* Escedír, to exceede, to surpasse, to sur­
mount, to excell.

* Eschálmo, m.a round peece of timber
whereto the oares are tied.

* Eschár, vide Echár en galéra, to con­
demne to the galleies.

* Eschiuma de pláta, skum or drosse of





siluer.

Esclarecér, to be famous, to be cleere, to
be manifest.

Esclarecído, m.famous, cleere, renow­
med.

Esclarecimiénto, m.fame, renowme,
cleerenes, excellencie, nobilitie, estima­
tin, perspicuitie.

* Esclarimiénto, m.Amber.

Esclavína, f. a satchell, a pouch, or a kinde
of garment, which Pilgrimes vse to
wander with and put their prouision
in.

* Esclavitúd, f. bondage, servitude.

Esclávo, m.a slaue, a bondman.

* Esclavónia, f. the countrey called Sla­
uonia.

* Esclúsa, a flood-gate.

Escluýdo, m.shut out, excluded, debar­
red.

* Escluymiénto, m.shutting out, exclu­
ding.

Escluýr, to shut out, to exclude, to reiect, to
debar.

Escóba, f. a beesome, a brush, a rubber.

* Escobádo, m.brushed, rubbed, swept.

Escobájo de úvas, the stalke of grapes
or that stalke from which the grapes
are plucked.

Escobár, to brush, to rub, to sweepe.

Escobílla, f. drosse, filings or parings of
mettall, a little beesome, a brush.

* Escobréro, vide Escobéro, m.a broom­
man.

* Escoçér, to vexe, to greeue, to smart as
a lash or ierke doth.

* Escocés, m.a Scottish man.

Escóda, f. a masons toole to square stones
with.

Escodár, or dolár piedras, to square or
plane stones, to cut stones.

* Escodilla, f. a porrenger.

* Escodriñádo, m.discussed, searched
out.

* Escodriñadúra, f. searching out, a dis­
cussing.

* Escodriñamiénto, m.idem. 

* Escodriñár, to discusse, to search out.

Escósia, f. a coife for to weare on the
head.

Escosiéta, f. a little coife.

† Escosína, f. a shauing knife, a filing
toole.

* Escosína de Quéso, a scraping knife
to scrape cheese.

Escosión, m. a coife for the head.

* Escóga, or Escója, vide Escogér. 

Escogér, yo Escójo, to choose out, to take
choise.

* Escogér, choise, election.

Escogído, m.chosen, the choise.

Escogimiénto, m.choosing, electing, ta­
king choise.

* Escója, or Escóga, vide Escogér. 

* Escojér, to take choise, to choose out.

Escolár, m.a scholler, a student, one that
learneth.

* Escolárse, to slide or slip away.

Escolástico, m.of or pertaining to a
schller or schoole, a student or scholler,
a schoolemaster.

* Escóllo, m.a rocke in the sea.

Escólta, a convoye.

* Escoltár, to serue as convoye, to conduct
or convoye any thing in warre.

* Escombrádo, m.cleansed, purged.

Escombrár, to make cleane, to purge, to
cleanse.

Escomeárse, to let the vryne passe with­
out being able to stay it.

* Escondedíjo, m.a lurking corner.

Escondér, to hide, to couer, to keepe close.

Escondidaménte, secretly, priuily, with­
out being seen.

* a Escondídas, priuily, secretly.

Escondidíjo, a lurking corner, a place to
lie hid in.

Escondído, m.hidden, kept close, out of
sight.

Escondimiénto, m.hyding, keeping close,
lurking in a corner.

* Escondízo, a corner to lurke or to hide
himself in.

* Escondríja, f. vide Escondríjo. 

* Escondrijón, m.a lurking place, a hy­
ding hoale.

Escondríjo, m.a lurking place, a corner to
keepe himself in secret from being seen.

* Escopéta, f. a peece with a snap-hans or
firelock, a gunshot, a fowling peece.

* Escopetázo, m.a shot or blow with a
gun, or fowling peece.

* Escopetéro, m.a gunner, one that shoo­
teth in a peece.

Escopetína, f. spittle.

* Escopidúra, f. spittle. Also Dandraffe
in the head.

Escopír, to spit, to sweat.

Escopleár, to scratch, to claw, to plaine
with a playning toole.

Escóplo, m.a scraping toole, a plaine for a
carpenter.

Escórche en la pintúra, the first
draught or line that painters draw.

Escória, f. drosse of any mettall, trash or
trumperie.

* Escoriál, a place where drosse of mettall
is put.

Escorpión, m.a scorpion, or an instru­
ment in war vsed among the Romanes, a scorpion.

* Escosión, vide, Escofión. 

* Escóta, f. a coard in a shippe called the
sheate wherewith they hoyse or let
downe the sayle.

Escotadúra, f. paying a shot or reckoning.

Escotár, to pay the shot, to discharge a
reckoning.

Escóte, m.a shot or reckoning.

* Escotilla, vide Escotillón. 

* Escotillón, m.a hoale in a hatch of a
ship, to goe downe into the ship. Also
the hatch it selfe.

* Escóva, vide Escóba. 

* Escovár, vide Escobár. 

* Escoveta, f. vide Escobilla. 

* Escovílla, vide Escobilla. 

* Escozér, or Escoçér, to grieue, to
smart, or very much to paine, as a
wound smarting with sharpe corosiues
or medicines, or as the blow or lash of a
whip.

* Escozído, m.gauled, grieued with
smarting of a wound or lash of a whip.

* Escozióte, it hath gauled thee, it toucht
thee, it made thee smart.

Escozimiénto, m.a smarting as wound
or lash with a whippe. Also a disease
when one cannot make water but his
vrine smarteth and tormenteth him.

* Escozón, idem. 

* Escreméntos, or Excreméntos, m.excrements, as vrine, ordure, sweate,
spittle, &c.

Escrevír, yo Escrivo, to write.

* Escríba, m.a writer, a scriuener, a no­
tarie, a clerke. Also a scribe among the
Iewes.

* Escribáno, vide Escriváno, m.a nota­
rie, a clerke, a purser of a ship.

* Escribír, vide Escrevir, to write.

Escríño, m.a deske, a casket.

Escrípto, vide Escríto, m.a writing.

Escriptór, or Escritór, m.a writer.

* Escriptório, vide Escritório, m.

* Escrito, m.written.

* Escríto atras, written backward.

Escritór, vide Escriptór, m.a writer.

Escritório, or Escriptório, m.a deske to
write on. Also a scriueners shop.

Escritúra, or Escriptúra, f. writing,
scripture.

Escrivanía, f. a writers trade, a pen and
inkhorne, carrying of letters.

Escriváno, m.a scriuener, a notarie, a
clerke, a carrier of letters, a stario­
ner.

* Escriváno de camara, a secretarie.

* Escríve, Escrívo, vide Escrevír. 

* Escrúpulo, m.a doubtfull point, a scru­
ple, a matter of doubt.

Escuchadór, m.a watchman, a Sentinell
in warre.

* Escúcha, or Centinéla, f. a Sentinell or
watchman that keepeth due watch in
the night, a skoute.

Escuchár, to harken, to keepe watch by
night.

* Escuchádo, m.harkened vnto.





Escudádo, m.a targettier, one armed
with a shield.

Escudár, to arme with a target, to de­
fend with a shield.

Escudéro, m.an esquire, a seruingman
that waites on a ladie or gentlewo­
man, in Spaine neuer but olde men
and grey beards.

* Escudéte, m.a little field. Also they
say, Enxerír de escudéte, to graft and
cut the stocke after the fashion of a lit­
tle shield.

Escudéte, a water lillie.

Escudilla, a dish for meate, the scale of a
ballance, a porrenger.

* Escudillár la ólla, to take out all the
pottage and meate in the pot.

Escúdo, m.a target, a shield, a french
crowne, a peece of 12. rials wanting
one quartillo, being in value English,
fiue shillings ten pence hapenie.  Also a
scutchion of armes.

Escudriñadór, m.a searcher, an inquisi­
tor, a discusser of matters.

Escudriñár, to search, to enquire diligent­
ly, to discusse out matters, to seeke to
the vttermost.

Escuéla, f. a schoole.

Escuérço, m. a toade.

Esculpído, m.graued, carued.

Esculpidór, m. a grauer, a caruer.

Esculpidúra, f. grauing, caruing.

Esculpír, to carue, to graue.

* Escúma, f. vide Espúma, skum, froath,
foame.

* Escupíto, m. spitten out.

Escupidór, m.a spitter, one that vseth
spitting.

Escupír, or Escopír, to spit.

Escúra, or Escuraménte, darkly, ob­
surely, so as it cannot be vnderstood.

Escuraménte, vide Escura. 

* Escurás, as a Escúras, darkling, by
darke.

Escurecér, or Escurescér, to darken, to
make obscure.

Escurecído, or Escurescído, m.darke­
ned, obscured.

Escurecimiénto, m.darkning, obscuring.

* Escuriál, m.a village in new Castile in
Spaine, where king Philip the second
built a monasterie or abbey for friers
of the order of S. Ierome, the most fa­
mous for building and greatnesse in
Christendome.

* Escuribánda, vide Escurribánda. 

Escuridád, or Escuredád, f. darknesse,
obscuritie, hardnesse to be vnderstood.

Escúro, or Obscúro, obscure, darke, not
easie to be vnderstood, hard to be per­
ceiued.

Escurribánda, f. a sudden assault, a run­
ning thoroughout all.

Escurridúras, f. broken drinke, the drop­
ping of the tap, the leauings of cups.

Escurrír, to run out.

Escúsa, f. an excuse, a cause alleged why.

Escusáble, excusable, that may be ex­
cused.

Escusación, f. an excuse, a reason allea­
ged why, a priuilege to the contrarie, a
defence of a matter.

Escusádo, m.excused, set free, defended.
Also in vaine, to no purpose.

* Escusadór, m.one that excuseth, one
that defendeth or sheweth a reason
why.

Escusadóra cósa, a matter that may be
excused.

Escusár, to excuse, to answere for, to shew
a reason why, to defend, to discharge
from.

Escuzádo, vide Escusádo. 

Esecución, or Esecusión, f. execution,
putting of a thing in practise.

Esecutár, to execute, to doe, to accomplish,
to bring to passe, to reuenge, to prose­
cute, to punish.

Esecutór, m.he that doth execute or put
in practise, he that accomplisheth or
punisheth.

Esención, f. exemption, freedome, outset­
ting.

* Esentár, to excuse, to free, to exempt, to
quit, to exclude, to outset.

Esénto, m.exempt, free, outset.

Eséquias, f. a funerall, rites or customes
vsuall to a buriall.

* Esféra, or Esphéra, f. the sphere or round
circumference.

* Esfiláta, as Corrér a la esfiláta, to run
out of order, to run at ones owne liber­
tie without rule or gouernment.

Esforçadaménte, valiantly, strongly, by
might and maine.

Esforçádo, m.valiant, stout, strong.

Esforçár, yo Esfuérço, to inforce, to en­
courage, to set on, to take courage, to
aduenture boldly, to doe his best.

* esFuerçe, esFuérço, vide Esforçár. 

esFuérço, m.courage, valor, stoutnesse of
minde, strength.

* esGotádo, m.emptied, drawen out
drop by drop.

* esGotamiénto, m.emptying, drawing
out euery drop, pumping out of water.

* esGotár, to emptie, to draw out water,
to draw out euery drop, to pumpe out
water.

Esgremír, yo Esgrímo, to fence, to flou­
rish a weapon, to play at cudgels or
bucklers.

Esgríma, f. fence-play, flourishing or
brandishing of a weapon.

* maestro de Esgríma, a master of fence.

Esgríme, Esgrémo, vide Esgremir. 

Esgrimidór, m.a fencer, one that can
handle a weapon skilfully.

Esgrimadúra, skill in fence, flourishing of
a weapon, playing at cudgels.

* Esguazár, to draine or drawe water
from any boggie or marrish place.

* Esguázo, m.the draining or drawing
of water from a bogge or marrish
ground.

* Esguizaro, m.a people in Germanie
called Switzers.

* Esípula, a disease called the mumps.

* Esipuládo, mumpsicke.

† Eslabón, or Eslavón, m.a steele to 
strke fire with. also the swiuell or linke
of a chaine.

† Eslabón de cadéna, the linke or swi­
uell of a chaine.

Eslabón de pedernál, a steele to strike
fire with.

* Eslavón vide Eslabón. 

Esmaltádo, m.enameled.

Esmaltár, to enamell.

Esmálte, m.enamell.

Esmerádo, m.neate, fine, trick and trim.

Esmerálda, f. a pretious stone called an e­
merald.

Esmerárse, to be neate, to be fine, or hand­
some, to beare themselues worthily or
valiantly.

Esmerejón, m.a small hawke called a 
merlin.

Esmeríl, a gun or piece called a base.

Esmeriláça, vide Esmeriláço. 

* Esmeriláço, m.the stroake or blow of
artillery called bases.

* Esmerilázo, m.the blow or stroake of a
piece called a base.

* Esmeralízo, vide Esmerilázo. 

* Esmirel, a kind of artillery, to the byg­
nes of an harquebus de croc called a base.

* Esortación, vide Exortación. 

* Esortár, vide Exortár to exhorte.

Espaciárse, to walke, to take the ayre.

Espácio, m.space, time, leysure.

* tan de Espácio, so leysurely.

Espacióso, m.large, at length, broad, slow.

Espáda, f. a sword, a rapier.

Espáda négra, a foyle, such as in fence
schooles they vse.

Espadádo, m.girt with a sword.

Espadáña, f. an herbe called cats tayle,
flags.

Espadár líno, to card flax, to hackle flax.

Espadárte, a swordfish.

Espadéro, m.a cutler, one that maketh
swords.

Espálda, f. a shoulder.

* Espálda de montón, a shoulder of
mutton.

Espálda de balvárte, the backe part of a
bulwarke.

* Espaldarázos, m.beating about the





shoulders with a swords being in the 
scabbard.

Espaldár, to shoulder, to thrust, to iustle.
Also the backe of a chaire, the backe of
a corslet.

* Espaldáres, m.the backe or hinder parts
of a corslet. Also the backe of a chaire.

Espáldas, the shoulders. Also the backe
part of a house.

* Espaldercétes, pouldrons of a corslet.

* Espaldéres, the hindermost rowers in a
galley.

Espaldúdo, m.broad shouldered.

Espamár, vide Espasinár. 

* Espáña, or Hespáña, f. the countrey called
Spaine.

* Españól, m.a Spanyard.

* Españoládo, m.made spanish, becom as
a spaniard.

Espantáble, fearfull, terrible, horrible.

Espantadízo, m.one that is fearfull or ti­
merous.

Espantádo, afrayd, terryfied, wondering.

Espantájo, m.fright, feare, skarring, a
wnder, a bugbeare, a thing set vp in
corne to feare awaie the crowes.

* Espantalóbo, an herbe called skarre
woolfe.

* Espantádo, admired, astonished, won­
dered, skarred, afrighted.

Espantár, to affray, astonish, skarre, to
wonder.

Espantosaménte, fearfully, dreadfully
terribly, wonderfully.

Espantóso, m.terrible, dreadfull, fearfull.

Espanzimiénto, m.sprinkling, or
spotting.

Espanzír, to sprinkle, to spot.

* Esparcído, m.scattered or spread a­
broad, sprinckeled.

* Esparcir, to scatter, or spread abroad, to
sprinckle.

Espárrago, m. sperage, an herbe.

Esparraguéra, f. the stalke of sperage.

Esparténa, f. a shooe made of a kinde of
small wickers or of bent.

Espartéro, a basket maker, a maker of
frailes.

Espárto, a small kinde of broome or wicker
whereof they vse to make frailes, Bent­
grasse, Spanish broome.

Esparzidaménte, scatteringly, here and
there, all abroad.

Esparzído, m.sprinckled, scattered, spread
abroad.

Esparzídor, m.one that scattereth abroad
or sprinckleth.

Esparzimiénto, m.sprinckling, scattering,
spreading abroad.

Esparzír, to sprinkle, to scatter, to spread
broad.

* Espasmár, to be astonished, to be ama­
zed.

* Espásmo, m.amazednes, astonish­
ment.

* Espátula, f. the shoulder blade, a voiding
knife, or slice to take crums and other
things from the table. an Apothecaries
slice.

* Espaventóso, Espaventózo, vide Es­
pantóso, fearefull, terrible, dreadfull,
hideous, monstrous.

* Espavillár, to snuffe the candle.

* Espavorecér, or Espavrescér, to be­
gin to feare.

* Espavorecído, m.skarred, feared.

* Especería, f. spicerie.

Espécia, f. spice, or spicerie.

Especiál, speciall, chiefe, principall.

Especialménte, chiefly, principally, espe­
cially.

* Espécias, spices.

Espécie, f. a kinde, a sort, a manner.

Especiería, a place where spices are sold
or kept.

Especiéro, m.a Grocer, a seller of spice, a
keeper of the spicerie.

Espectáculo, m.a spectacle, a thing to be
seene or looked vpon.

Especulación, f. beholding of some thing,
contemplation, speculation, espying.

Especulár, to espie, to contemplate, to be­
hold.

Especulatívo, m.contemplatiue, giuen to
meditation.

Espedimiénto, m.deliuerie, expedition,
dispatch, quicke riddance.

Espedír, yo Espido, to deliuer, to di­
spatch, to make expedition or quicke
riddance.

* Espejádo, m.a thing as cleere as a loo­
king glasse.

Espejár, to looke in a glasse, to vse for to
behold himselfe in a glasse, to be as cleer
as a looking glasse.

Espéjo, m.a looking glasse.

Espejuélos, vide Antójos, spectacles.

* Espelár, vide Espelir, to expell, put or
thrust out.

* Espelír, vide Expelír, to expell.

* Espelón, the nose or snoute of a ship or
galley.

† Espélta, f. beere corne.

Espelúnca, f. a caue, a den.

Espeluzádo, m.full of bristles, frighted so
as his haire standeth vpright.

esPeluzamiénto, m.standing of the
haire staring vpright, taking away of
haire.

esPeluzárse, to be frighted that the haire
standeth vpright, to set vp the bri­
stles.

esPelúzos, m.the haire standing vpright,
shaking fits.

* Espendér, to spend, to waste.

* Espendido, m.spent, wasted.

* Espéques, m.woodden leauers to lift
great burthens withall.

* Espéra, a demur.

Espéra, Esféra, or Esphéra, f. a spheare, a
circle, a bowle, a roundell, a figure in
all partes round.

Esperánça, f. hope, trust, expectation,
wayting for a good turne.

Esperár, to hope, to look for, to stay, to ex­
pect, to waite for.

esPerezárse, to stretch out the bodie, to
straine or retch out himselfe at lenght
with lazines.

esPerézo, m.the retching or stretching
out of all the parts of the body with la­
zines.

Espérico, m.round as a sphere.

Esperiéncia, f. experience, tryall.

Esperimentádo, m.tried, found by expe­
rience.

Esperimentár, to prooue by experience, to
finde by tryall that it is so.

Esperiménto, m.an experiment, a triall
made.

* Esperón, m.the nose or snowte of a ship
or gallie.

* Esperónte, a kinde of bulwarke in for­
tification.

* Espérto, vide Expérto. 

Espessádo, m.thickened, close togither.

Espessaménte, thickly, oftentimes.

Espessár, to make thicke, to set close togi­
ther.

Espésso, m.thicke, often, close togither.

Espessúra, f. thicknes.

Espetár, to put meate on the spit.

* Esphéra, or Esféra, a spheare.

Espía, f. a spie, a scoute.

Espiár, to spie out, to watch who commeth.

Espíca nardi, spikenard, a plant so called.

* Espíde, Espído, vide Espedír. 

Espíga, f. an eare of corne.

* Espíga para enxerír, a sion or grasse.

* Espigadéra, a gleaner after haruest.

* Espigádo, m.grown to an eare of corne,
bearded like corne.

* Espigasíl, vide Espíca nardi. 

Espigár, t growe to an eare, to gather
eares of corne, to gleane, to leaze and
gleane corne after the haruest is done.

Espigon, m.an eare of corne.

* Espigón de ájo, a head of garlicke.

Espigón de cabéça de ájos, a cloue of
garlicke.

Espína, f. a thorne, a fish bone.

* Espína de Majuélas, a barberrie bush.

Espína blánca, a white thorne.

† Espináca, spinage an vsuall herbe.

* Espinádo, m.done or hurt with pricks or
thornes.

Espinál, a thorne bush, or a place where





thornes growe.

Espinár, to pricke like a thorne.

Espinázo de animal, the ridge bone of
the backe of any living creature.

* Espingárde, a harquebusse in the Por­
tingale toong.

Espingardéro, vide Arcabuzéro. 

Espinilla, the shinbone or small bone of
the shin.

Espíno, m.a bullasse tree, a sloe tree.

Espíno majuélo, a hawthorne tree.

Espinóso, thornie, prickly.

* Espión, m.a spie.

Espiradéro, m.a breathing place, a place
to fetch winde at.

Espirár, to breath, to fetch his winde.

Espíritu, m.the breath, the spirit, the
ghost.

Espirituál, spirituall, ghostly.

Espiritualménte, spiritually.

* Espitál, vide Ospitál, an hospitall, a
spittle.

* Esplanáda, as hazér esplanáda, to ex­
plaine, to make plaine to be vnder­
stood.

* Esplanár, to make plaine, to set out at
large or plainly.

* Esplendidaménte, sumptuously, rich­
ly, stately, magnificently.

* Esplendidéza, f. statelinesse, magnifi­
cence, pompe, sumptuousnesse, riches.

* Espléndido, m.pompous, stately, sump­
tuous, magnificent, rich, costly.

* Esplendór, m.a goodly shew, bright shi­
ning, glistering.

Espliéga, f. a kinde of sweete herbe called
spikenard.

* Espliégo, idem. 

Espoláda, f. a stroke with a spur, a spur­
gaule.

* Espoleádo, m. striken with a spur, spur­
gauled.

* Espoleándo, striking with the spur,
spur-gauling.

Espoleár, to spurgaule, to strike with the
spur.

Espolón, m.a cocks spur. Also a certaine
sort called a spur.

* Espondil, a wherle of a spindle, the
white hard thing that sticketh to the
shell of an oister, a great round oister.

* Esponér, vide Exponér, to lay or put
out to hazard, to expound.

Espónja, f. a sponge.

Espónja piédra, a pumice stone.

Esponjadúra, f. rubbing with a pumice,
pumysing.

Esponjár, to spunge, to doo with a pumice
stone.

Esponjóso, m.spungie, full of holes, hol­
low.

* Espontaniaménte, voluntarily, of ones
owne accord.

Esportica, f. a little basket, a small pan­
nier.

Esportílla, idem. 

* Esportilléro, m.a basket maker, a por­
ter that carrieth baskets or burdens.

* Espósa, f. a bride.

Espósas, f. fetters, manicles, shackles or
gieues for prisoners.

Espóso, m.a bridegroome, a spouse.

Espremír, yo Esprímo, to expresse, to
presse or wring out, to set out at large,
to get out by force.

* Espríme, esprímo, vide Espremír. 

Espuéla, f. a spar.

* Espuéla para el yélo, an iron stirrup
or shoo to slide on the ice with, vsed of
the Dutchmen.

* móço de Espuélas, a lackey, a foote­
man.

Espuérta, f. a basket, a maund, a pannier,
a flasket.

* Espuésto, m.set out or abroad, in dan­
ger, open to all chaunces. Also expoun­
ded, declared.

* Espugnádo, m.woon by assault, con­
quered, ouercomed by force.

* Espugnár, to win by assault or by force,
to conquer, to ouercome.

* Espulgádo, m.rid from fleas, fleaed,
lowsed.

Espulgár, Præs. yo Espúlgo, 1. Præt. yo
Espulgué, to ride cleere from fleas.

* Espulgue, vide Espulgár. 

Espúma, f. fome, froth, scum.

* Espumádo, m.scummed, the fome or
froth being taken away.

* Espumájo, m.vide Espúma. 

* Espumajóso, m.full of scum, frothie, ful
of fome.

Espumár, to scum, to fome, to take off the
froth.

* Espumílla, f. a kinde of fine white ci­
pers or linnen that women in Spaine
weare on their heads.

Espumóso, frothie, scummie, full of fome.

Espúra, f. water or other liquor that is
cleere.

Esquádra, f. a carpenters squire. a squa­
drn of 25. soldiers.

Esquadrón, m.a squadron of soldiers of
the whole armie, a great squadron.

* Esquámas, f. scales of fish or any other
thing.

Esquéro, m.a bag to tarrie baite for fish.

* Esquesíto, m.exquisite, notable.

* Esquifádo, m.made ready as a boate or
skiffe to row or to bunch.

Esquife, m.a cockboate, a skiffe or small
boate to go in fresh riuers.

* Esquíla, f. a little bell, a sacring bell.

Esquiléncia, f. a disease in the throte cal­
led the quincie.

Esquiléta, f. a small bell, a saunce bell.

* Esquilla, f. a sacring bell.

* Esquilmádo, hauing taken or gathered
the fruit of his vineyard, corne or cat­
tell.

Esquilmár, to take or gather the fruit of
his vineyard, corne or cattell.

Esquílmo, m.the fruit or profite of any
cattell, or of land or vineyard.

Esquílo, m.a squirrell.

* Esquilón, m.a great sacring bell.

Esquina, f. a corner.

Esquinádo, m.cornered, made with cor­
ners. Also cleansed.

Esquinár pája, to cleanse corne from
chaffe by casting it against the winde,
to winnow corne. Also to make corners.

Esquináncia, or esquiléncia, f. a disease
called the squinance or the Queenes
euill.

* Esquitár, to quit ones selfe, to be quit or
euen with one.

Esquivaménte, squeamishly, disdainful­
ly, scornefully, proudly, stately.

Esquivár, to shun, to auoide, to eschew, to
be stately or coy.

Esquivéza, f. squeamishnes, statelinesse,
coyishnes, shunning, auoyding.

Esquividád, idem. 

Esquívo, m.squeamish, coy, stately, dis­
dainfull.

Essa, she.

Esse, he.

Esséncia, f. being.

Essénto, m.free, exempt.

Esso, that, it.

* Essótro, id est, esso otro, this other.

* Ésta, this.

* Está, it is, it standeth, he is, he standeth.

* Ésta cósa, this thing.

Estáble, stable, firme, stedfast, certaine.

Establecér, or Establescér, to establish,
to confirme.

Establecído, m.established, confirmed.

Establecimiénto, m.establishing, confir­
mation.

estableménte, firmely, stedfastly, con­
stantly.

Establerízo, m.a horse keeper, a keeper of
an oxe stalle, also a horse stabled or
standing at stable.

Estáblo, m.a stable, a stall, a house to
keepe cattell in.

Estáca, f. a stake, a stocke to grasse on, a
pale, a racke whereat horses eate hay.

Estáca, para plantár, a stock to grasse on.

Estacáda, f. a place full of stocks to grasse
on, or listes to fight in.

Estacádo, m.set on a stake, tied to a­
stake, put into the listes to fight.

* Estación, f. the being in a place. Also the
going from one church to another, in
remembrance of Christes being or re­
maning so long on mount Caluary, so





long in the garden, so long on the crosse,
so long in the sepulchre.

* Estáda, f. a tarrying, a staying.

Estadál, a measure of eleuen foote long.

* Estádio, m. a certaine measure of ground
a race to run.

Estádo, m.estate, condition, degree, sta­
ture.

* estádo de água, m.water of the depth
of a man.

* Estáfa, a sturdines, a begging with a
commaund as sturdie rogues vse.  Also
sometimes vsed for Estribo, a stirrup.

Estafár, to begge in the imperatiue moode,
t begge with a commaund, as sturdie
beggers, and rogues doe, to robbe.

Estai, or Estay, a coard in a ship, called the
stay.

Establár, to cracke, to burst, or breake in
sunder.

Estallído, m.the crack or noise of a gunshot
or noyse of breaking any thing.

* Estambrádo, made of yarn.

* † Estambrár, to make with yarne or
woosted.

† Estámbre, m.a web of yarne, woosted
yarne.

* Estaméña, f. a kind of kersey cloath.

Estamenéa, lynsey, woolsey.

* Estámpa, f. a print, a stampe.

Estampádo, m.stamped, printed.

* Estampadór, m.a printer, oone that stam­
peth with puncheons, &c.

Estampár, to print, to stampe.

* Estampida, f. a noise of any thing, a
great crack.

Estança, f. a standing place, a meeting
place.

Estançár, Præs. yo Estánco, 1. Præt. yo
Estanqué, to stop, to stay, to stand stil as
water, to stop blood.

Estancárse el água, to stand as a poole of
water doth.

* Estáncia, f. a dwelling place, an abiding
place.

* Estánco, m.a command from the higher
powers or authoritie, to sell any thing
in a set place appointed, a restraint
from selling any thing elsewhere then
in the appointed place.

Estandárte, m.a standart.

* Estañádo, tinned within.

Estañár, to solder with tinne.

* Estañéro, m.a pewterer, a worker in
tinne.

Estáño, m.tinne.

* Estanque, vide Estancár. 

Estánque, m.a poole, a pond.

Estánque de péces, a fish pond.

Estantáles, props, vndershoarers, sup­
porters.

Estánte, standing.

* Estantigua, f. a hag, a hobgoblin.

Estár, Præs. Estóy, estás, está. 1. Præt.
Estúve, viste, estúvo, Fut. Estaré, rás,
rá. Sub. Præs. Esté. Imperfect. Estu­
viéra, estaria, or estuviésse. Fut. Estu­
viére, to be, to stand.

* Estár sobre sí, to be warie, to looke to
himselfe.

* Estaría, vide Estár. 

* Estátua, f. a statue, an image, the picture
or counterfait of any thing.

* Estatuádo, m.pourtrayed, pictured,
made into images.

Estatuário, m.an image maker, a maker
of counterfaites and pictures.

Estatúra, f. a stature.

Estatúto, m.a statute, an act of parlia­
ment, an edict, a decree.

* Estatuýr, to appoint, to ordaine.

Estavón, vide Eslavón. 

Éste, he, this.

* Esté, the Imperatiue moode of Estár,
let it stand, let it alone, let it be.

Estención, f. an extension or stretching
out.

Estendér, yo Estiéndo, to stretch out, to
bend out, to inlarge.

* Estendér el árco, to bend a bow.

* Estendidaménte, at length, largely, all
abroad.

Estendído, m.inlarged, stretched out.

Estendimiénto, m.stretching out, inlar­
ging.

* Estensívo, extending, or farre stret­
ching.

Esténso, or Exténso, m.inlarged, stret­
ched out.

Estentíno, m.vide Intestíno, the guts.

* Estépa, f. the holy rose, a flower so called.
Also a towne in Andulazia.

Estéra, f. a matte.

Estercoládo, m.dunged.

Estercolamiénto, m.dunging.

Estercolár, yo Estiercólo, to dung.

* Estercoléro, m.a dunger, one that car­
rieth or spreadeth dung.

* Estercolíno, m.a dunghill.

Estéril, barren, vnfruitfull.

Esterilidád, f. barrennes, vnfruitfulnes.

Esterlín colorádo, scarlet.

Esteriór, or Exteriór, exterior, outward.

Estéro, a salt marsh, a place where the
tide doth ebbe and flowe, a lake, a
poole.

Esterquéro, m.a dunghill.

Estéva, m.the plough handle, the plough
beame that the culter is in.

Estevádo, m.crooke-legged.

* Estévan, m.a proper name Stephen.

* Estibrár, vide Estribár. 

* Estiende, Estiéndo, vide Estendér. 

Estíercol, m.a dunghill.

* Estiercole, vide Estercolár. 

* Estígias infernáles, the lake called
Styx, which the Poets fayned to be near
hell, and that there the passage was ouer
to hell.

Estilár, t still water.

Estílo, a  stile in enditing.

* tenér por estílo, to be accustomed.

* buén estilo, a good custome, a good stile
of writing.

* Perdér el estilo, to grow out of vse or
custome.

Estima, f. estimation, value, price.

* Estimable, woorthie the estimation or
thinking on.

Estimación, vide Estima. 

Estimádo, m.esteemed, made account of
prised.

Estimadór, m.one that esteemeth, priseth
or valueth.

Estimár, to esteeme, to value, to price or
rate, to make account of.

* Estimulo, m.a pricke.

Estinco, m.a small kinde of fish called a
Smelt.

* Estinguír, vide Extinguír, to extin­
guish, to quench, to put out.

* Estinto, vide Extinto. 

Estío, m.summer.

* Estipulación, a solemne couenant.

Estirádo, m.vpright, drawen hard, stroa­
ked vp ani hoote or hose.

Estirádas cálças, hosen drawen and
striked vp smooth.

Estirár, to set vpright, to draw on close
and smooth.

Estirárse, to stroke or smooth vp himselfe,
to hang himselfe.

* Estirpár, vide Extirpár. 

* Estírpe, f. a stocke from whence one
sprung and had his originall.

* Estíva, f. straw to stuffe a thing with­
all.

Estivál, pertayning to summer, or stuffed
with straw.

* Estiváles, m.buskins or bootes.

* Estivár, to stuffe with straw.

* Ésto, this thing.

Estocáda, f. a stocada or thrust with a
weapon.

Estocadas dar, to stab, to thrust, to run in
with a weapon.

* Estófa, f. any stuffe for apparell.

Estóla, f. a stole, a roabe of honor, a wo­
mans gowne, a long vestment downe to
the heeles, any garment to couer the bo­
dy with.

* Estólido, m.foolish, dull witted.

Estoniagádo, m.angry, full of rage or in­
dignation.

Estomagárse, to stomack a matter, to be
angry, to rage at.

Estómago, the stomach, rage, wrath.

* Estónces, then, at that time.

Estópa, f. okam, or the hurdes of





towe, such as they vse in caulking of
ships. Sometimes tow.

Estopeño, m.belonging to tow.

* † Estoperál, a skowper.

* Estoperóles, m.nailes of yron to stop or
fasten the tow in caulking of ships.

* Estóque, m.a sword or rapier, a tucke
long and narrow.

Estóque yérva, an herbe called corne gla­
den, or corne flag.

* Estóra, vide Estéra. 

Estoráque, m. a sweete gum called Storax
vsed in incense.

* esTorcér, yo esTuérço, to wrest, to
wreath.

* Estorcimiénto, m.wresting, wrea­
thing.

† Estorníja de carro, the triggar of a
cart.

Estorníno, m.a birde called a Stare or
starling.

Estornudár, to neese.

Esternúdo, m.neesing.

Estorvár, to stop, to let, to trouble.

Estórvo, a  stop, a let, hinderance, impedi­
ment.

* Estótro, this other.

* Estoy, I am, or I stand, vide Estár.

Estraçár, to teare, to rent.

Estráço, m.tearing, renting.

* Estrada, f. a way, a streete.

* Estradióto, m.one that rideth long,
with his legs at large downe in the stir­
ruppe.

Estrádo, a cloath of estate with cushions
vsed of Princes and great nobles. Also
the cloath of the iudgement seat for the
iudges to sit on: this manner of Estrá­
do, almost euerie gentlemans wife in
Spaine hath, and vseth without sit­
ting on a stoole.

Estragádo, marred, wasted, spoiled.

* Estragadór, m.a killer, a murtherer, a
destroyer.

Estragamiénto, m.or Estrágo, spoile,
slaughter, murthering.

Estragár, Præs. yo Estrágo, 1. Præt. yo
Estragué, to spoile, to marre, to lay
waste.

Estrágo, m.a slaughter, a cruell murther,
a massacre.

* Estrague, vide Estragár. 

Estrangéro, m.a stranger, one of another
countrey, one but newly entertained.

* Estrañaménte, strangely, like a stran­
ger.

Estrañár, to estrange, to alienate.

Estrañéza, f. strangenes, being a stran­
ger.

Estrangúria, f. the strangurie, a disease
when one cannot auoide out his vrine.

* Estranjéro, m.or Estrangéro, a stranger.

Estráño, m.strange, of another countrey
or place, rare.

* Estrasládo, m.bred, borne, transfor­
med.

* Estratagéma, f. a stratagem, a wittie
shift or politike practise in war.

* Estráva, f. a woodcocke.

* Estravagánte, an extrauagant, by­
matter. A decree of the Pope so cal­
led.

Estrécha, or Estrechaménte, streightly,
narrowly, neerely.

Estrechár, to streighten, to make narrow,
to make streight, to bring to a neere
pinch.

* Estrechéza, f. streightnes, neerenes,
narrownes.

Estrécho, m.streight, neere, narrow. A
streight at sea.

* Estrécho de már, a streight or narrow
passage ouer sea.

Estrechúra, f. streightnes, narrownes.

Estregadéra, f. a currie-combe, a horse­
combe.

Estregár, yo Estriégo, to currie or combe
a horse.

Estrélla, f. a star.

Estrelláda, f. a starwoort or sharwoort.

Estrelládo, m.beset with stars.

* Estrelládos huévos, egs fried (without
beating together) as when they are
fried with collops or bacon.

Estrellár, to set with stars, to dash against
the wall in many peeces, to frie egs.

Estrelléro, m.an astronomer, one that
knoweth the seuerall constellations of
the stars, or one that looketh much a­
loft.

* Estremadaménte, extremely, to the
vttermost.

* Estremadissimo, m.most extreme.

Estremádo, m.extreme, passing, excee­
ding.

* Estremadúras, the borders.

* Estremárse, to be extreme, to exceede.

Estremecér, or Estremescér, to tremble,
to quake.

* Estremecído, vide Tembládo, trem­
bling.

Estrémo, m.extremitie, the last of the
beades, the latter time pasture toward
winter.

* Estrémo de cuéntas, the vttermost of
the reckoning, the last of the beades.

* Estrémo de dehéza, the latter time of
pasture feeding or comen towarde
winter.

* Estrémo de pláta, the last of the beades
commonly made of siluer.

Estréna, f. a new yeeres gift, handsell, or 
the first money taken.

Estrenár, to take handsell, to receiue a new
yeeres gift.

Estreñído, m.restrained, tied, bound in
his bodie, that cannot goe to stoole.

Estreñír, yo Estriño, to restraine, to tie.

* Estrépito, m.a noise.

* Estribadéro, m.one that endeuoreth or
doth his best, one that thrusteth with
his feete.

Estribadóra cósa, a matter to be labou­
red in.

Estribadúra, f. endeuoring, doing his best,
a thrusting or pushing hard with the 
feete.

Estribár, or Estrivár, to endeuor, to strain,
to doe his best, to thrust or push hard
with the feete.

Estribo, a prop to vnderset a house, a
stirrup.

Estribo, vide Estrívo. 

Estribórda, the right side of a ship called
the larboord.

* Estriego, Estriegue, vide Estregár. 

* Estriñe, Estriño, vide Estreñír, to re­
straine.

* Estrinseco, m.outward, externall, ex­
trinsecall.

* Estrivár, or Estribár, to endeuor, to doe
his best.

* Estriveráge, or Estriveráje, the iutties
of a wall to strengthen or hold vp a
house.

* Estriveránge, a place where many stir­
rups are.

* Estrívo, or Estríbo, a stirrup.

* Estropajóso, m. stumbling, full of stum­
bling.

* Estropeçádo, m.stumbled, offended,
troubled.

Estropeçár, yo Estropiéço, to stumble,
to offend or take cause of offence.

Estropeár, to racke with cordes, stret­
ched.

Estropiádo, m.racked with cords, stret­
ched.

* Estropiece, Estropiéço, vide Estrope­
çár, to stumble.

Estropiéço, m.stumbling.

Estruéndo, m.an vnquiet troublesome
noise.

* Estrugudór, vide Estragadór. 

Estrujar, or Apretár, to straine, to thrust.

* Estrupár vna vérgen, to deflowre a
maide.

* Estrúpo, m.whooredome, violating of
maides.

Estúche, m.a case or boxe of tooles for
surgeons, &c.

Estudiánte, a student, one that followeth
studie.

Estudiár, to studie, to setle his minde to
some thing.

Estúdio, m.studie, setling of his minde.

Estudiosaménte, studiously.

Estudióso, m.studious, industrious.





* Estuérçe, Estuerço, vide Estorcér. 

Estúfa, f. a stoue, a hoatehouse.

* Estúlcia, f. folly, foolerie.

* Estupéndo, horrible, monstrous, wonde­
rous.

* Estúpro, whoredome, rauishing of wo­
men.

* Estuvándo, vide Estrivándo or Estri­
vár. 

* Estúve, estuviéra, Estuviésse, Estúvo,
vide Estár. 


E T
* Etereogénas partes, parts of an other
kinde, contrary to omogénas pártes,
which are of one kinde.

* Etéreo, m.of the ayre, ayrie, fierie,
bright.

* Eternál, euerlasting, eternal.

Eternaménte, euerlastingly, eternally.

Eternidád, f. eternitie, euerlastingnes.

* Eternizádo, m.made eternall, or euer­
lasting.

Eternizár, to make euerlasting, to eter­
nise.

Etérno, euerlasting, eternall.

* Ethéreo, vide Etéreo. 

Éthico, or Ético, m.one that is sicke of a
consumption. Also belonging to morall
philosophie or manners.

* Ethimilogía, f. the etymologie or true
exposition or reason of words.

* Etrúsco, one of Tuscanie in Italie.


E V
* Evacuación, f. emptying, euacuation.

Evacuár, to emptie, to make voide.

Evangélio, m. the gospell, glad tidings.

Evangélico, m.belonging to the gospell,
or good tidings.

* Evangelizár, to preach the gospell, to
declare ioyfull tydings.

Evangelista, m.a preacher of the gospell,
a messenger of glad tidings.

Évano, m.Eben wood, sugar chest.

* Evaporación, f. an euaporating, a
steaming out.

* Evaporár, to euaporate, to steame out.

* Eucharistia, f. the sacrament of the
Lords supper.

Eufórbio, m.a certaine gum called Eu­
phorbe, found first by king Iuba, and
called by the name of his phisition Eu­
phorbius.

Eufrásia, f. an herbe called eiebright. Also
a proper name of women in Spaine.

* Evidénte, euident, cleere, out of que­
stion.

* Evitáble, that which may be auoided.

* Evitádo, m.shunned, eschewed.

* Evitár, to auoid, shun or eschew.

* Evólie, a voice that they vsed which
sacrificed to god Bacchus.

* Eunúco, m.an eunuch or gelded man.

* Eúphrates, one of the foure riuers that
come out of paradise.

* Eúro, m.the east winde.


E X
* Exaltación, f. an exaltation, a lifting
vp.

* Exaltár, to exalt, extoll, magnifie or lift
vp.

* Exasperár, to exasperate, to prouoke,
to egge on or to aggrauate.

Exámbre, m.vide Enxámbre, a swarme
of bees, a hiue of bees.

Exámen, m.an examination/

Examinación, idem. 

Examinadór, m.an examiner.

Examinár, to examine, to inquire, to trie.

Excedér, to exceede, to surpasse, to goe be­
yonde.

Exceléncia, f. excellencie, surpassing, sur­
mounting, preheminence.

Excelénte, excellent, passing great or
good. Also a peece of Spanish monie.

* Excessívo, m.exceeding, surpassing,
vnmeasurable.

* Excésso, m.excesse, too much.

* Exclamación, f. crying out, exclai­
ming.

* Exclamádo, m.cried out on.

* Excluýr, to exclude, to shut out, to de­
barre.

* Exclúso, m.excluded, debarred, shut
out.

* Excommunión, an excommunication.

* Excreméntos, m.excrement, the offal
comming superfluously from the body,
as the siege, vrine, sweate, choler, me­
lancholie, flegme, sniuell, &c. Also the
refuse of any thing.

† Éxe, or Héxe, the axletree of a cart,
waggon, &c.

Exéa, a spie, a scoute.

* Exeár, to play the scout or spie. Also to
driue away.

* Execráble, execrable, abhominable, de­
testable, blasphemous.

* Execrár, to execrate, to detest, to blas­
pheme, to curse.

* Execración, banning, cursing, execra­
tion.

* Executár, to put in execution.

* Executívo, executiue or to be put in
execution.

* Executór, a performer, an executor.

* Executoriál, a writ of execution.

* Executória cárta, a patent to giue no­
tice from the prince of the gentrie of
any one.

* Exegidéro, m.that which is t be exac­
ted, or required.

* Exegír, to exact, to driue vnto, to de­
maund importunately, to require.

* Exempción, f. discharge, riddance
from.

Exemplár, m.a patterne, an example, a
coppie of some thing to follow.

* Exemplár castígo, m.chastisement for
example of others.

* Exemplarménte, by way of example,
by shew.

* Exemplificación, f. exemplification.

Exemplificár, 1. Præs. yo Exemplifico.
1. Præt. Exmplifiqué, to exempli­
fie, or to set out at large, to discourse
vpon.

* Exemplifique, vide Exemplificár. 

Exémplo, m.an example, a shew, a pat­
terne, a coppie, a counterpane, an open
execution or punishment to feare o­
ther.

* Exémto, vide Essénto, exempted, pri­
vileged, chosen out, or taken away.

* Exénto, or Esénto, idem. 

* Exéquias, or Eséquias, funerals.

Exercicio, m.exercise, occupation, trade.

* Exercitádo, m.exercised, busied, im­
ploied, occupied.

Exercitadór, one that vseth exercise,
trade, or busines.

Exercitadóra cósa, a matter that re­
quireth busines, imployment or indu­
strie.

Exercitár, to exercise, to bee busie, to
stirre.

Exército, an armie or hoste of souldiers, a
campe.

* Exhaládo, drawne out, drawne vppe,
exhaled.

* Exhalár, to exhale, to drawe out, to 
drawe vp.

* Exhortádo, m.exhorted, counsailed,
admonished, encouraged.

* Exhortár, to exhort, to warne, to ad­
monish, to aduise, to counsell.

* Exído, m.a leasue for cattle to feede on,
pature, a medowe.

* Exigidéro, m.that is to be exacted, or
earnestly demaunded.

* Exigír, to exact, to get with much adoe,
to aske with great importunitie or ear­
nestnes.

* Exilio, m.banishment, exile, driuing
from his natiue soile.

* Eximído, exempted.

* Eximír, to exempt, to discharge, to re­
lease from, to rid out, to outset.

* Existéncia, being, presence.

* Exicráble, execrable, horrible, detesta­
ble.

* Exorár, to request earnestly.

* Exorbitánte, strange, woonderfull, ex­
traordinarie.





* Exorbitáncia, strangenes, extraordi­
narines.

* Exorcísta, m.a kinde of enchanter, or
coniurer.

* Exórdio, m.a preamble, a preface, or in­
troduction to a matter.

Exortación, f. an admonition, exhortati­
on, encouragement, aduise, or wishing
to a matter.

Exortadór, one that exhorteth, encou­
rageth, aduiseth, or wisheth to a mat­
ter.

Exortár, to admonish, exhort, encourage,
aduise, or wish to a thing.

* Exorrúpto, m.abrupt, preposterous.

* Expeçér, to fish out.

* Expelído, m.expelled, driuen out, bani­
shed.

* Expelír, to expell, to banish, to driue a­
way.

* Expérto, or Espérto, m.tried, approo­
ued, experienced.

* Exponedór, or Esponedór, m.an ex­
pounder, an interpretor, a setter out,
a layer out.

Exponér, or Esponér. Præs. Expóngo,
Expónes, Expóne. 1. Præt. Expúse,
Expusíste, Expúso. Fut. Expondré, or
Exporne, as, a. Sub Præs. Expónga.
Imperfect. Expusiéra, Expornía, or
Expusiésse. Fut. Expusiére, to ex­
pound, to interpret, to vnfold, to dis­
cusse, to set foorth, to set or lay out.

* exPónga, or esPónga, Expóngo vi­
de exPonér. 

* Expórne, or EsPorné, ExPornia, vide 
exPonér. 

* exPuésto, or esPuésto, m.expounded,
interpreted, vnfolded, set out, laide
out.

* Expugnádo, or Espugnádo, m.woon
by forde or assault.

* Expugnár, or Espugnár, to win by force,
or assault, to ouercome, to vanquish.

* exPuse, exPusiéra, exPusiésse, exPú­
so, vide exPonér. 

* Exquisito, or Esquisíto, exquisite, neat,
fine, excellently done.

* Extasís, an amazement, an astonish­
ment, an extasie, a quandarie, a trance.

* Extendér, vide Estendér. 

* Extensaménte, or Estensaménte, a­
broade at large.

* Exténso, vide Esténso, stretched out,
laide out at large.

* Exterminár, to driue or cast out, to ba­
nish, to destroy, to ouerthrowe vtterly,
to vndoo.

* Exteriór, vide Esteriór, outwarde, on
the outside.

* Extérno, outward, externall.

* Extinguir, to extinguish, to quench
to put out.

* Extínto, extinguished, put out.

* Extirpación, f. rooting out, plucking
vp by the rootes.

* Extirpár, to roote out, to plucke vp by
the rootes.

* Extorción, or Estorción, extorcion,
wrong, oppression.

Extrinsico, external, extrinsicall, out­
ward.

* Extravagántes, or Estravagántes, 
such as follow not common order.

* Extremadaménte, extreamely.

* Extremadissímo, or Estremadissi­
mo, m.most extreame, in the highest
degree.

Extremádo, or Estremádo, m.extreme,
the vttermost that maybe.

* Extrémo, or Estrémo, extreme, the vt­
termost, as much as may be.

* Exultár, to reioice, to leape, to triumph.



* Eýs, id est, aueýs, yee haue.



Ezquerdeár de camína, to go out of the
way, to go amisse.



F

* FÁbla, vide fábula, a tale, a fable.

* Fablár, vide Hablár, to speake, to
talke.

* Fabór, m. fauor, good liking.

* Fabrica, a frame, a building.

Fabricación, f. working or framing of a
thing, a building.

Fabricadaménte, cunningly, by due
forme, in frame.

Fabricádo, m.framed, wrought, forged.

Fabricadór, m.a framer, a workman, one
that plotteth thing, or forgeth or fashi­
oneth.

Fabricár, Præs. yo Fabríco, 1. Præt. yo
Fabriqué, to frame, to forge, to worke,
to fashion, to invent, to make, to builde.

* Fabrificádo, m.framed, &c. vide fa­
bricádo.

Fabrificár, vide Fabricár. 

* Fabríque, vide Fabricár. 

Fábula, f. a tale, a fable.

Fabulosaménte, like a fable, falsely, fey­
nedly, counterfaytly.

Fabulóso, fabulous, full of trifling tales,
tittle tattle, fainedly.

* Facción, f. a skirmish, an action.

Fácil, easie, light, gentle, easie to be plea­
sed, readie to be intreated, tractable,
soft, pleasant.

Facilidád, f. easines, gentlenes, tractable­
nes, softnes, pleasantnes, facilitie.

* Facilissimo, most easie, most light most
tractable.

Facilitár, to make easie, to make gentle, to
appease, to make tractable, to make
smooth, to expound.

Facilménte, easily, softly, gently, plain­
lie.

* Facimoróso, m.wicked, vngracious, ve­
rie naught, full of vices, leud, full of
mischiefe.

Fación, a maner, a custome, a fashion, ac­
tion.

Faciónes, conditions, manner, customes,
fashions.

* Fácto, m.a deed.

Facultád, f. facultie, abilitie, power, li­
cence, a qualitie, profession, &c.

* Facúndia, f. eloquence, sweete flowing
speech, rolling smooth talke, grace in
speaking.

* Facúndo, well spoken, eloquent flowing
in speech, hauing words at will.

* Faena, busines, any thing that a man
hath to doe, properly marriners worke
at sea.

* Fafarrón, vide Fanfarrón, a bragger, a
boaster.

* Fájas de cálças, vide Fáxas de cál­
ças. 

† Faísa, f. a kerchiefe, a wasteband, a swa­
thing band.

Faisán, vide Faysán, m.a phesant.

† Faisár, or Faysár, to wrap or tie with a
swathing band or such like.

* Falácia, falsehood, deceit, fraud, guile.

* Faláce, deceitfull, deceauing, false, frau­
dulent, guilefull.

* Falágio, a kinde of spider.

* Falánge, or Falánje, a Greeke worde,
called by the Romanes a legion, the
Switzers and Italians Batallon, the
French Caterna, Spanish Esquadron,
a companie of souldiers betweene sixe
and eight thousande, vide Esqua­
drón.

* Falángia, or Falánge, a battle like a
halfe moone.

* Falcádo, m.beset, or done with great
yron nailes or hookes.

* Falçánte, a falsifier, one that playeth a
part in a comedie.

* Falcificádo, m.falsified, counterfaited,
corrputed.

* Falcificár, Præs. yo Falcifico, 1.
Præt. yo Falcifiqué, to falsifie, to
counterfaite, to corrupt.

* Falcidád, f. falshood, vntrue dealing.

* Falcifiqué, vide Falsificár. 

* Falconéro, m.a faulkoner, one that kee­
peth a hawke, or hawkes.

Falcón, vide Halcón, a hauke, a faulkon.

* Falconéte, m.a peece or artillerie called
a faulkonet, or fawkenet.

Fálda, f. the lap of a coate, the skirts or
quarters of a coate. Also the pleits or
foldes in a garment that is gathered. 
The neather part or skirts of a moun­
taine or hill.





Faldaméntos, m.the skirts of a ierkin,
&c.

Faldétes, skirts or quarters of a coate,
skirts such as those that run at tilt vse
below their armour. Also a paire of ri­
ding bases.

* Faldiquiéra, vide Faldriquéra. 

Fálla, vide Fálta, f. a want, a fault.

* Fallár, vide Hallár, to find.

* Fallár, vide Faltár, to want, to fault or
doe amisse.

* Fallecér, to faile.

* Fallecído, failed, missed.

* Fallecimiénto, a failing, a missing.

* Falído, m. failed, missed.

Falsádo, m.counterfaited, falsified.

Falsaménte, falsly, counterfaitly, cor­
ruptly.

Falsár, to falsifie, to counterfaite, to cor­
rupt.

Falsário, m.a counterfaiter, one that fal­
sifieth or corrupteth, a forger.

Falsías, f. falshoods, deceits, counterfaite
dealing.

* Falsidád, f. counterfait dealing, false
play, deceit.

* Falsificár, to falsifie, counterfait or
forge.

* Falsifico, a falsifier, a forger, a counter­
faiter.

Fálso, m.false, vntrue, counterfaite, cor­
rupt.

* Falsopéto, m.a pocket in the bosome,
such as priestes vse in their cassockes or
frocks to carrie their handkerchiefe or
booke in.

Fálta, f. want, an error, a fault.

Faltár, to want, to erre, to do amisse.

* Faltriquéra, f. a pocket.

Fáma, f. report, fame, renowne.

* Famélico, m.hungerbitten, hungrie, pi­
ned with hunger.

Família, f. a houshold, a family.

Familiár, familiar, friendly, fellowly,
gentle, well acquainted with.

Famaliaridád, f. familiarity, friendlines, 
fellowship, keeping companie with.

Familiarménte, familiarly, fellowly,
friendly, louingly, like companions and
friends.

Famosaménte, famouslie, renownedly,
notably.

Famóso, m.famous, renowned, of great
name, much spoken of, of great account.

† Fanál, m.the lanterne in the Admirall
ship. Sometimes taken generally for any
lant-horne.

Fanéga, vide Hanéga, a measure con­
taining a bushell and a halfe.

* Fánfa, a play, an enterlude, vide Fár­
ça.

Fanfarrón, or Fafarrón, a lustie brag­
gard, a boasting ruffianlike fellow.

Fanfarroneria f. bragging, boasting,
great craking.

Fantaseár, to imagine, to conceiue in his
fantasie, to thinke fondly.

Fantasia, f. fantasie, light imagination,
fond conceipt.

Fantásma, f. a walking spirit, hobgobblin,
robin good fellow.

Fantástico, m.fantasticall, fond concei­
ted, full of light imaginations.

* Fantástigo, vide Fantástico. 

* Fantazióso, m.full of fancies, fantasti­
call.

* Faráge, vide Fardáge. 

* Faranduléro, a comedian, a plaier.

Faráute, an interpretor.

* Farçánte, a player of enterludes, or
plaies.

Fárças, f. playes, enterludes, comedies or
tragedies acted.

* Fardáje, or Fardáge, the packing togi­
ther of diuers fardels, bundels or
packes.

Fardél, or Fárdo, a fardell, a packe.

Farína, vide Harína, meale, flower.

* Faról, a lanthorne standing on the
pope of the ship to giue light. Also a
tower or high place by the sea coast,
wherein were continually lights and
fires, which serued for seamen to set the
hauen and the safest entrance, of which
the tower Faról (about halfe a mile
from the Groine in Galizia in Spaine)
was named.

Farón, or Farrón, a beacon, a watch­
tower.

* Farráge, vide Fardáge. 

Fárro, or Escándia, bran, the cribble of
meale that is boulted or sifted out: some
say it signifieth any hard corne, or
bread corne.

* Fársa, or Fárça, an enterlude, a play.

* Farsánte, m.a plaier or actor of come­
dies.

* Farzánte, an actor of plaies, a plaier.

Fasól, an herbe called Fenugreeke.

* Fásta, vide Hásta. 

Fastidiádo, m.loathed, despised much, set
at naught.

Fastidiár, to be tedious or lothsome, to
trouble, to molest, to importune, to cloy.
Also to loath or abhorre.

Fastídio, m.loathing or loathsomnesse, dis­
daine, abhorring, setting at naught.
Also molestation, trouble, vexation, 
wearisomenesse, tediousnesse.

Fastidióso, one giuen to loathing, dis­
dainfull, scornefull, abhorring much.
Also troublesome, importuning,  tedi­
ous, irkesome.

* Fastío, vide Hastío, m.loathing, dis­
daine.

Fásto, or Faústo, m.pride, arrogancie, in­
solencie, hawtinesse of hart.

Fatál, fatall, that the destinies haue ap­
pointed, such as his fortune is.

Fatíga, f. wearines, griefe of mind, vexa­
tion, discouragement.

Fatigádo, m.wearied, vexed, grieued, out
of comfort.

Fatigár, Præs. yo Fatígo, 1. Præt. yo
Fatigué, to wearie, to vexe, to grieue,
t driue out of hart.

Fatigóso, wearisome, vexed, sore grieued,
in an irkesome case.

* Fatigue, vide Fatigár. 

* Fáto, vide Hécho. 

Fatór, m.a factor, a dealer for others, an
agent.

Fatoría, f. factorship, dealing as an agent
for other.

* Favaráz, Avarráz, Havvaráz, or Pa­
parráz, an herbe called stauesaker or
lowsebane.

* Faúnos, m.gods of the fields and woods.

Favór, m.fauour, good liking, good ac­
ceptance.

Favoráble, fauourable, friendly, accep­
table.

Favorableménte, fauourably, friendly,
louingly, with good liking and accep­
tance, kindly.

Favorecedór, or Favorescedór, a fa­
uourer, a friend, one that sheweth lo­
uing kindnesse.

Favorecér, or Favorescér, yo Favoré­
sco, to fauour, to shew friendship, to
deale kindly and louingly.

Favorecído, or Favorescído, m.one fa­
uored, one well thought of, one that fin­
deth friendship.

* Favorésca, or Favorézca, vide Favo­
recér. 

Faústo, or Fásto, pride, hautinesse, sto­
macke, insolence, &c.

† Fáxa, f. a wastband, a swathing band,
any rolling band to swathe with, some­
time a fetter or gieue.

Fáxa de niños, a swathing band for lit­
tle children.

Fáxas de piernas, garters to garter the
legs with, or swaddle bands for the
legs.

* Fáxas de cálças, panes of hose.

* Faxádo, m.swathed, gartered, bound
about.

Faxár, to swathe, to garter, to binde a­
bout.

* Faxína, f. boughes, stakes, and such like
stuffe to make a rampire with.

* Faxinádo, m.rampired.

Faysa, or Faysán, m.a pheasant.

* Fayción, a fashion, manner or cu­
stome.

* Fáz, f. a countenance, face or gesture.

* Fazér, vide Hazár. 






F E
Fé, or Fée, f. faithfulnesse, credit, honest
dealing, sometimes a wedding ring.

* que es de la Fé? where is there any
faithfull dealing?

* Fé mentída, f. a false counterfeite
faith.

* Féa cósa, a foule matter, a shamefull
case.

Fealdád, f. fowlenesse, filthinesse, shame­
full dealing, dishonest doing.

* Feaménte, fowly, shamefully, filthily.

Febréro, m.the moneth Februarie.

Féble, feeble, weake, fraile, impotent.

Febledád, f. weaknesse, feeblenesse, infir­
mitie.

Febleménte, feebly, weakely.

* Febrído, m.vide Fabricádo. 

* Fécha, vide Hécha, f. a deed, a doing,
an action.

* a la Fécha del presénte, at the doing 
or making hereof.

* Fécho, vide Hécho, m.made or done.

Fecúndo, f. fruitfull, plentiful, ranke, ful,
abundant, fertile.

* Fée, or Fé, faithfulnesse, credit, honest
dealing, a wedding ring, a fee.

* Feéza, f. vide Fealdád. 

* Fegádo, vide Higado, the liuer of any
thing.

* Felíce, or Felíx, happie, fortunate, pros­
perous, blessed.

Felicidád, f. happines, felicitie, good for­
tune, good lucke.

Feligréz, m.a parishioner, one of the pa­
rish.

* Feligrezía, a parishionership.

* Felix, vide Felíce, happie, fortunate.

Félpa, f. vnshorne veluet, flushe, shag.

* Féltre, vide Fiéltro. 

* Fementído, m.a breaker of his faith,
a falsifier of his faith.

* Femína, vide Mugér. 

* Femíneo, m.womanlike, soft and ten­
der, female like, pertaining to a woman.
Also of the feminine kind or gender.

* Feminíl, womanlike.

Fenecér, or Fenescér, yo Fenésco, to fi­
nish, to make an end, to bring to a con­
clusion.

Fenecído, m.finished, ended, brought to
a good passe.

Fenecimiénto, m.finishing, concluding,
making an ende, bringing to passe.

* Fenéstra, vide Ventána. 

* Fenícia, vide Phenícia, a countrey
called Phenicia.

* Fénix, f. a bird in Arabia so called,
whereof writers saie, there is neuer but
one in the world at once, and when shee
waxeth old, she gathereth into hir nest
many strong spices, and firing then
the nest and all, she burneth herselfe, of
whose ashes breed another Phenix.

* Féno, vide Héno, m.haie for cattle.

Féo, m.foule, filthie, vgly, vncomely to see
t, vnhonest.

* Ferería, vide Ferrería. 

Féria, a holiday, a faire, a market.

Feriár, to buy and sell, as chapmen do in
faires or markets, to keepe holiday, to
make a play daie.

* Ferír, vide Herír, to wounde.

* Fermentár, to season, to giue
a taste or sauour.

Ferocidád, f. fiercenes, crueltie, wildenes,
rigour.

Feróz, fierce, cruell, hastie, wilde.

* Ferrádo, m.done with iron.

* Ferradór, m.a worker in iron worke.

* Ferrería, an iron worke, as the mine
where it is melted into sowes, the forge
where it is hammered first into bars, &c.

* Ferreateádo, sealed as cloth is.

* Ferréte, a seale for cloth, &c. Also a
thing to die cloth blacke.

Fértil, frutefull, plentifull.

Fertilidád, fruitfulnes, plentie, aboun­
dance, store of increase.

* Fervorosaménte, hotly, ardently, ha­
stily, eagerly.

* Fervoróso, vide Herveróso, hot, in a
chafe, hastie, eager, earnest.

Festijádo, feasted, made merry, well en­
tertained.

Festijár, to make good cheere, to feast, to
entertaine.

Festivál, of a feast, or belonging to a
feast, or to good cheere.

* Festividád, f. the festiuall day.

Feudatário, m.a feodarie, one that hol­
deth of his lord in fee.

Féudo, m.fee, feud or tribute.

* Feyónes, a kinde of pulse called French
beanes, or beanes of Rome.



* Fiacáso, vide Fracáso. 

Fiáda, f. betrothed, faithfully promised,
assurance.

* Fiádo, as dár en fiádo, to deliuer vpon
trust, to credit with.

Fiadór, m.a surety that vndertaketh to set
another mans debt answered, or that
baileth one out of prison.

* Fiámbre, f. cold meate.

Fiánça, f. credite, putting in suerties for
debt, bailing of prisoners, any assu­
rance.

Fiár, to trust another, to become surety for
another, to put in baile for other.

Fición, f. a fained matter, a made tale, a
forged fable, a fiction.

* Fidálgo, vide Hidálgo, a gentleman.

* Fíde dígnos, men woorthie credite, able
men, men whose wordes are woorth the
taking.

* Fíde comísso, committed to his charge,
put in trust, a feoffement of trust.

* Fíde comissario, a feoffar of trust, one
that hath authoritie from another to
t enfeoffe a mans sonne in landes af­
ter the fathers death, or may other­
waies dispose of lands according to the
giuers minde.

* Fidéos, m.a kinde of paste to eate, made
of flowre and butter, or oile.

* Fidúcia, trust, confidence, faith, assu­
rance.

Fiébre, f. a feauer, an ague.

Fiél, faithfull, trustie, as good as his word:
the pinne set at buts or pricks which ar­
chers measure to: the little toong of a
ballance, shewing which way the
waight goeth.

Fiél de pézos, the triall of waight, the
litle toong of the ballance to shew which
is the heauier in waying.

Fiéle, or Fiél, vide Hiél. 

* Fiéles, faithfull men, officers that had
charge to see the temples and publike
building kept in reparations.

Fieldád, faithfulnes, true dealing.

Fielménte, faithfully, iustly, without
fraud, honestly and truely.

Fiéltro, m.a felt, whereof felts are made,
or felt whereof riding cloakes and bases
are made. Also a hat it selfe, or cloake
made of felt.

Fiéra, f. a wilde beast.

Fieréza, f. wildnesse, sauagenes, rude­
nes, fiercenesse, crueltie.

* Fieríssimo, m.most wilde, most rude,
most sauage, most fierce or cruell.

Fiéro, m.fierce, wilde, sauage, rude, cruell.

* Fiéros, rigorous bad dealings, fitter for
bruit beasts then for reasonable men.

Fiérro, vide Hiérro, iron.

Fiésta, f. a feast, a merriment, a making
good cheere.

* Figuerál, a place of figtrees.

* Figueróa, a shire or countie in Portin­
gale so called. also a proper name there.

Figúra, f. a figure, a shape, a forme, a fa­
shion. Also a coate carde.

Figuradaménte, figuratiuely, darkly.

Figurár, to figure, to forme, to fashion, to
frame, to make shew or representation
of some thing absent.

* Figúras, figures, shapes, formes. Also
coate cardes.

Figuratívo, m.figuratiue, darke, hard to
be vnderstood, that representeth some
thing.

Figurílla, f. a little picture, forme or fa­
shion of some thing.

* Fíjo, vide Híjo, a sonne.

* Fíla, f. a ranke of soldiers in order, called
a file.





* Filéra, vide Hiléra, idem. 

Filéte, m.a lace, a bone-lace, a fillet.

Filipéndola, an herbe called filipendula,
red saxifrage or dropwoort.

* Filipódio, m.an herbe called polypodie
of the oke.

Filo, m.the edge of any weapon that is
vsed to cut with.

* Filoména, vide Ruyseñór. 

Filosofár, to play the philosopher, to be a
studious louer of wisedome.

Filosofía, f. philosophie, which consisteth in
the right discerning betweene vertues
and vices, and in hauing skill of natu­
tall and supernaturall things.

Filósofo, m.a philosopher, a louer of wise­
dome and learning.

* Filosomía, f. phisiognomie, or the skill
to iudge of a man by beholding his
face.

Fin, m.an end, a conclusion, the vpshot of
a matter, death.

Finádo, m.ended, dispatched, finished,
concluded, dead.

Finál, finall, to end with, at last.

Finalménte, lastly, finally, to conclude, to
make an end.

Finár, to end, to conclude, to make an end,
to dispatch, to die.

Finamiénto, m.the ending, the conclusi­
on, the vpshot, the dying, the decea­
sing.

* Fincár, to stay and remaine in a place.

* Finchár, vide Hinchár. 

* Finéza, f. finenesse, queintnes, subtiltie.

Fingidaménte, fainedly, counterfeitly,
dissemblingly, hypocritically.

Fingido, m.fained, dissembled, counter­
feited, forged.

Fingidór, m.a fainer, a dissembler, a for­
ger, a counterfeiter.

Fingimiénto, m.faining, forging, coun­
terfeiting, dissembling.

Fingir, yo Finjo, to faine, to dissemble,
to counterfeit, to forge.

* Finja, Finjo, vide Fingír. 

* Finócho, vide Hinójo. 

Finiquíto, m.an acquittance to certifie
debt discharged, a quietus est.

* Finíssimo, most queint, cunning and
craftie.

Fíno, m.fine, queint, cunning, craftie, sub­
tile.

* Finócho, or Finójo, vide Hinójo, 
fennell, a knee.

* Finxidaménte, vide Fingidaménte, 
fainedly, counterfeitly.

* Finxído, vide Fingído. 

Firma, f. a seale, a signing or such like
confirming of a matter by assurance, a
signing or setting downe ones names to
any thing in writing.

* laFirmáda, f. vide Firma. 

* Firmádo, m.sealed, signed, confirmed,
established, ratified.

* Firmaménto, the firmament, the skie.

Firmár, to signe, to seale, to confirme, to
assure.

Fírme, stedfast, firme, stable, sure.

* Firméça, vide Firméza. 

Firmaménte, surely, firmely, stedfastly,
strongly.

Firméza, f. assurancel, stedfastnes, firm­
nesse, stabilitie.

* Fiscáles persónas, officers of the ex­
chequer.

Fiscál, m.a basket pertaining to the ex­
chequer, or the kings remembrancer in
the exchequer.

* Fiscál procuradór, an atturney of the
exchequer for the king, the kings at­
turney.

Físco, m. the princes exchequer.

* Fiseréta, or çarcilloo de la vid, the ten­
drell or yoong string of vines that wind
about the poles or props.

* Fisica, f. phisicke, medicine.

Fisico, m.a phisitian.

* Fisonomia, phisiognomie, the arte or
rule to know his naturall inclination by
his face or visage.

Fistigo, vide Alhócigo, a Fisticke tree.

Fistola, f. a dangerous bad disease called a
fistula, because it groweth in length
like a pipe.

Fixádo, m.fastened, set fast.

Fixaménte, fast, surely, stedfastly.

Fixár, to fasten, to settle, to stablish.

Fixo, m.fast, stedfast, sure.

* Fizga, f. an instrument to kill fish with­
all, a troutspeare, or with some such like. Also a
iest, a floute.

* Fizgadór, m.one that killeth fish with a
troutespeare, or with some such like in­
strument. Also a mocker or taunter.

* Fíze, Fiziéra, Fisiésse, vide Fazér. 

* Fizgár, to kill fish with a troute speare.
To mocke or floute.

* Fizgón, m.a mocker, a flouter, a taun­
ter.


F L
Fláco, m.leane, weake, slender, feeble.

* Fláma, vide Lláma, to flame of fire.

* Flaménco, m.a Fleming, a low Dutch
man. A birde like a shoueler.

* Flámula, f. a streamer or pendent in a
ship.

* Flándes, m.Flanders, the low Coun­
tries.

* Flaqueár, to become weake, feeble, leane,
or slender.

Flaquéza, f. feeblenes, weaknes, faintnes,
leanenes, slendernes.

Flárco, m.a bottle.

* Flásco, m.a flaske for a souldier. Also a
great bottle or flagon.

* Flasquillo, vide Frasquíllo. 

Fláuta, f. a pipe of a reed, a flute, a fife.

Flautadór, m.a player on a fife or flute.

* Flebotomia, flebotomie or letting of
blood.

Flécha, f. an arrow, a shaft.

* Flechadór, m.an archer, a shooter in a
long bow.

* Flechadúra, f. the stroke ow wound with
an arrow. The winding vp of a wound
with cloathes.

Flechár, to shoote a shaft.

* Flecházo, m.the shooting of an arrow,
the stroke or blow that an arrow giueth.

* Flechéro, m.an archer, a fletcher.

* Fléma, flegme, one of the fower hu­
mors raigning in mans bodie. Also
much patience.

* Flemático, m.one that aboundeth with
flegme, flegmatike of complexion. Al­
so one hauing much patience.

* Flemóso, m.full of flegme,  vide Fle­
matico. Also verie patient.

Fletár, to pay money for ferrying ouer
some water, or money for passage by
boate or shipping, &c. To pay custome
or toll for wares transported, to set ships
on flote.

* Fletadór, m.one that payeth ferriage,
or passage money, one that payeth toll
or custome for wares transported. A
setter of ships on flote.

* Fletamiénto, m.paying for passage, or
toll or custome for wares transported,
setting ships on flote.

Fléte, m.passage money, money for ferri­
age, or transporting by water. Also cu­
stome or toll money for wares transpor­
ted.

* Fléuco, m.fringe.

Flocadúra, f. fringe, flockes.

* Flójo, vide Flóxo, slow, negligent,
idle, slothfull, weake, apt to no goodnes,
blockheaded.

* Flóque, vide Fléuco, fringe.

Flór, f. a flower.

* Flór de-lis, the Flowe-delice.

* Flór de la mugér, a womans monthly
course.

* Flór de paraýso, flower of Paradise.

* Flór de la bárva, the first mossie haire
that groweth on the beard.

Flór en la colór, a fresh color.

* Flór de açafrán, Saffron.

Florecér, or Florescér, to flourish, to
blossome, to beare flowers, to budde, to
bring foorth blossomes, to grow, to pro­
sper, to be in estimation or authori­
tie.

* Floreár, to dally withall, to make no rec­
koning or accompt of.





* Floresílla, or Florecílla, vide Flore­
zílla. 

Florésta, f. a forrest, a wildernesse, a great
wood.

Florestéro, m.a forrester, a raunger, a
keeper.

Floretáda, f. a fillip with the fingers, a
fillip giuen on the forehead.

* Florezílla, f. a little flower.

Florído, m.flourishing, that which bud­
deth, blossometh, groweth or prospereth.

Florín, m.a kind of monie in France called
a Florin, in Dutch a Gulden, being in
value two shillings English.

Flóta de náves, a fleete of ships, a com­
panie of ships consorted on a voyage.

* Flotár, or Sobreaguár, to floate or fleet
vpon the water.

Floxaménte, slackly, loosely, feebly,
faintly, without courage, negligently,
idlely, slothfully, heedlesly, like a blocke
head.

Floxedád, slacknesse, loosenesse, faint­
nesse, feeblenes, idlenes, negligence,
blockeheadednes, vnlustines, weaknesse.

Flóxo, slacke, loose, feeble, faint, negli­
gent, weak, idle, slow, dull-headed, vn­
apt, sluggish, heedlesse.

* Flózo, lither, slothfull, idle, that plieth
not his businesse, vnlustie, that stan­
deth still.

Flúcco, the yong mossie haire that grow­
eth on the chin with yong men.

* Fluéco, a flocke, such as is shorne off
from cloth, or beaten off in the fulling
mill. Also fringe.

* Flux, m.flush at cardes when one hath
all of one sute or sort.

* Flúxo, m.a flux, an ouerflowing, as the
fluxe of the belly.

* Flúxo de sángre, the hemorrhoides.


F O
* Fócil, m.a little flash or flame of fire
suddenly made and quickly out again,
as of gunpowder or such like. Also a
steele to strike fire with, a tinder boxe.
Also the name of a certaine bone in the
armes.

Fófo, m.that is soft in feeling, a swelling
or soft puffing vp of any thing, a hollow
thing.

* Fogár, vide Fogón. 

Fogón, m.an harth, the touch-pan of a
peece, the cookeroome in a ship, a place
to make fire on, the little hole in a touch
pan in a peece, by which the fire getteth
into the powder of the peece.

Fogóso, m.firie, set on fire.

* Fogóte, m.a match for a soldier which
is lighted.

* Fója, vide Hója. 

* Fois, a kinde of money vsed in the king­
dome of China, being of the value of a
quarto in Spaine, which fower Ma­
ravedis.

Folláges, mantelling in armes, flourish­
ing, polishing, painting or setting a
thing out trim to the shew.

Follajes, idem. 

Follón, an vntowarde fellow, a lewde
person.

* † Follúz, the third part of a blanke in
money.

* Fomentádo, m.cherished, warmed,
comforted.

* Fomentadór, m.one that cherisheth,
warmeth or comforteth.

* Fomentár, to foster, to cherish, to nou­
rish, to feede, to comfort, to harten, to
encourage.

* Fondáca, or Dógana, a custome house,
a toll house where they vse to take toll
or taxe of people for carrying or trans­
porting of goodes.  Also a marchants
storehouse or warehouse.

* Fóndo, the foundation of a thing, a
treasurie or any thing whereupon a
man doth relie.

* dár Fóndo, to cast anchor.

* Fondón, m.the bottome, the ground, the
depth.

Fondóso, m.deepe, profound, high, of
great receit, large, vnsatiable.

* Fonsadéra, pay or taxe for the repai­
ring of the ditches of a citie.

Fontenál, a place full of springs or foun­
taines, the head of a conduit whence
the water is carried by pipes.

* Fontezica, f. a little fountaine, a
spring.

Fontezuéla, a little fountaine, a
spring.

* Foradár, vide Horadár. 

* Foráge, or Foráje, prouision for horses,
meate for cattell. Also furring, or li­
ning of garments.  Also lining pikemen
with shot.

* Foragído, vide Huýdo. 

* Foralménte, in open court.

* Forándos, vide Huýdo. 

Foráño, fierce, wilde, sauage, cruell.

Forastéro, m.a stranger, one that com­
meth from another countrie.

Forçádo, forced, compelled, constrained,
that needes must be.

* Forçádo de galéra, vide Galleóte, a
gallie slaue.

Forçadór, m.a rauisher, one that getteth
by force or violence, a deflourer of mai­
dens or women by outrage.

Forçár, yo Fuérço, to rauish, to commit a
rape, to vse violence, to get by extortion
or wrong.

Forcejár, to doe his best, to endeuor to the
vttermost, to doe what he can, to trie
his cunning.

Forçosaménte, violently, forcibly, by
oppression, by extortion.

Forçóso, m.forcible, violent, very strong,
of great power, auailable.

* Forçúdo, m.one that is of great force or
strength.

Foréra, f. currant money, taxe, tribute.

* Foréro mayór, m.a chiefe collector or
gatherer of taxe or tribute money.

Fórja, f. a smithes forge, a place where men
frame or plot any thing.

Forjádo, m.forged, framed, wrought,
plotted, plotted or made.

* Forjadór, m.a forger, one that frameth
or maketh things.

Forjár, to forge, to frame, to make.

Fórma, f. a forme, a fashion, a mould to
make any thing by, a shoomakers last
to set shooes on.

Formádo, m.formed, fashioned, framed,
cast in a mould, made after the fashi­
on.

Formáje, vide Quéso, cheese.

Formál, formall, according to fashion, in
order.

Formalménte, orderly, formally, by due
fashion.

Formár, to frame, to fashion, to forme, to
cast in a mould, to bring to a propor­
tionate order.

* Formidáble, dreadfull, terrible, to be
feared.

Formulário, m.a booke of presidents to
make instruments by. A booke of copies
to write by.

Fornecér, or Fornescér, to furnish, to
store, to garnish, to arme, to fortifie, to
defend.

* Fornecído, m.furnished, stored, fen­
ced, fortified, well appointed.

Fornecimiénto, m.furniture, store, gar­
nishing, fortifying.

Fornicación, f. whoredome, fornica­
tion.

* Fornicadór, m.a whoremoonger, a lea­
cherous person.

Fornicár, Præs. yo Forníco, 1. Præt. yo
Forniqué, to haunt harlots, to fellow
whores, to commit fornication.

Fornicário, m.a whoremoonger, a forni­
cator, an adulterer.

* Fornício, vide Fornicación. 

* Fornído, vide Fornecído, furnished,
well appointed, &c.

* Fornique, vide Fornicár. 

* Fornír, vide Fornecér, to furnish,
&c.

Forodádo, vide Horodádo. 

* Forquéta, f. a little forke to feede





with, &c.

* Forrádo, m.lined, furred.

Forráje, or Forráge, furring, lining. Also
the lining of pikemen with shot. Also
forrage, prouision for horses.

Fortalecér, or Fortalescér, to build some
bulwarke, to make a rampire, to fortifie
a place.

Fortalecído, m.fortified, entrenched,
rampired about.

Fortalecimiénto, m.fortification, ma­
king strong a towne or place with bul­
warkes, rampires, &c.

Fortaléza, f. strength, a fortresse, a bul­
warke.

* Fortezuéla, or Fortezuélo, a little fort
or strength.

Fortificadór, m.a fortifier, one that hath
skill or bestoweth cost on making strong
a place.

Fortificamiénto, m.fortifying or making
strong, of a place against danger of ene­
mies.

Fortificár, to fortifie, to make strong, to
make impregnable.

* Fortúito, as cáso Fortúito, a chaunce
that commeth by fortune, haphazard.

Fortúna, f. fortune, chance.

* Forxár, vide Forjár. 

* Fórza, vide Fuérça. 

* Forzóso, forcibly, of force.

* Fóso, vide Fósso, a ditch.

Fóssa, or Fósso, a ditch, a pit.

* Fossádo múro, m.a wall ditched a­
bout.

Fossár, to dig, or ditch about, to make a
ditch about a wall.

* Fossíllo, m.a little ditch.



Fraçáda, f. a blanket or couerlet for a
bed.

* Fracassár, to fall into any chance or mis­
hap suddenly, vnawares.

* Fracusár, idem. 

Fragáda, vide Fragáta, a small barke cal­
led a frigot.

* Fragáncia, f. a fragrant and sweete sa­
uour or smell.

* Fragánte, fragrant, or hauing a sweete
sent or sauour. Also by and by, foorth­
with.

* Castigár en fragánte, to chasten by &
by, or forthwith.

* Frágas, f. strawberries. Also craggie
waies.

* Fragáta, a small barke called a fri­
got.

* Frágil, weake, feeble, fraile, readie to
breake or to fall.

* Fragilidád, f. frailtie, feeblenes, readi­
nes to fall.

* Fragménto, a fragment, a peece.

Fragóso, m.rough, stonie, rugged, hard
and sharpe.

* Fragránte, fragrant, that smelleth sweet
of flowers, &c. fresh of taste.

Frágua, f. a forge, the smithes coale.

Fraguár, to harden, to drie, to waxe
firme.

* Fragúras, craggie waies.

* Fráila, vide Frayla. 

Fraile, vide Fraýle. 

* Frailelízo, vide Fraylésco. 

Francaménte, freely, liberallie, bounti­
fully, frankly.

* Francés, m.a frenchman.

* Mal francés, the french pockes.

Fránco, m.liberall, franke, free, ende­
nized.

† Francolín, m.a birde called a God­
wit.

Fránjas, or Fránzas, fringe to weare on
the skirts of womens coates, &c.

* Franqueádo, enfranchised, made
free.

Franqueár, to make free, to giue liberty,
to deliuer out of bondage into freedom,
to vse liberally, to enfranchize or make
free.

Franquéza, f. liberalitie, bountifulnesse,
franknes. Also freedome, libertie.

* Fránzas, vide Fránjas. 

* Franzimiénto, m.trimming with
fringe, making of fringe.

* Franzír, to vse fringe.

* Fráscas, rubbish, or baggage refuse a­
bout repayring of houses, weedings of
gardens, &c.

Frásco, vide Flárco, a bottle.

* Frásco, vide Flásco, a flaggon, a soul­
diers flaske.

* Frasquíllo, or Flasquíllo, a souldiers
touchboxe.

Fraternidád, f. brotherhood.

* Fratérno, m.brotherly, louingly, kind­
lie.

* Fráude, m.deceit, fraud, false dealing,
coosening.

* Fraudelénto, fraudulent, deceitfull,
coosening.

* Fráxino, vide Frézno, an ash tree.

Fráyla, a Nunne.

Fráy, or Fráyle, m.a frier.

Fráyle, idem. 

* Fraylésco, of the order of Nunnes or
Friers, belonging to Nuns or Friers,
cloath with which Friers are clothed.

Fraylezíllo, a birde with blacke feathers
on the head, like linget, called of some,
an Owpe. Also a little frier.

Frazáda, f. a couerlet, vide Fraçáda.

Fréça, hogs dung, sheepes dung.

* Freçár, to dung as sheepe or swine.

Freçáda, vide Fraçáda, or Frazáda, a
couerlet.

Frécha, vide Flécha, f. an arrowe, a
shafte.

Frechadúra, f. the stroke or wounde with
an arrow, the winding vp of a wounde
with clothes, drawing or shooting of a
bow.

Frechár, vide Flechár, to shoote.

Frechéro, m.an archer, a fletcher.

Fregadéro, m.a rubber, a curricombe.

Fregadiéntes, a toothscraper.

Fregádo, m.rubbed, fretted, chafed.

Fregadúra, f. rubbing, fretting, cha­
fing.

Fregár, Præs. yo Friégo, 1. Præt. yo
Fregué, to frot, to rubber, to chafe, to 
wipe.

* Fregáta, a small vessell called a Fri­
gotte.

* Freir, vide Freýr, to frie.

* Freidéra, or Sattén, a frying pan.

* Freído, vide Freýdo, fried.

* Freidúra, a frying.

Frenár, to bridle, to curbe, to keepe vn­
der.

* Frenéro, m.a bridle maker.

Frenesía, m.a giddie disease of the braine
called the frensie, comming by inflam­
mation of the midriffe.

Freneticár, to bee frantike, to playe the
madde man.

Frenético, m.frantike, madde.

Freníllo de la léngua, the string of the
toong.

Fréno, a bridle,  the bit of a bridle, a re­
straint.

Fréno de coscója, a bridle with a sharp
bit.

* Frentál, the ornament of a horse bri­
dle raines on his forehead.

Frénte, f. the forehead, the brow, a front
or forepart of a battell.

* arrugáda, or rugósa Frénte, a wrink­
led forehead.

* Frequéncia, f. a haunt, often comming
or vsing of a thing, or of companie.

Frequentadaménte, oftentimes, com­
monly, much vsed.

* Frequentádo, m.haunted, often vsed,
frequented.

Frequentár, to haunt, to frequent, to vse
often or commonly to, to keepe com­
pany.

Frequénte, often, much in vse, much in
request.

Fresáda de ceváda, ptisane drinke, barly
water.

Fresár, to bruse, to rub one with another.

* Frescaménte, freshly, newly, somwhat
coldly.

Frésco, m.fresh, new, somewhat colde,
pleasant, sweete, fresh and vnsalted.

Frescór, or Frescúra, freshnesse, coole­
nesse, pleasantnesse of aire.

Frescúra, vide Frescór. 

* Frésno, vide Frézno, an ashe tree.





* Fréso, m.a kinde of fringe or silke lace,
or such like to set on a garment.

* Fresón, m.a yoong hog or weaned pig, a
griese or step, a young infant.

Fresquezíto, somewhat fresh weather,
somewhat coole weather.

* Fresquissimo, m.most fresh, most plea­
sant, coole.

* Fretár, to pay passage money in a ship
or barke, to pay custome for mar­
chandize.

Fretár náve, to hire a ship for to fraight.

Fréte, the fraight money, passage money.

* Fréxno, vide Frézno. 

* Freydéra, f. a frying pan.

Freydúra, f. frying.

Freýle, a brother of an order of knight­
hood.

Freýr, yo Frío, to frie as meate is fried.

Frezár, or Freçár, to chew the cud. Also
to be of like condition to another.

Frézno, m.an ashe tree.

Frialdád, f. cold, coolenesse, a cold or stale
iest.

Friaménte, coldly.

* Friegue, Friego, vide Fregár. 

Friéra, f. a kibe, a chilblaine.

Friéra de pies, a kibe on the foote.

* Frigído, m.colde.

Frío, m.colde, milde, soft gentle.

* Dicho frío, a cold or stale iest.

Frío, vide Freýr. 

Friollégo, m.very chill, colde.

* Frisa, frise cloth.

* Frisáda, a stuffe called frise or frizado.

* Ióba Frisáda, a kinde of cottoned
or frised garment worne by mourners and
priestes in Spaine.

Frisár, to cotton or freeze cloth.

* Frisól yérva, a kinde of herbe.

Frisóles, a kinde of white pease called
kidney beanes.

Fríto, m.fried in a frying pan.

* Frivolo, friuolous, vntoward, vnor­
derly, paltering, wrangling.

* Friýssimo, m.most cold.

* Fróga, f. the mixing togither of lime
and sand.

Frontál, a forehead cloth. Also a cloth
vsed before the altar. Also a cupboord
cloth.

* Frónte, vide Frénte. 

Frontéra, f. the frontiers, the borders.

Frontéro, m.ouer against, afront, a cap­
taine of a garrison.

Frontispicio, the foreshew, the first face.

Frotádo, m.rubbed, chafed.

* Frotamiénto, rubbing, chafing, frot­
ting.

Frotár, to rub, to frot, to chafe.

* Fructifero, m.vide Frutifero, fruitfull,
that beareth fruit.

* Frúcto, vide Frúto, fruit, profite, in­
crease.

* Fructuóso, m.fruitfull.

* Frugál, frugall, neere, sparing, thriftie.

* Frunzir, to draw cloth or such like into
a ruffe.

Frustéra, f. a iest, a scoffe, a mockerie.

* Frustrár, to make voide or of none ef­
fect, to deceiue.

Frúta, f. fruit of trees.

* Frúta podrida, putrified or rotten
fruit.

* Frúta tardia, fruit that commeth late,
winter fruit.

* Frúta blánda, soft tender fruit.

Frúta de sartén, a fritter.

Frutál, a  place of fruit, or trees bearing
fruit.

* Frutéra, f. a woman that selleth fruit, a
fruit dish.

* Frutéro, m.a man seller of fruit. Also a
towell or napkin which they alwaies in
Spaine vse to lay ouer the fruit when
they bring it and serue it to the table.

Frutífero, m.fruitfull, that beareth fruit.

Frutificár, Præs. yo Frutifico, 1. Præt.
yo Frutifiqué, to beare fruit, to yeelde
plentie of fruit, to fructifie.

* Frutifiqué, vide Frutificár. 

* Frúto, m.fruit, increase, plentie of corne
or other things.

Frutuóso, m.fruitfull, that yeeldeth fruit
or increase.


F V
* Fucíl, vide Fócil. 

Fuégo, m.fire.

Fuélles, m.bellowes to blowe the fire
with.

Fuellesuélos, or Fuellezuélos, small
bellowes.

Fuénte, f. a fountaine, an ewer, a lauer.

* Fuentezica, f. a little fountaine, an
ewer, a lauer.

* Fuentezílla, a little ewer, spring or
lauer.

* Fuénte rabía, f. a citie betwixt France
and Spaine in Biscay.

* Fuér, vide Fuéra, without, &c.

Fuéra, without, besides, moreouer, vn­
lesse.

Fuérça, f. force, violence, strength, valor,
a force or hold of defence.

* Fuérce, Fuérço, vide Forçár. 

* Fuerçosaménte, vide Forçosamén­
te, forcibly, violently.

Fuéro, m.the law, the custome, a court
where matters are heard and decided
according to law.

Fuérte, strong, valiant, forcible, swift.

* Fuerteménte, strongly, forcibly, vali­
antly.

* Fuertizíllo, m.a small fortresse.

* Fuésta, vide Fústa, a foyst, a pinasse.

* Fúga, a running away, a flight, an es­
cape, an ouerthrowe.

* Fugáce, flying, escaping, fugitiue, flit­
ting.

Fugitivo, m.a runnagate, a fugitiue, a
runaway.

† Fuláno, m.one, a certaine man, such a
one.

* Fulía, f. a daunce or song.

* Fuliadór, m.a dauncer or singer of such
daunce or song.

* Fúlle, vide Fuelle. 

Fulléro, m.a coosener in play, a pilferer, a
lewd shifting fellow.

* Fúmo, vide Húmo. 

Fumosidád, f. smokinesse, fumositie.

* Fúnda, f. a case for any thing. Also the
arming of a pike with cloth, veluet or
such like, &c.

Fúnda de Almoháda, or Colchón, a
pillowbeere.

Fúnda de mésa, f. a carpet cloth.

* Fundación, f. a foundation.

* Fundáco, a merchants warehouse.

* Fundadaménte, groundedly, vpon a
good foundation.

* Fundádo, m.founded.

Fundadór, m.a founder, a layer of foun­
dations.

Fundamiénto, m.the foundation, the
groundworke.

Fundár, to lay a foundation.

* Fundería, a place to melt or founde
mettall in.

Fundición, f. melting of mettall, casting
of mettall.

* Fundidór, m.a bell founder, a melter of
mettall.

* Fundír, to cast or melt mettall.

* Funerál, pertayning to a buriall, fune­
rall rites.

* Funésta cósa, a lamentable thing, a
thing polluted with a dead bodie,
mournfull, cruell, detestable, lamenta­
ble, deadly.

* Funésto, defiled, or polluted with a dead
body, mournfull, curell, deadly, detesta­
ble.

Fúria, or Rábia, f. fury, raging, madnes.

* Fúrias, the three furies, Alecto, Tisi­
phone, and Megera.

* Furibúndo, m.mad, raging, furious,
wood.

Furiosaménte, madly, furiously, raging­
ly.

Furióso, m.raging, furious, mad.

Furór, m.furiousnes, rage, madnes, wood­
nesse.

Furriél, a harbinger, a furrier, an ap­
pointer of lodgings.

* Furriér, idem. 

Fusléra, f. brasse that may be melted.





Fústa, Bergantin, or Galeóta, a foiste, a
brigandine, a pinnasse.

Fustan, m.fustian, a kinde of dublet­
ting.

* Fustancíllas, fustians, stuffe made of
fustian.

Fúste de silla, the saddle tree of a saddle.

* Fustéda, vide Fústa. 

* Fustére, yellowish stuffe to die clothes
withall.

* Fustibál, or Fustivál, a certaine war­
like instrument vsed in olde time.

* Futúro, m.that which is to come.

Fuzía, or Aúzia, f. trust, confidence.



G

* GAbelláro, vide Gabeléro, a ta­
ker of toll or custome, a customer,
a toll gatherer.

* † Gabeléro, a customer, a toll gathe­
rer, a taker or gatherer of toll or cu­
stome.

* Gábia, or Gávia, f. the top on the mast
of a ship.

* Gáça, f. a kinde of silke stuffe like ey­
pers, whereof they vse to make cloakes
and womens mantels in Spaine for the
sommer. Also it is the hope of a coard,
point, or other string.

Gaçafatónes, foolish talke, rauing talke,
dotings.

† Gaçápo, or Gaçapíto, m.a rabbet, a
yoong conie.

Gacélo, m.a wilde goate.

* Gácha, f. a kind of hodegepotch made of
flower, water, butter and honie.

* Gáda, or Merlúza, a fish called a whi­
ting.

* Gadaneadór, m.a mower, that mow­
eth with a sieth.

* Gadíz, Cadis, or Cális, the citie of
Spaine now called Cales.

* Gaditáno, m.a man of Cales.

* Gafár, to snatch away in haste or sud­
denly.

* Gafarí, vide çafarí, a very sweet pom­
granate.

Gáfas, f. the bender of a crossebow.

† Gafedád, f. a benumming of the hands
that one cannot stretch them out. Also
leprosie.

* Gafetí, or Gaferí, a kinde of herbe.

† Gáfo, m.one that is benummed in his
sinewes that hee cannot stretch them
out.

* Gafóso, m.benummed in the hands, le­
prous.

* Gáges, or Gájes, m.pay or wages.

* Gáino, or Gáyno, vide Gámo, a fal­
lowe deere.

* Gáio, vide Gáyo, a prong of a forke.

† Gaíta, vide Gáyta. 

† Gaitéro, vide Gaytéro, a plaier on
bagpipes.

Gájes, vide Gáges, m.wages, pay.

Gájo, m.a cluster of grapes.

* Gál, a  fish called a dare or goldfish.

Gála, f. brauerie, liueliness, courage,
neatnesse, daintinesse.

* a la Gála, a la Gála, couragiously,
brauely, merily, liuely, finely, gal­
lantly.

Galán, m.braue, lustie, couragious, gal­
lant, neate, or trim.

* Galána, vide Gála. 

* Galáno, vide Galán. 

Galaneménte, lustily, brauely, couragi­
ously, liuely.

* Galanéz, f. brauerie, gallantnes, neat­
nes, liuelines, courage, &c.

† Galápago, m.a snaile, a welke, a per­
winkle, a tortoise.

* Galárda, vide Gallárdo. 

Galardón, m.reward for worke or ser­
uice done, wages, salarie.

Galardonádo, m.rewarded, payed his
wages, or his hire.

Galardonadór, one that rewardeth, pay­
eth wages or hire.

Galardonár, to reward, to pay wages or
hire.

* Gálas de vn bálde, the handle of a buc­
ket.

Galbanádo, m.gummed with Galba­
num.

Gálbano, m.a gum called Galbanum.

Galéa, vide Galéra, a galley that is ro­
wed by force of men.

Galeáça, f. a galeasse, a ship so called.

* Galeár, to take vpon him much, to com­
mand.

Galeón, m.a great ship among the Spa­
niards called a Galeon.

Galeóta, or Fústa, f. a small barke called a
foiste, a small pinnase or a frigot.

Galeóte, a rower in a galley or small
barke, a boat-man, a sayler.

Galéra, or Galéa, a galley.

* Galéta, f. vide Galléta, a ship or Gal­
ley, a kan.

* Galfárro, m.a great eater or deuourer,
a rakehell-fellow.

* Gálgas, f. stones cast from a rocke, tower
or hill to annoy the enemie.  Also grey­
hound bitches.

Galgana, a kinde of pulse, called chi­
ches.

† Gálgo, m.a gallow-clapper or vngra­
tious wag, a greyhound.

* Gálha, vide Agálla, gals to die with, or
to inke with.

* Galícia, or Galízia, a Prouince in
Spaine so called, lying betweene Portu­
gall and Biskay.

Gallardamente, liuely, pleasantly, mee­
rily.

Gallardétes, streamers, or pendents in
ships.

Gallardía, f. mirth, pleasantnes, liueli­
nes.

Gallárdo, m.liuely, merrie, pleasant,
fine.

Gallégo, m.the west-wind. also a man of
Galicia.

* Galleóte, a sayler, a rower.

Galléta, f. a kind of kan to drinke in, a
ship or galley.

Gallillo, m.the Vuula, or falling downe
of a part of the roofe of the mouth, the
weezell or little rong at the entrance
of the throat, the throat boll.

Gallína, f. a hen.

Gallína ciéga, a woodcocke. Also a vene­
mous blind worme called a sloworme
or blind-worme.

Gallína ponedéra, a hen that vseth to
lay egs, a laying hen.

* Gallína assentadéra, a broodhen.

* Gallína enána, a little hen.

* Gallína morisca, a hen of Guynie.

* Gallína de India, a Turkie hen.

* Gallína del río, a Moorehen.

* Gallína cluéca, a clock-hen.

Gallináça, f. hens dung.

* Gallináro, vide Gallinéro, a hen roost,
a poulterer.

* Gallinería, a place or market where
they sell hens.

Gallinéro, a poulterer, a keeper of hens, a
coupe to keepe hens in, a hen roost.

Gallipávo, a Turkie cocke.

* Galliúda, f. a kinde of dog fish called a
sea-hinde.

Gallóchas, f. winter shooes, sockes of
woollen to weare in shooes, shooes with
wooden soles.

Gállo, m.a cocke.

Gallocrésta, an herbe called Clarie.

* Gallo de Índia, a turkie cocke.

† Gallófo, or Gallóffo, a begger.

* † Gallofeár, to beg.

* † Galloféro, m.a begger.

* Gallópe, m.a gallop.

Gallopeár, to gallop as a horse doth.

* Galván, m.a proper name of a Moore.

* Gálvano, a kinde of gum or liquor is­
suing out of a tree.

Gáma, f. a doe, a deere.

* Gamarulí, a kinde of deformed thing
that liueth in the sea, but hath no ordi­
narie proportion of a fish.

* Gambini, or Babovini, pent-houses to
keepe off raine.

* Gáma, m.a bucke, a deere.

Gamón, an herbe called Daffodill.

* Gamonéra, the place where Daffodils
grow.





* Gamónes, vide Gamón. 

Gamonitál, a bed of Daffodils.

Gamonílla, f. the flower of Daffodill.

Gamonito, m.a Daffodill.

Gamúças, leather called Shamois, little
deere.

Gána, will, desire, lust, appetite, minde.

* de buéna Gána, with a good will,
gladly.

Ganadéro, m.a heardman, a hayward,
one that tendeth sheepe or other cattle.
Also a drouer of cattle, a grasier.

† Ganádo, cattle in generall, a droue of
cattle, a flocke, or heard of any cattle.
Also won, gotten, gained.

Ganáncia, f. gaine, lucre, winning, ad­
uantage.

Ganancióso, m.gainefull, one the win­
ning side, on the getting hand.

Ganapán, m.a porter, a bearer of packes
or burthens.

* Ganapiérde, the game at cardes called
Loadhim.

Ganár, to get, to gaine, to winne, to ob­
taine.

Gáncho, m.a shepherds hooke, or shep­
herdes staffe, knobs in a greble staffe,
branches in a stags horne.

Ganchóso, m.knobbie, branched.

* Gánga, f. a bird somewhat lesse then a
hen.

* Gánge, a riuer of east India comming
from Paradise, that is called Phison:
it is at the narrowest eight miles ouer,
in some place twentie miles, at the shal­
lowest a hundred foote deepe.

Gángo, a barnacle, one that speaketh in 
the nose.

Gangóso, a man that snaffteth in
the nose.

* Ganivéte, or Ganibéte, a penknife.

Gañán, a ploughman, a herdsman.

Gañír, to snarle, to grin as a dog or a fox,
to yelpe, to barke.

Gañído, m.snarling, barking, grinning,
yelling as foxes and curre dogs do.

Gañón, the throate, the gullet, the cud of
a beast, the throate boll, the gargill, the
craw, the crop or gorge. Sometimes ra­
uening, or gluttony.

* Ganosaménte, very willingly or glad­
lie.

* Ganóso, m.desirous, willing.

* Gánsa, f. a goose.

Gánso, m.a gander.

Ganzúa, a false or counterfaite key, a
picklocke.

* Garabáto, m.a hooke, a trammell, pot­
hangers, any crooked yron or hooke.

* Garabatíllo, m.a little hooke.

* Garáfa, or Garáffa, a kinde of vessell
narrow at top, and wide at bottome, of
glasse.

* Garamón, vide Garañón. 

* Garañón, a stallion or great horse kept
onely to couer mares and to breed.

* Garavancíllos, m.an herbe called
Milke-vetch.

Garaváto, m.a hooke of yron, a grappel, a
pothanger.

Gárbo, the bulke of any thing, the forme,
the fashion, the countenance, or beha­
uiour.

* Gárbo de cuérpo, the fashion of the
body, the carriage of a mans selfe.

Gárça, f. a foule called a hearon.

Garçétas, f. antlyers, or harts hornes, fea­
thers of the hearon.

† Garçón, m.a wooer, an amorous fel­
low.

† Garçoneár, to court women, to go a
wooing.

Gárço de ójo, grey eyed.

Gárço, agarike, a roote at the Apotheca­
ries.

* Gardadéro, m.a keeper of the guard­
robe.

* Gardarópa, f. vide Guardarópa, a
guardrobe.

† Garfiár, to hooke, to catch with a hooke,
to get with a grapple.

† Gárfio, m.a grappling hooke that hoo­
keth on euery side, the hooke of an an­
kor that holdeth in the ground.

Gargageár, or Gargajeár, to gargarise
or to wash the throate, to spit out.

† Gargájo, flegme, choler, melancholie,
&c. that men raise by the throat and
spit out.

Gargánta, f. a throat.

Gargánta de piérna, the ham of the
legge.

Gargánta del pie, an instep of the foot.

Gargantéz, f. greedines of meate, glutto­
nie, minding much of the belly.

* Gargantéza, idem. 

Gargantílla, f. a carquenet to weare a­
bout the necke, a neck-lace, a chaine.

* Gargánto, vide Gargánta, the gullet
or throat bell.

Gargantón, m.a glutton, a lurcher at
victuals, a greedie gut.

* Gargarísmo, m.gargling or washing
the throat.

* Gargarizár, to gargle or wash the
throate.

Gárgaro, the top of the mount Ida, being
very fruitfull.

* Gárgata, idem. 

Gargavéro, vide Garguéro, the throat,
the weasand, the throat pipe, the pipe of
the lungs, the winde pipe.

Gárgola, f. lineseed, seed of flaxe. Also a
dentine into a boord to let in another
to be ioyned within it.

Garíta, a watch-tower, a sentinell house
vpon a wall for souldiers to watch in.

* Garleár, to tattle, to prattle much.

† Garlíto, m.a weele made of wickars to
catch fish in, a bownet to catch fish or
birdes. Also a certaine bird.

* † Garnácha, or Carnácha, a moorish
garment.

* Garóte, vide Garróte. 

† Gárra, f. a paw of a beast.

* Echár la gárra, to lay hold on, to catch
into his pawes.

† Garráfa, f. a glasse to keepe any liquid
thing in, a drinking glasse, a violl,
wide at bottome and narrow at top.

* Garrafádo, m.grapled, catched holde
on.

* Garrafár, to grapple, to catch holde
on.

* † Garráma, f. a gentle terms for stea­
ling, as in English, to take a thing
where he findes it, to finde it before it
was lost, to borrow it without the ow­
ners leaue.

* Garráncho, a dung-forke, a thing to
scrape with.

* Garrañón, m.a stallion kept to couer
mares and for breed.

† Garrapáta, f. a tike, a filthie worme
that sticketh on sheepe, calues, &c.

Garridaménte, finely, neatly, deftly, ele­
gantly.

Garridéza, f. neatnes, handsomnes, fine­
nes.

Garrído, m.fine, neate, handsome, deft,
nice.

* Garróba, vide Garróva. 

† Garrócha, f. a pricke, a short dart to
cast at the bull.

* † Garrochár, to throw the Garrócha
at the bull, to strike in the bull with a
Garrocha.

* Garrotáço, vide Garrotázos. 

* Garrotázos, m.blowes with a short
cudgell.

Garróte, m.a cudgell to winde a coard as
carriers do to packe their wantels with.

Garróte dár, to strangle, to racke.

† Garróva, f. a kinde of fruite, or of pulse
growing on a tree.

* † Garrovál, a place where such pulse
growe.

† Garróvo, m.the tree that beareth such
pulse.

* Garrúchas, f. coardes to get vp the saile
with.  Also ropes endes to tye the sayle
with.

Garrúvia, vide Garróva, pigeons pease.

* Gartíja, a little serpent called a lysard.

Garvánço, m.a pease.

Garvínes, m.night caps of silke, caps to lie
in.

* Gárvo, vide Gárbo. 

* Gárza, f. a hearon.





* Garzéra, f. a place where herons
breede.

* Gárzo, m.gray eied.

* † Gasajádo, m.made merrie, well wel­
comed and entertained.

† Gasájo, mirth, delight, pleasantnesse,
curtesie.

* Gasanhóte, a locust or a great gras­
hopper.

* † Gaspácho, m.a sop made with vine­
ger, oile, salt and bread.

Gastádo, m.spoiled, marred, consumed,
wasted, rent, destroied.

Gastadór, m.a waster, a spender, a de­
stroier, a pioner in war.

* Gastadóres, pioners in the war, cutters
downe of wood in war.

Gastár, to spend, to waste, to lay desolate,
to consume.

Gásto, m.cost, expence, charge, waste, con­
suming.

* Gáta, the castell at the sterne of a gallie,
some vse it for the top on a ships mast,
and so it signifieth most properly. Also
a shee cat.

* yr a Gátas, to goe creeping on all fower
like a cat.

* † Gatapáta, f. vide Garrapáta, a fil­
thie woorme annoying sheepe, calues,
&c. called a tike.

† Gateár, to creepe on all fower.

* Gatéra, f. an herbe called catmint or
nep. Also a hole for a cat to creepe in
and out.

* Gatíco, a little cat.

Gatillo, a little cat. Also an herbe called
Cammocks.

* Gatillo cásto, a tree called hempe tree,
or Agnus castus.

* Gatíno, vide Gatíllo. 

Gáto, m.a cat.

* Gáto montés, a cat of mountaine, a
wilde cat.

* Gáto de mósco, a muske cat.

* trampílla del Gáto, a trap to catch a
cat.

Gáto cervál, a cat with a skin like a
hart.

Gáto páus, a munkey.

Gavánço, m.a dog brier.

* Gavéta, f. a woodden platter.

* † Gaveléro, m.a gatherer of custome,
tole or tribute.

Gávia, or Gábia de nave, the top on a
ship mast, whereon they sit or stand, to
spie.

Gavílla, or Gávila, a stacke or houell of
corne, a bauen or fagot.

† Gavilán, a great hauke, as a goshauke,
a ierfaulcon. Sometimes vsed for
a lesser hauke. Also an herbe called
groundswell, or the downe of thistle
blossoms, &c.

* Gavilánes de la plúma, the neb of the
pen, or the nose or inside of the penne
where it is cut.

* Gavión, a hand barrow to beare stones
or morter, or such like betweene two
men. Also the broad brims of a hat.

Gavióta, f. a sea gull, a sea cob.

* Gayón, a ruffian, a swaggerer.

† Gáyta, f. a bagpipe.

* Gaytéro, m.a plaier on bagpipes.

* Gazís, those that are descended of pro­
genitors Moores or Turks.

† Gaznár, to gaggle as geese vse to doe.

Gaznáte, the throate boll, the windepipe.

* † Gazpácho, vide Gaspácho, a sop
made with vinegar, oyle, salt and
bread.


G E
* † Gebeló, a wilde hog.

* Gelíz, a broking fellow.

* Gelo, id est, se lo that, vnto him.

Gelosia, f. ielousie, Also a lattice win­
dow.

Gemído, m.groning, mourning heaui­
ly, pytifull lamentation.

* Gemidór, m.one that mourneth heaui­
ly, or that groneth.

* Gemiéndo, mourning heauily, gro­
nyng, sobbing, and sighing.

Gemír, yo Gímo, to grone, to mourne
heauily, to sob, to wayle, to make a la­
mentable noise, to roare, to cracke.

* Gíme, Gímo, vide Gemír. 

Genciána, f. an herbe called Gentian, or
Bitterwoort.

* Genealogía, or Descendéncio, vide 
Abolório. 

Generación, f. begetting, linage, descent
of kindred, a stocke, a pedigree.

Generál, generall, vniuersall.

Generalidád, f. generalitie, vniuersali­
tie.

Generalíssimo, m.most generall, most
vniuersall.

Generalménte, vniuersally, general­
lie.

* Génere, vide Genéro, a kinde, stocke,
linage, pedigree, sort, or manner.

* Genérico, m.of or pertaining to a stock
or linage, sort or manner.

Género, m.kinde, stocke, linage, pedi­
gree, a sort or manner.

Generosidád, f. noblenes of birth, genti­
litie, generositie.

Generosaménte, gentlemanlike, like one
of noble parentage, like one of a noble
minde.

* Generóso, m.a gentleman, one of a
noble house, of a noble spirite or cou­
rage.

* Genésta, or Genísta, broome.

Gengíbre, m.ginger, a spice vsuallie
knowne.

* Geniáles léchos, beds whereon they
beget and conceiue children.

* Geníl, m.a riuer in Spaine in Anda­
luzia.

* Genitívos, m.the coddes, cullions of a
man.

* Génio, m.a mans angell or spirite, or
rather his naturall disposition.

* Genitál, the priuitie of man or woman,
seruing to engender.

* Genízaro, or jenizaro, a captaine or
such like officer among the Turkes. Al­
so some attendants about the Empe­
rour of the Turks person which are cul­
led by that name, they are of his guard.

* Génoua, a cittie so called in Italy.

* Genoués, people of Genoua.

* Gentálla, f. common, base people.

Génte, f. a nation, people, a companie of
folke.

* Gentiána yerva, the herbe called gen­
tian, or bitterwoort, or felwoort.

Gentíl, proper of personage, handsome,
fine, comely, goodly to looke vpon.
Also a heathen, Ethnick, or Pagan,
one that knoweth not God.

Gentiléza, f. propernes, finenes, beautie,
comlines.

* Gentilhómbre, a man of good pro­
portion and carriage, a comely man,
well qualitied, a gentleman, a hand­
some proper man.

* Gentilhómbre de la bóca, a taster to
a prince.

* Gentilhómbre de la cámara, a gen­
tleman of the chamber bearing such
an office.

Gentisico, m.of or pertaining to a Gen­
tile or Pagane.

* Gentilidád, f. gentilitie, or paganisme.

Gentilménte, properly, finely, comelie,
neately, handsomely.

Geografia, f. Geographie, the descrip­
tion of the earth with the seuerall
countries and parts thereof.

Geógrafo, a describer of the earth, a
Geographer.

Geómetra, m.a measurer of the earth, a
land measurer, a worker by proporti­
ons Geometricall, a surueyor, a taker of
heightes or distances.

Geometría, f. measuring of ground, sur­
ueying of land, taking the height of a­
ny thing by the shadow, discerning of
distances of places or matters by view,
casting of plots cunningly for camps,
artificiall fortification or dooing anie
thing by due proportion.

Gerarchía, f. a Hierarchie, a state of
priesthood, ecclesiasticall state, a royall
priesthood, a hierarchie of angels.





* Gerigónça, Girigónça, vide Jeri­
gónça, f. pedlers french, gibbrish.

Geripliéga, a drugge called Hiera Pi­
cra.

* Germinár, to spring, to spout, to budde.

Geróndio, the ground of a verbe.

Gésto, m.the countenance, the gesture, the
carriage, the outward behauiour.

Lobítos en tal gésto, ah my pretie mun­
kie face.

* Géta, a great lippe, such as the blacke
Moores haue. Also a kind of mushrom.

* Getón, m.a great lipped fellow, a negro.
Also great mushrome.

* Gezmines, Iazmines.


G I
* Giba, vide Corcóba, f. a bunch or
crookednes on the backe.

* Gibádo, vide Corcobádo, m.crooke
backed, one with a bunch on his backe
or shoulders.

* Gibóso, m.idem. Also hillie, full of
hils.

Giféro, m.one that selleth flesh by retaile
dressed. Also sometimes vsed for a
butcher.

Gigánte, a giant, a monstrous man that
was supposed to haue his beginning
from the earth without hauing any
naturall parents, such as we reade of
Gog and Magog, with Corinæus, &c.

Gigantéa yérva, a certaine herbe.

* Gilbarbévra, a prickley shrub called
Butchers broome or knecholme.

* Giles, the names of men of a certaine
familie or kinred so called, in English
Giles.

* Gíme, Gímo, vide Gemír. 

* Gimiéndo, grouing, vide Gemír.

* Ginea provincia, the countrie or pro­
uince of Guinie.

* Ginébta, or Ginébro, a sweete shrub
or tree called Iuniper.

* Ginébra, the towne of Geneua.

Ginéta, f. a captaines leading staffe.

* cavalgár a la Ginéta, to ride with the
legs trussed vp in short stirrups, with a
target and a ginnet launce.

* cavalgár a la brída, to ride with their
legs downe long, as men vse to ride in
England. Also to run at tilt or tour­
ney.

Ginéte, a light horseman that rideth a la
ginéta, called a ginnet.

* Ginéte de Salamánca, a certaine kind
of earthen pitcher. Also a light horse­
man of Salamanca.

* Ginéte esquadrón, a squadron of light
horse-men armed with targets and
launces.

* Ginéte lánça, a ginnet launce.

* Ginetón, a certaine weapon, a great
leading staffe for a captaine, &c.

* Girabandera, f. a turning about of the
ensigne or flag.

Giráfa, f. a leopard.

* Girálda, f. the image of a woman of
gilt brasse in the top of the great tower
of Seuill in Spaine, which turneth with
the winde. Also the proper name of wo­
men in Spaine.

* Girár, to wheele or compasse about.

* † Girifálte, a great hauke called a ier­
faulcon.

* Girigónça, or Gerigónça, vide Jeri­
gónça, f. pedlers french.

Girófe, a gilloflower, the great sweete
gilloflower, a carnation or such like.

† Girón, a lap, a garde, the skirt or hem of
a garment.

Gironádos, m.of many sundrie colours,
partie coloured. Also with many skirts.

* Gitáno, m.a counterfeit rogue called
a gypson or Egyptian.


G L
Gléva, vide Gréva, greaues, armour for
the legs or thighes.

* Glóba, f. a globe, a round boule, &c.

* Glóbo, m.a globe, a sphere.

Glória, f. glorie, praise, fame, renowne,
credit.

Gloriárse, to brag, to boast, to glorie, to
make a great shew, to vaunt himselfe.

Glorificár, Præs. yo Glorifico, 1. Præt.
yo Glorifiqué, to glorifie, to set foorth
his praises, to magnifie, to exalt, to ex­
toll, to aduance.

Glorificación, f. glorifying, setting
foorth with great praises, extolling,
lifting vp to the skies, magnifying.

* Glorifiqué, vide Glorificár. 

Gloriosaménte, gloriously, stately, pom­
pously, magnificently, famously.

Glorióso, m.glorious, high, stately, mag­
nificent, pompous, famous, notable,  ex­
cellent, renowned.

Glósa, or Glóssa, a glosse, an exposition, a
briefe discourse expressing a thing, a
commentarie, a paraphrase.

* Glosádo, or Glossádo, m.commented
vpon, interpreted, briefly expounded.

Glosadór, or Glossadór, m.an expoun­
der of darke sayings, a glosser, a com­
menter, an interpreter.

Glosár, to expound, to interpret, to com­
ment, to open hard sayings.

Glotón, m.a glutton, a greedie gut, a
bellie god.

Glotoneár, to eate vnreasonably, to play
the glutton, to haue no minde but on his
bellie.

Glotonía, f. gluttonie, too much eating
and drinking, bellie cheere.

* Glóva, vide Glóba. 


G O
Góbio, m.a little fish called a gudgeon.

* Goçár, vide Gozár. 

* Gódos, the Gothes a kinde of people.

Góffo, vide Gófo. 

Gófo, m.rude in speech, of no good vtte­
rance.

Gója, f. a basket, a pannier or skep.

Góla, f. a gorget of yron, such as souldiers
weare about their neckes.

* Goléta, f. the name of a fort vpon the
coast of Barberie.  Also another in the
low countries.

* Golfano, an herbe called Nenuphar or
water-Lillie.

Golfin, or Gorfin, m.a fish called a Dol­
phin.

Gólfo, m.a gulfe of the sea, where it hol­
loweth in betweene two capes.

* Golgónço, one full of gesture, a busie
bodie, a medlar in all matters, a smatte­
rer in all things, one that hath an oare
in euery mans matter.

Golondrina, f. a swallow.

* Golondríno, a yoong swallow.

Golosína, f. gluttonie, gourmandise, de­
light in belly cheere.

Goloseár, to play the glutton, to eate vn­
reasonably, to haue al his delight in fil­
ling the belly.

Golóso, m.gluttonous, an vnreasonable
eater, one whose minde is all on his bel­
lie.

* Golozinár, to play the glutton, to eate
and deuour much meat.

* Gollorias, f. brothes, pottages, suppings.
Also a kind of little birds.

Gólpe, m.a blow, a stripe, a knocking at a
doore.

* Gólpe de génte, a throng of people, a
great number of people.

* Gólpe de guarniciónes, a great num­
ber of garrisons of soldiers.

Golpeár, to strike, to smite, to beate with a
hammer, &c.

Golpeádo, m.smitten, striken, beaten
with a hammer.

* Golpezílla, f. a small stroke such as lo­
uers in iest giue one another.

Góma, f. gum, a clue of thread.

* Gomarábiga, gum of Arabia, which is
the best gum.

Gomitadúra, f. vomiting, casting of the
gorge, loathing of the stomacke.

Gomitár, vide Vomitár, to vomit, to
spew, to cast the gorge, to loath.

Gómito, m.vomit, spewing, casting the
gorge.

* Gómo de lána, a packe of woll.
  




Gomóso, m.gummie, full of gum.

* Góndola, a boate in Venice, so called, of
the making and bignes of an English
wherrie.

Góndrola, f. a kinde of small barke or
boate like a wherrie.

* Gónce, Gónze, or Gózne, the hinges
of a doore or window.

* Góndola, f. a kinde of small barke, a
wherrie.

* Gónze, vide Gónçe. 

* Góra, vide Górra. 

* Gordillo, m.somewhat fat.

Górdo, m.grosse, fat, heauie, vnwilsome,
dulwitted, foolish.

Gordúra, f. fatnes, grossenes, vnwilsom­
nes.

Gordolóbo, a great furrie herbe called
Lungworke, bullocks, Lungqort, wool­
blade, or torch herbe.

* Goreár, to take off the hat often.

* Gorejár, vide Gorgeár. 

† Gorgeár, to chatter or chirpe as birdes
do, to sing as a bird.

† Gorgeadór, m.a chatterer, a pratler, a
babler, a crier out, one that vseth to
make a disorderly noise.

* † Gorgeamiénto, m.chattering, pra­
ting, babling.

Gorgójo, m.a little worme that spoileth
corne much in the grainers or lofts, cal­
led a Weeuill or bowd.

† Gorguéra, f. a gorget, a partlet or neck­
band.

Gorgúzes, the head of a dart, a club.

* † Gorjál de málla, a gorget of maile.

* Gorílla, f. a little cap.

* Gormádo, m.full of spewing, giuen
much to vomit.

Gormár, vide Gomitár. 

† Górra, a cap, a bonnet, a veluet cappe
made high, somewhat of the fashion of
the courtiers wearing of veluet caps in
England, or like a womans veluet cap,
with somewhat broader brimmes.

Gorrión, m.a birde called a sparrow.

Gorrioncíllo, m.a yoong sparrow.

* Gorvarán, m.grograine.

Gorvión, a thing at the Apothecaries
called Euphorbium.

* Gorúllo, m.any little knop in cloath.

* Gorvorán, m.grograin.

* Gósne, vide Gónce. 

* Gosóso, vide Gozóso. 

Gósque, m.a whelpe, a little dogge, a
curre dogge.

* Gosquéjo, a little dogge, a whelpe, a
curre dogge.

Góta, f. the gout, a disease incurable af­
ter that it hath seized on a ioint. Also a
droppe.

Góta, corál, the falling sicknes.

Goteádo, m.dropped on, spotted with
drops.

Goteár, to drop.

Gotéra, f. a gutter wherein drops fall and
so run away.

Gotílla, f. a little drop.

Gotóso, m.goutie, troubled with the
gout.

Governación, f. gouernment, rule, or­
dering, direction.

* Governádo, m.gouerned, guided, di­
rected, ordered.

Governádor, m.a gouernour, a ruler, a
director, an orderer, a tutor.

* Governadóra, f. a gouernesse, a tu­
tresse.

Governálle, or Timón, the rudder, the
helme of a ship or barke whereby it is
guided in the course.

Governár, yo Goviérno, to gouerne, to
guide, to order, to direct, to rule.

* Goviérne, Goviérno, vide Gover­
nár. 

Goviérno, m.gouernment, order, mode­
ration, rule, direction.

* Gozádo, m.enioyed, obtained.

Gozár, to reioice, to enioy, to obtaine.

* † Gózne, vide Gónce, the hinge of a
doore.

Gózo, m.ioy, mirth, gladnesse, merri­
ment.

Gozóso, or Gosózo, merrie, glad, ioy­
full.

† Gózque, vide Gósque, m.a whelpe, a
little dogge, a curre.

* † Gozquéjo, or Gosquéjo, idem. 


G R
* Grá, id est Grácia, f. grace, fauour,
comlines, beautie, pleasantnesse, thanks.

Grácia, grace or thanksgiuing, grace or
comelinesse. Also merrie and wittie
iests.

* Grácias dezír, to speake pleasantly, or
wittily.

* Grácias dár, to yeeld thankes, to bee
thankefull.

Graciosaménte, graciously, fauoura­
ble, comely, pleasantly, thankefullie,
wittily.

Gracióso, m.gracious, pleasant, comelie,
thankefull, well thought of, in fauour,
acceptable.

* Gráda, a step, a degree, a staire, a round
in a ladder.

* Las Grádas en Sevílla, the greeses or
steppes, as in entring the exchange at
Seuill whereon the merchants entred
do walke in a faire place.

* Grádas de yglésia, the greeses or steps
of a church.

Grádo, m.a degree, a dignitie, an office, a
state, a step. Also threescore miles on
earth, answering to a degree in heauen.
Also a meane, an entrie, a way to any
thing.

Graduár, to preferre to a degree, to pro­
mote, to graduate, to take degree in
schooles.

Graduádo, m.one that hath taken de­
gree, one come to preferment, a gradu­
ate in the vniuersitie.

Gragéa, f. carawaies that are eaten in
sauce.

† Grája, or Grájo, a chough, a iacke daw.
Some say a iay.

* Grajéa, f. carawaies.

Grájo, vide Grája. 

Gráma, f. graspe, an herbe called dogs­
tooth, or rather the herbe verueine.

Gramatica, f. grammar, the art of spea­
king or writing right of any toong.

Gramático, m.a grammarian, one that
can speake and write in a toong artifi­
cially and according to rule.

* Gramonílla, f. a kinde of herbe.

Gramóso, m.grassie, a place where grasse
doth growe. Also where much dogs­
tooth the herbe groweth.

* Grán, vide Gránde, great, big, large.

Grána, f. graine to die cloth with in
graine, cutcheneale, seede, graine.

Grána deparaýso, graines of paradise,
a thing called Cardamomum.

* Grána en Gráno, cutcheneale, scarlet
graine.

Granáda, f. a pomegranate, so called be­
cause it is full of graines. Also a citie in
Spaine called Granada.

* génte Granáda, f. a people strong, 
goodly and lustie, people of good stature
proper and comly.

* Granadéro, m.a seller of pomegra­
nates.

* Granadíno, a man of Granada. Also a
little or yoong pomegranate.

Granádo, a pomegranate tree.

* Granádo trígo, great lustie wheate,
wheate  of a lustie eare and goodly
corne full of flower.

Granár, to kerne as corne doth, to graine.

* Granáte, m.a precious stone.

* Grán capitán, the great captain, which
name and title was giuen to Gonçalo
Fernándes de Cordua duke of Sessa
for his great valor and woorth.

* Gránças de trígo, the barbes of wheat,
the huskes wherein the corne doth lie,
the chaffe, sometimes bran or cribble of
meale that is boulted out.

† Gránças echár, to winnow the chaffe
from the corne, to sift out the huskes
from the corne.

Grancér, vide Granizár, to haile, as
when the haile falleth.

* Granchóso, vide Grançóso. 





† Grançóner, ortes or refuse of things,
barbes of the eares of corne, huskes,
chaffe, bran.

* † Grançónes de árbol, the withered
buds and leaues that fall from trees.

† Grançóso, m. full of barbes, orts, chaffe
or bran.

* Grandázo, m.a thing very great or
bigge.

Gránde, great, big, large, spacious.

Grandeménte, greatly, hugely, ex­
tremely, largely.

Grandéza, f. greatnesse, largenesse, huge­
nesse, long countenaunce.

* Grandezillo, m.somewhat big, prettie
and great.

Granéra, f. a granier, a place to keepe
corne in.

* Granéro, vide Granéra. 

* Granfaústo, m.great stately pride,
great pompe.

* Grangeadór, m.one that laieth vp in
the barne, a laier vp in store, a good
husband, a thriftie man, a sauer of
things.

Grangeár, to play the good husband, to
get, to heape vp in store, to hoord vp, to
spare, to gather togither.

Grangeria, f. gathering togither, heaping
vp store, hoording, sparing, prouiding
for a rainie day, good husbandrie.

* Grangéro, or Granjéro, m.a good
husband, a thriftie man, a gathering
fellow.

Granja, f. a farme, a grange.

* Graniçár, vide Granizár. 

* Graníço, vide Granízo. 

* Granjeadór, or Grangeadór, a far­
mer, a goood husband.

* Granjeár, vide Grangeár. 

* Granjería, f. vide Grangería. 

* Granjéro, or Grangéro, a good hus­
band, a thriftie fellow.

Graníllo, m.a little graine, the kernell or
stone in fruit, the waight of a graine,
the stone in a grape.

Granito, or Granido, m.a stone in figs.

Granizár, or Graniçár, to haile.

Gráno, m.graine, a corne, a stone in a
grape or such other fruit.

* Gráno de helécho, the seede of ferne.

* Granúja, the huske of a grape.

* Gránzas, f. cribble or bran. Also
chaffe.

* Granzér, vide Grançér. 

* Granzónes, vide Grançónes. 

Grássa, vide Grassúra, f. fatnes, grease,
varnish to set out things in shew.

Grassiénto, m.fat, greasie, well fed.

* † Grasnadóres, gaggling geese.

* † Grasnár, to gaggle as geese doe, to
chirp, chatter, or crake as birdes or
crowes, to quackle as duckes.

* † Grasnído, m.the gaggling of geese, or
of such like fowles, the chirping or chat­
tering of birdes, the quackling of
duckes.

* Grassúra, or Grássa, fatnes, grease,
varnish.

* Grassúra en la barríga, the fat gut r
tripe, the arsegut.

Gratificación, f. dooing a good turne,
shewing of thankefulnes.

* Gratificádo, m.gratified, hauing had a
good turne, pleasured, rewarded for a
good turne.

Gratificár, to gratifie, to do a good turne,
to shew a thankefull minde, to pleasure
another.

* Grátis, for God, a mercie, gratis.

* Gratitúd, f. thankefulnes, gratitude.

* Gráto, gratefull, acceptable, thanke­
full.

* Gratuitaménte, of good will, freely,
without benefit, without paine or tra­
uell.

* Gratúito, without recompence or hope of
reward, vnhired, freely bestowed.

* Gratulatória cárta, a letter of congra­
tulation or thankesgiuing.

* Gravádo, m.engraued, as in stone, met­
tall, bone, or such like.

* Gravadúra, f. engrauing in mettall,
&c.

* Gravár, to engraue in wood, mettall,
stone, bone, &c.

Gráve, graue or sober, grieuous, heauie,
troublesome, sorrowfull. Also stately,
loftie, proud.

Gravedad, f. authoritie, grauitie or so­
brietie, griefe, trouble, sorrow, vexati­
on. Also statelines, loftines, pride.

Graveménte, grauely or soberly, heauily,
greeuously.

* Gravéza, f. weight, grieuousnes.

* Gráyas, Grecians.

† Graznár, to chirp, chatter, or sing as
birds, to crake as crowes, to gaggle as
geese do, to quackle as duckes do.

† Graznído, m.chirping, chattering r
singing of birdes, craking of crowes,
gagling of geese, quackling of duckes.

* Gréba, or Grévas, greues or armor for
the legs or thighes.

Gréda, clay, fullers earth which they vse
in thicking of cloath.

Gredóso, m.chalkie, clammish, clayie.

Greguéscos, m.great wide breeches, cal­
led galligaskoines.

Grémio, m.a lap, the place on the inside
betweene the two thighes.

Grévas, armor for the legs.

* Gréy, f. a flocke or people committed to
to ones charge.

Gréyes, f. idem. 

Gría, f. a nit, the spawne of a louse.

* Griégo, m.a Grecian.

Griéta, f. a disease on a horse called the
scratches, the chaps or cranies on the
hands arising with extreme cold going
without gloues.

Grífo, m.a griphon.

Grillár, to chirpe or sing like a Cricket.

* † Gríllo, m.a Cricket. Also a kinde of
grashopper.

Grillos, m.fetters or gieues. Also a kinde
of grashoppers.

* † Grillónes, m.great fetters, great gras­
hoppers or crickets.

Gríma, f. a fright, the standing vp of the
haire on the head.

* Grimál del ójo, f. the corner of the
eie.

* Grimóso, m.one much afrighted, one
whose haire vseth to stand vpright.

* Grípho, vide Grífo. 

Grisól, vide Crisól. 

Gríta, f. crying for helpe, lamentation,
schriking.

* Gritadór, m.one that vseth to schrike or
crie out, a maker of noise.

* Gritamiénto, m.schriking or crying
out.

Gritár, to schrike or crie out, to make an
outcrie.

* Gríto, m.a schriking, a noise, a crying
out.

* Grósca, f. a kinde of venemous ser­
pent.

Grossaménte, grossely, rudely, foggily,
bungarly.

Grossedád, f. grossenes of conceit, dulnesse
of wit, doltishnes, blockheadednes.

Grosséro, m.a grossehead, a blockhead, a
dull witted fellow.

* Grossezuélo, somewhat thicke, some­
what dull witted, none of the wi­
sest.

Grossúra, or Grosúra, f. fatnes, grossenes,
foggines.

† Grúa, f. a crane to winde vp great bur­
thens with. Also vsed for the crane
birde.

* Grúe, vide Grúlla, f. a crane birde.

* Gruélla, vide Grúlla. 

* Gruesséro, a seller in grosse.

Gruésso, grosse, fat, thicke, foggie, dull­
witted, lined within.

Grúlla, f. a crane birde.

Gruméte, m.a ship-boy, a drudge in a
ship, a galley slaue.

Grúmo, m.a cabbage. Also a little cluster
of grapes.

Grunído, m.grunting like a hogge.

Gruñidór, m.one that grunteth like a
hogge.





Gruñír, to grunt as a hogge.

* Grúpa de cavállo, f. the crupper that
goeth vnder a horses taile.

Grupáda, f. a blowe, a stroke of the waues
of the sea, or such like, or a great troupe
or companie.

Grupéra, f. the crupper that goeth vnder
the horse taile.

Grúta, f. a den, a caue, a hollowe place in
the ground.

* Grúz, vide Grúlla, a crane.


G V
* Guáçumas, f. a fruite growing in the
Indies.

† Guadafiónes, m.manicles to tie and
wring the hands with, gauntlets, splints
mittens, long gloues.

Guadalquinír, a riuer in Spaine so cal­
led running by Seuill.

* † Guadamecí, or Guadamecíl, vide 
Guadamecíes. 

† Guadamecíes, or Guadamecíles,
hangings made of gilt leather for their
houses in Spaine.

* † Guadalajára, f. a cittie in Spaine in
the kingdome of Toledo.

† Guadáña, f. a sieth to mowe with.

† Guadañadór, m.a mower that moweth
haie or corne.

* † Guadapéra, f. a choake peare, a wilde
peare.

* Guadapéro, m.a wilde peare tree, a
choake peare tree.

* Guadramáña, vide Guadrimáña, f. 
deceit, cosenage.

† Guadrimáña, f. deceit, a peece of cose­
nage.

† Guái, vide Guáy, alas, wo.

* Guaiábos, a kind of fruite in the In­
dies.

* Guaiadór, vide Guayadór. 

Guaiár, vide Guayár. 

* † Guálda, an herbe to die yellow with.

* † Gualdádo, coloured yellowe, more
white than yellow.

† Guáldo, yellow.

* † Gualdrápa, a footecloth for a noble
man to ride on.

* † Guanábanos, a fruite in the In­
dies.

* Guantáda, a blow with the palme of
the hand.

* † Guantádo, gloued, one that weareth
gloues.

† Guánte, m.a gloue.

* Guánte de hiérro, a gantlet.

* Sálvo el guánte, alwaies excepting.
Also in a woman alwaies excepting
their honor and honestie.

* Guantéro, m.a glouer, one that maketh
or selleth gloues.

Guántes, m.gloues.

* † Guantezillo, m.a little gloue, a
childes gloue.

Guárda, f. a guard, or warding, a watch,
custodie, keeping.

* Guárda de Balvárte, the watch and
warde at the bulwarke.

Guardádo, m.warded, watched, kept,
looked to. Also, a secret matter.

Guardadór, m.a sauer, a keeper, a war­
der by day, a watchman by night.

Guardár, to garde, to watch, to saue, to
looke vnto, to keepe, to reserue, to lay
vp. Also to defend, protect, to shield, to
beware, to looke vnto, to see vnto.

Guardarópa, a garde-robe, a place where
clothes are kept. Also a keeper of the
garde-robe.

Guárdia, f. a garde, keeping safe, looking
to, a protection, a defence.

* Guardimáña, vide Guadrimáña. 

Guardián, m.a warder, a gardian that
hath the tuition of a yoong lad and of
his reuenues, a keeper or looker to
things, one that taketh charge.

* Guardián de navío, a ship keeper, one
that looketh to a ship when it is laid vp.

* Guardiña, the furre of a little beast.

* Guarecér, or Guarescér, to heale, to
make sound.

* Guarecído, m.healed.

* Guarentígia, an obligation which is of
force to take execution according to the
tenor of the bond without any processe
in lawe, a statute.

Guarída, f. a sconce, a place of refuge, a
retiring place, a place of rescue.

Guarísmo, m.arithmetike, algorisme, the
art of numbring.

Guarnecér, or Guarnescér, to furnish,
to fortifie, to fraight a ship, to garnish.

Guarnecído, or Guarnescído, furnish­
ed, trimmed vp, fortified, fraighted,
garnished.

Guarnescimiénto, m.furniture, fortifi­
cation, furnishing.

Guarnición, f. a garnison, embrodery,
garding of a garment, stitching of a
garment, hilts of a sword.

Guarnición de génte, a garrison f
souldiers.

Guarnicionéro, m.an armorer, a maker
or seller of armes, an vpholsterer, an em­
broderer.

* Guárte, take thou heede, looke well to
thy selfe.

* Guastár, vide Gastár. 

Guáy, alas for wo, out alas.

* † Guayadór, m.one that waileth and
lamenteth, or a dogge that howleth, or
barketh.

† Guayár, to wayle, to lament, to howle,
to wo his wretched state.

† Guáyas, f. lamentation, wailing, how­
ling, crying out vpon their missehap.

† Guedéja, f. a tuffe or locke of haire.

* Guedéja enhetráda, a locke of haire
that is crisped or curled.

Guedejóso, vide Guedejúdo. 

† Guedejúdo, or Guedejóso, one that
vseth to weare long tufts or lockes of 
haire.

* Guedéla, f. vide Guedésia. 

* Guélpe, a gulpe, as much as one drin­
keth at once without fetching his breth,

vide Golpé.

* Guerdár, vide Guardár. 

* Guerdóso, vide Guardóso, sparing,
niggardly, pinching.

Guéro, as Huévo guéro, an addle
egge.

Guérra, f. warre, battell, martiall af­
faires, warfarre.

Guerreadór, m.a warrior, a souldior, a
man at armes, a maker of warre and
troubles.

Guerreár, to make warre, to plaie the
souldier, to fellow the warres, to leade
a souldiers life.

* Guertéra, a garter, as órden de la
Guertéra, the order of the garter.

* Guéso, vide Huésso. 

* Guéux, allies, confederates, such as they
be in league with.

Guía, m.a guide, a leader, a conductor.
Also a guiding, leading, conducting,
ordering.

* Guiabára, f. an herbe called Crowe­
foote.

Guiádo, m. lead, guided, conducted.

Guiadór, m.a leader, a guide, a comman­
der, a conductor.

Guiár, to guide, to leade, to commande, to
conducte.

† Guíja, vide Aguíja, f. a needle. Also a
peeble stone.

† Guíjas, peeble stones, the beach or shin­
gle by the sea side.

† Guijárra, f. a stone, a peeble stone.

† Guijuélo, a small peeble stone, a grauel
stone.

* † Guílla, reuenewes of a wards land.

* Guinálda, f. vide Guirnálda. 

Guínda, f. a sower hard cherrie.

* Guindaléza, f. a great coard in a
ship.

* Guindamaýna, id est, Guínda, y a­
maýna, that is hoise vp saile and strike
saile.

* Guindár, to hoise vp any thing.

Guindas, f. sower bad cherries.

* Guindaléras, f. cherrie trees bearing
such sower cherries.





* Guindaléta, a great coard a ship boord,
to hoise vp saile.

* Guindáste, m.a coard in a ship.

Guindo, a sower cherrie.

Guiñár, to twinkle the eie, to winke with
the eie, to beckon.

* Guión, vide Guyón. 

Guirnálda, f. a garland, a coronet of
flowers.

Guísa, a guise, a fashion, a manner.

Guisádo, m.sod, baked, rosted, or other­
wise dressed.

Guisár, to dresse meate like a cooke, to
seeth, to boile, to bake, to roste, &c.

Guitárra, f. a rebecke, a gitterne, a small
instrument to play on.

* Guyón, or Guión, m.a cornet or horse­
men.

Gúla, f. gluttonie, the weazand or gullet,
whereby the meate passeth.

* Gulílla, f. a little throate, the throate
boll.

* Gullería, f. delicates, iuncates, daintie
cheere.

* Gullonías, idem. 

* Gúmana, f. vide Gúmena. 

† Gúmena, f. the cable of a ship.

* Gúmera, vide Gúmena, f. 

* Gúrbias, a carpenters chisell.

Gurupéra, f. a crowper of a horse.

† Gusaneár, to be full of wormes, to haue
or breed wormes.

† Gusaniénta cósa, a thing full of
wormes.

† Gusaníllo, m.a little small worme.

† Gusáno, m.a worme.

* Gúses, a kinde of poore pilgrime.

* Gúsque, m.a whelpe, a little dog, a cur
dog.

* Gusquéjo, a whelp, a little dog, a curre
dog.

* Gustádo, m.tasted, assaied, tried, liked.

* Gustadara, f. tasting, assaying, proouing,
liking.

Gustar, to taste, to assay, to prooue, to like
of.

Gústo, m.taste, proofe, assay, good li­
king.

* Gustóso, tasting well of, a sauorie
taste.

* Gúvias, vide Gúrbias. 

* Guyádo, m.guided, ruled, ordered, di­
rected.

Guyadór, m.a leader, a guide, a directer,
an orderer.

Guyár, to guide, to rule, to order, to di­
rect.

* Guyávas, vide Guayávas, a kinde of
fruit in the kingdome of China.

* Guyón, m.the guidon or cornet of a
companie of horse.

* Gúzque, a little dog or whelpe, a
curre dog.



H

HA, a voice of calling or speaking to
one. Also a voice of affirming
yea.

* Ha, ha, ha, of laughing.

* Hába, a beane.

* † Habalráz, a kinde of seede that kil­
leth lice.

* Habíl, or Ábil, able, nimble, actiue.

* Habilitár, or Abilitár, to enable, to
make fit, nimble, actiue, &c.

* Habilidád, or Abilidád, f. ablenesse,
actiuitie, deftnes.

* Habitación, or Abitación, f. a dwel­
ling, an habitation.

* Habitácolo, vide Abitácolo, an a­
bode, dwelling or abiding place.

* Habitadór, or Abitadór, m.a dwel­
ler, an inhabiter, one that abideth in a
place.

* Habitánte, vide Abitánte, dwelling,
lodging, inhabiting.

* Habitár, or Havitár, to inhabit, to
dwell.

* Hábito, or Ábito, m.a habit, fashion,
custome.

Hábla, f. speech, talke, pratling.

Habladór, m.a talker, one that hath toong
at will, a pratling fellowe, a busie
bodie.

Hablár, to speake, to talke, to reason.

* Hablár par cifras, to speake mistical­
ly, to talke darkly.

Hablár de espácio, to speake leisure­
lie.

Hablíllas, f. fables, trifling tales.

† Habubílla, f. a bird called a Iay, some
say a howpe, other a lapwing. Ouid
saith a howpebird whereinto Tereus
was transformed.

† Háca, or Hacanéa, f. a nag, a gelding,
a hackney.

† Háoa, f. a plot of ground, a field, a
closet.

* † Haçanóso, m.vide Hazañóso, a
doughtie man, he that doth some woor­
thie deede.

* Haçár, vide Haçér. 

* † Haçár Hiléras, to keepe ranks or files
as soldiers doe at their stands especi­
ally.

† Háce, m.a fagot, a bunch, a bundle, a
sheafe of corne.

Háce hazér, to tie in a bundle, to make a
fagot.

† Hacecíllo, or Hacezíllo, m.a bauen,
a small bundle.

* † Haçéña, Hazéña, or Acéña, f. a 
water mill.

* Hacér, vide Hazér, to make, to doe.

† Hácha, f. a twybill that carpenters doe
make morteise holes with, an axe, a
hatchet, a torch.

* Hácha de ármas, a halbard, a battell
axe.

* † Hácha de céra, a torch, a linke to
light the way.

* † Hachéro, m.one that cutteth with an
axe or hatchet. Also the place where a
torch or linke is set to giue light.

* Hácho de léña, a bundle or bunch of
small sticks to set firing to any thing on
a sudden.

Hachuéla, f. a little hatchet.

* Hácia, vide Házia, towards.

* Hacia, vide Hazia, I or he did make
or doe.

* Hacína, f. a woodstacke, a wood pile, a
heape or stacke of corne.

* Hacíno, a niggard.

Hadádo, fatall, that which is set downe
by the destinies.

Hadadór, m.a teller of fortunes, a reader
of destinies.

Hadár, to  tell destinies, to tell what peoples
fortunes shall be.

* Hádas, f. the destinies.

Hádo, m.destinie, that which is a mans
fortune (as they say.)

* Hága, Hágo, vide Hazér. 

* Haijár, vide Ahijár, to adopt or take
for his naturall childe.

* Háy, or áy, alas for woe.

* † Hafíz, a keeper of silke.

* Háia, vide Háya, f. a beech tree.

Háial, vide Hayál, a groue of beeches.

* Haládo, m.pulled or plucked at.

* Haladór, m.a puller or plucker at.

* Ha la hé, vide A la fé,  in good earnest,
in faith, in good faith.

* Halagádo, m.flattered, smoothed, mol­
lified, appeased, mitigated, cockered,
cherished.

† Halagadór, m.a smoothbootes, a flatte­
rer, a faire spoken man, a cunning
tongued fellow.

Halagadóra cósa, a smooth matter, a
pleasing matter.

* Halagár, Præs. yo Halágo, 1. Præt. yo
Halagué, to cherish, to cocker, to make
much of, to flatter, to asswage, to mol­
lifie, to mitigate, to appease.

† Halágo, m.faire speech, cockering, ma­
king much of, flatterie.

* Halague, vide Halagár. 

Halaguéño, m.fawning, flattering, coc­
kering.

Halagueñaménte, cockeringly, smooth­
ly, flatteringly.

* Halaguéro, vide Halagádor, a flat­
terer, a smoothbootes.

* Halár, to plucke at, to pull on, to drawe
to.





Halcón, or Alcón, m.a hauke.

* Halconéra, a place to keepe haukes in,
a meewe.

Halconéro, m.a faulconer, one that kee­
peth a hauke or haukes.

* Halconéte, a peece of artillerie called a
faulkonet.

Hálda, f. the skirts of clothes, or the lo­
wer part or skirt of a mountaine.

Háldas, f. skirts of clothes, the lowest
parts in clothes, welts, or gardes vpon
clothes. Also the lowest parts or skirts
of mountaines or hils.

* Haldeándo, drawing the skirts of their
clothes on the grounde, as some women
vse to do.

* Haldeáno, vide Aldeáno, a countrey­
man, one that dwelleth in a village.

* Haldeár, to drawe a long the skirts of
their clothes, to goe with a gowne or
long garment dragging on the ground.

Haldúdo, m.hee that weareth clothes
with long skirts.

Halládo, m.found.

Hallár, to finde.

Hallázgo, m.rewarde for finding anie
thing, the finding of some thing.

Hallúlla, f. pellets to cram pullen with.

* Halóque, m.wine called Hollocke.

* Halvanéga, f. a caule of net-worke for
women.

* Halvárda, vide Alvárda, f. a packe­
saddle.

Hamácas, m.hanging beds: brasill beds
made to hang vppe against a tree or
wall, like a cabbin bed in a ship.

Hamágo, m.bees meate.

Hamapóla, or Pappoúlla, f. wilde pop­
pie, or red cornerose.

* Hámbar, vide Ámbar, amber.

* Hambéres, the towne of Anwarpe.

† Hámbre, f. hungar, famine.

† Hambreár, to be hungrie, to long for to
eate.

† Hambriénto, m.hungrie, longing to
eate.

* Handadór, vide Andadór, m.one that 
goeth or walketh much, a trotter vppe
and downe.

* Handár, vide Andár, to go.

* Handén, vide Andén, m.a walke, a
place to walke in.

† Handrájo, m.a ragge, a patch.

* † Handrajóso, m.full of ragges, rag­
ged.

† Hanéga, f. a measure conteining a bu­
shell and a halfe.

* Hanegáda, the quantitie of a bushell.

* Hanelár, or Anelár, to gape, or gaspe
for breath.

* Hangelóte, vide Angelóte, a coine
of golde in Englande called an an­
gell.

* Hánpa, f. swaggering or quarrelling for
queanes or whoores.

* Háo, a voice of calling, as hoa.

† Haragán, m.a lazie fellow, a sluggard,
a retchles companion.

† Haraganía, f. sloth, lazines, careles­
nes.

* Harambél, vide Arambél. 

* † Harána, f. craftie deceite in buying
and selling.

* † Haranéro, m.a subtle deceiuer in
buying or selling.

* Harcabuziéro, vide Arcabuzéro, m.
a shooter in a harquebuse.

* Harcabúz, vide Arcabúz, m.a harque­
busse.

† Hárda, f. a squirrell.

† Hardaleár, or Haredaleár, to be thin,
to waxe thin.

* Hardíd, or Ardíd, m.a wilie policie, a
stratageme.

* † Hardílla, f. a little squirrell.

* Hardór, m.heate, burning, feruencie,
earnest desire, great courage, exceeding
loue.

* Hárduo, vide Árduo, hard to com­
passe, loftie.

* Haré, I will make or do it, vide Ha­
zér.

* Háre, vide Hárre. 

* Harénca, or Harínca, f. vide Harén­
que, a herring.

* Harénga, f. an oration, a long speech.

* Harénque, f. a herring.

* Hargamása, vide Argamása, a mix­
ture of lime and sand.

† Haríja, f. mill-dust, or dust of the
meale.

Harína, f. meale.

Harinál, a bin to keepe meale in, a meale
trough.

Hariníllas, f. a kinde of play at dice.

* Hárma, vide Árma. 

Hárma, wilde rue.

* Harmáda, vide Armáda, a great fleete
of ships.

* Harmár, vide Armár, to arme.

* Hármas, vide Ármas, armes.

* Harmonía, vide Armonia, musicke,
melodie, harmonie.

† Harnéro, m.a sieue to sift with.

* Harón, an herbe called cuckopit. Also
an idle lazie fellow, a retchles compa­
nion.

† Haróna béstia, f. a restie iade, a iade
that will tire quickly, a dull lazie
beast.

† Haroneár, to be restie, to be lazie or
slothfull.

† Haronía, f. restines, dulnes, lazines.

Hárpa, f. an instrument of musicke called a
harpe.

Harpáda cára, the face crossed, the face
wounded, the face slashed ouer with
cuts.

* Harpadór, m.one that doth any thing in
great haste or speede. Also a harper.

* Harpadúra, f. a skotching or notching of
any thing.

Harpár, to crosse the face, to wound the
face. Also to do anything in great hast
or with speede.

Harpías, f. three monstrous rauening
birds, hauing faces like maidens. They
were said to be gotten of Mars and
Terra.

* Harpón, m.a trout-speare with three or
fower teeth.

* Harponádo, m.stroken or wounded
with a trout-speare.

* Harponár, to strike or hit with a trout-
speare. To kill fish with a trout-speare.

* Hárra, vide Harre. 

† Hárre, a voice of carters to their horses,
saying, arce, gee, haight, &c. to cause
them to goe as they woulde haue
them.

† Harreár, to driue beastes as carters
doe.

* Hárria, f. a droue or companie of mules
or asses togither.

† Harriéro, m.a driuer of beasts, a carter,
&c.

* Hárrio, m.the proper name of Arrius,
whereof the sect of the Arrians came.

* Hartádo, m.filled, satisfied.

Hartár, to fill, to satisfie.

* Hartásgo, Hartázgo, Hartázga, or
Hartúra, fulnes of meate or drinke, sa­
cietie.

* Hartiéro, m.vide Harriéro, a horsekee­
per.

† Hárto, m.filled, satisfied, enough, full.

Hárto mas, much more.

† Hárto ménos, much lesse.

† Hartúra, f. fulnesse, sacietie, sufficiencie,
ynough, as much as is requisite.

Haruéro, vide Harnéro. 

* Hasadór, m.vide Assadór, a spit, a
turnespit.

* † Háspa, vide Áspa. 

Hásta, euen, vntill, vp to.

Hásta agóra, vntill now.

Hásta álla, thither to.

Hásta aquí, hitherto.

Hásta que, vntill that.

* Hásta quánto, vntill, how much.

* Hásta tánto, euen to so much.

* Hásta quándo, vntill when.

Hásta, vide Ásta. 

* Hastádo, m.a pikeman, a speareman.

* Hastigádo, vide Hostigádo, pricked
forward.

* Hastigár, vide Hostigár, Præs. yo Ha­
stígo, 1. Præt. yo Hastigué, to pricke
forward.





Hastigue, vide Hastigár. 

* Hastil, m.vide Astíl, the staffe of a
speare, the stalke or handle of any
thing.

* Hastilla, f. a chip, a splinter, a single
quarter of timber.

Hastio, loathing, abhorring, mislike, dis­
daine.

Hastióso, m.one that hath a queasie sto­
macke, one that quickly will loath or
vomit at a thing.

† Hatáca, f. a ladle, a great spoone, a pot­
sticke.

* Hatáca de Hiérro, an iron ladle.

* Hatacadéra, or Atacadéro, a pole to
ram powder into a peece of ordinance.

* Hatajár, vide Atajár. 

* Hataláya, vide Ataláya, a beacon to
watch and warde at.

* Hatalayár, vide Atalayár. 

* Hatambór, vide Atambór, a drum,
a taber.

* Hataráya, f. a small fishing net or a ca­
sting net.

* Hatasajár, to giue or make cuts or
slices.

† Háto, m.a herd, a stocke of cattell, a
droue of any manner of cattell.

* † Hátt, an aduerbe of calling.

† Háva, f. beanes, a beane.

* Háva morisca, f. a kinde of small
beanes.

* Havádo animál, m.a liuing thing or
beast hauing the lampas in the mouth.

† Háva de béstias en la bóca, the lam­
pas, a disease in the mouth of beastes,
when such long barbles growe in their
mouthes that they cannot well feede.

* Havalório, vide Avalório. Also gar­
nishing with bugles.

† Havár, a fielde of beanes, a beane close, a
place to lay beanes in.

* Hávas, beanes. Also the quince in a
beast, or lampas, vide Háva de béstia.

Hávas de pérro, dog beanes.

* da Dios Hávas a quien no tiéne
quixádas, God giueth beanes to them
that haue no iawes to eate them: God
sends fooles fortune.

Havarráz, vide Avarráz, an herbe cal­
led stauesacre or lowsebeane.

* Havatído, m.beaten downe, deiected.

* Havér, vide Avér, to haue.

* Havéres, vide Avéres, m.goodes, sub­
stance.

* Havestrúz, vide Avestrúz, m.

* Havitár, vide Abitár. 

* Hávito, vide Habito, the habit, fashion
or custome.

* Haviésso, vide Aviésso. 

* Havilidád, vide Abilidád. 

* Havolórios, m.garnishing with bu­
gles.

* Háxa, vide Fáxa. 

* Hay, or Ay, woe, out alas.

† Haya, f. a beech tree.

† Hayál, a groue of beeches.

† Ház, f. the face, the outward shew of a
thing, or superficies, the outside of any
thing, the forefront, a campe or host of
men in battell.

* Ház de la tiérra, the face of the earth.

* Ház de qualquiér cósa, the outside of 
any thing.

* Ház, doe thou, make thou, the Impera­
tiue of the verbe Hazér.

* Hazabáche, vide Azabáche, or  Aza­
vache, m. 

* Hazábra, f. a small ship or barke.

* † Hazagáya, f. a iauelin, a moores wea­
pon.

* † Hazaár, vide Azaár, the flowers of
orenges.

† Hazaléja, f. a cloake, a vaile, a french­
hoode, a towell.

Hazáña, f. an exploit, a deede, a famous
act, a great matter done, a leude fact,
a wicked deed.

Hazañóso, m.a woorthie man, hee that
doth valiant or doubtie deeds, or great
exploits.

* † Hazár, vide Azár. 

* Hazazíllo, m.a little bundle of stickes,
or woode, a little fagot or bauen.

* † Hazcóna, f. a kinde of weapon like a
halberd, a glaiue.

† Háze, vide Háce, a fagot, a bundle.

* Hazebúche, vide Azebúche. 

* Hazedía, sharpenes, sowrenes, tartnes.
Also a sole fish. Also a kinde of roote.

* † Hazédo, m.sharpe, sower, eager.

Hazedór, m.a factor, a dooer, a dealer in
matters.

* Hazedóra cósa, a thing easie to bee
done.

* Hazedúra, f. sharpenes, tartnes, eager­
nes, sowernes.

* Hazendádo, m.rich in substance, well
furnished with goods.

Hazéña, vide Hacéña, a watermill.

Hazér, Præs. Hágo, házes, Háze, 1.
Præt. Hize, Hiziste, Hizo, Fut. Ha­
ré, rás, rá, Sub. Præs. Hága, Im­
perfect. Hiziéra, Haría, or Hiziésse,
Fut. Hiziére, to do, to deale, to bring
to passe, to followe on a matter, to com­
mit, to cause, to bring or beare.

* Hazér pesár, to make sorie.

* Hazér pedáços, to teare in peeces.

* Hazér plazér, to make merrie or ioy­
full.

* Hazér cámara, to go to stoole.

* Hazér aguáda, to take in fresh water a
shipboord.

Hazér água, to take in fresh water a
shipboord. Also to make water.

* Hazér niébla, to be mistie, to bee a
fogge.

Hazér cláro, to be cleere or faire wea­
ther.

* Hazér niéve, to snowe.

* Hazér cuénta, to reckon, to cast ac­
counts.

Hazér dentéra, to set the teeth on edge.

* Hazér cáso, to make account or recko­
ning of.

Hazér frío, to be colde, to waxe colde.

* Hazér cámpo, to pitch the field with
his enimie, or fight with his enimie.

* Hazér de bárro, to worke with clay, or
to emplaister.

* Hazér cáda vn su offício, euery man
to fall vnto his taske, to do euery man
what he should.

Hazér Ármas, to fight, or to combate.

* Hazér vertúd como enzina, a pá­
los, to become good, as an oake with
cudgelling, for by throwing of cudgels
to beate downe the acornes, the oake
beareth the better the next yeere.

* Hazérlo a la mugér, to haue to do with
a woman.

Hazér ventája, to surpasse, to exceede, to
go beyond.

* Hazér pápo, to eate much, to plaie the
glutton.

* Hazér piérnas, to stop on a sodaine as a
horse when hee runneth. Also to stande
strongly on his legs.

Hazér a fuéra, vide Hazér a lo lárgo. 

* Hazér se a lo lárgo, to get a loose out
from another, as two men offering to
drawe swords against another, or
two ships meeting to fight.

* Hazér Álto, to make a stande as soul­
diers in warre.

* Los esquadrónes Hiziéron Álto,
 the squadrons made a stande.

* Hazérse de nuévas, to make a thing
seeme strange vnto them which they
knowe of, to make himselfe strange in
that he is aware of.

* Hazér tíro, to make a shot. Also to
girde or taunt at one.

Hazér turrón, to make a kinde of meate
of hony, almondes, the kernels of pine
apples, grated bisket, ginger, and other
spices.

* Házes, as con dos Házes, with two
faces.

* Hazezíllo, m.a little bundle of stickes,
a little fagot, or bauen.

† Házia, towards, thitherward.

* Hazía, I or hee did make or doe, vide 
Hazér.

* † Házia abáxo, downwards.

Házia atrás, backwards.

* De házia la máno derécha, on the
right hand as yee go hence.





* Házia do quiéra, euen where or whi­
ther you will.

* † Haziágo, vide Aziágo, m.a dismall
or darke daie.

† Haziénda, f. wealth, riches, goods, sub­
stance.

* Haziéndo, in working, in doing.

* Haziénte, one that doeth, a dooer.

Hazimiénto, m.working, a dooing, bu­
sines.

Hazíno, or mesquíno, a poore wretch, a
simple soule.

* Hazitúna, vide Azeytúna, f. an oliue
berrie.

* Hazumbár, vide Azumbár. 


H E
* Hé, as a la Hé, in good faith, surely, of
a certaintie.

* No lo hé, I care not for it.

* Hea-pués, go to then.

He aquí, behold, see heere.

* Hébano, or Hébeno, vide ébano, the
blacke wood called Ebanie.

Hébra, f. a string of any roote, the barbes
of any herbe or flower being small like
strings or threeds.

* Hebréo, m.a Iewe.

Hebréro, m.the moneth called Februa­
rie.

* Hébro, río, a riuer called Heber.

* Heçár, vide Hezár. 

* Héçes, f. dregges, the lees of wine, the
grounds of beere, &c.

* Hechádo, vide Echádo, m.

* Hechár, vide Echár. 

* Hechizádo, m.bewitched, enchaunted,
forespoken.

Hechizár, to bewitch, to enchant, to fore­
speake, to curse.

* Hechizéra, f. a shee witch, an enchan­
tresse, a sorceresse.

Hechizería, f. witchcraft, sorcerie, en­
chantment.

Hechizéro, m.a man witch, a sorcerer,
an enchanter, a coniurer.

Hechízo, vide Hécho, any thing that
is to be done, any thing to be plotted, or
effected. Also witchcraft or sorcerie.

* Ruýdo hechízo, a false alarme, a ru­
mour made of one thing when another
is purposed.

* Hechízos, witcheries, witchcrafte.

Hécho, m.a deed, a fact, any thing that
is done or effected.

* Héchos, or Hazáñas, deedes, facts, ex­
ploits, matters brought to passe.

Hechúra, f. the making, the fashion, the
forme.

* Héco, vide Écho, or Éco, the voice
echo.

* Hécuba, f. the name of a queene of
Troy, wife to king Priamus.

Hedád, vide Edád, f. 

Hedér, yo Hiédo, to stinke, to haue an
ill sauour.

* Hedificár, vide Edificár, to build.

* Hedifício, vide Edifício, m.building.

* Hediondéz, vide Hedór, stench, loath­
some, sauour.

Hedióndo, m.stinking, ill sauouring.

Hedór, m.stinke, stench, loathsome sa­
uour.

* Hédos, a moist and rainie constellati­
on beginning in October.

* Hégloga, vide Égloga, f. a pastorall
speech or heardmans song.

* Héla, behold there.

* Heláda, vide Eláda, f. frost, freezing.

* Heléar, to be somewhat bitter.

* Héle, behold him, see him.

Helécho, m.fearne, female fearne.

* Helécho de róble, petit oake fearne,
polypodie.

Helgádo, m.the parting of the teeth, the
space betweene the teeth.

Helgadúra de diéntes, idem. 

* Helicón, m.a mountaine at Boetia in
Greece dedicated to Apollo and to the
Muses.

* Helitrópia, vide Elitrópia, the herbe
Turnesole or Sunflower, which turneth
with the sunne both at rising and go­
ing downe.

* Helitrópio, vide Elitrópio, a precious
stone, which receiueth the sunne like a
burning glasse.

* Hélo, behold him, behold it.

* Hélo aquí, see heere he is.

* Hélos aquí, see, they be heere.

* Hemanár, to spring, to issue, to runne as
water doth, to descend, to proceede, to
be conueyed.

* Hemancipár, vide Emancipár, to
manumit or make free him that was
bounde.

* Hembídia, vide Embídia, enuie, ma­
lice.

Hémbra, f. a woman, the female of any
liuing sensible thing.

* Hémbra de corchéte, a maile, the eie
of a claspe wherein the hooke taketh
holde.

* Hembrár, to make or create women.

Heméncia, f. vehemency, great ear­
nestnes, exceeding endeuour, beate
in affections.

Hemencióso, m.vehement, verie ear­
nest, hot in his sute, instant, impor­
tune.

Hemenciár, to be vehement, to be ear­
nest, to be hot in affections, to be inf­
stant, or importune.

Hemendár, vide Emendár, to amend.

* Hemiendár, vide, Emendár. 

* Hemispério, or Hemisphério, m.the
halfe spheare or circular globe, as much
of the skie and firmament as we can
discerne in our horizon.

* Hemoróides, a disease about the fun­
dament called the hemorrhoides.

* Henáno, a dwarfe.

* Henbarcár, vide Enbarcár, to ship in,
to take on ship-boord.

* Henbargár, vide Enbargár. 

* Hencadenár, vide Encadenár. 

* Hencalár, vide Encalár. 

* Hencaminár, vide Encaminár. 

* Hencanastádo, vide Encanastádo. 

* Hencandilár, vide Encandilár. 

* Hencaperuçádo, vide Encaperu­
çádo. 

* Hencaramár, vide Encaramár. 

* Hencarár, vide Encarár. 

* Hençarçár, vide Ençarçár. 

* Hencarcelár, vide Encarcelár. 

* Hencarecér, vide Encarecér. 

* Hencarniçár, vide Encarniçár. 

* Hencargár, vide Encargár. 

* Hencastellár, vide Encastellár. 

* Hencavalgár, vide Encavalgár. 

* Hencaxár, vide Encaxár. 

* Henclavijár, vide Enclavijár. 

* Henchimiénto, m.filling, stuffing full,
swelling.

Henchír, or Hinchír, to fill, to swell.

* Hencobrír, vide Encobrír. 

* Hencogér, vide Encogér. 

* Hencolár, vide Encolár. 

* Hencombrár, vide Encombrár. 

* Hencomençár, vide Encomençár. 

* Hencomendár, vide Encomendár. 

* Henconár, vide Enconár, to fester.

* Hencontrár, vide Encontrár. 

* Hencorár, vide Encorár. 

* Hencorbár, vide Encorbár. 

* Hencordonár, vide Encordonár. 

* Hencorvár, vide Encorvár. 

* Hencostrár, vide Encostrár. 

* Hencrespár, vide Encrespár. 

* Hencrudecér, vide Encrudecér. 

* Hencuadernár, vide Encuadernár. 

* Hencubár, to put in a tub or barrell.

* Hencubertádo, vide Encubertádo. 

* Hencubertár, vide Encubertár. 

* Hencubrír, vide Encubrír. 

* Hencuéntro, vide Encuéntro. 

* Hencumbrár, vide Encumbrár. 

* Hendéchas, vide Endéchas. 

* Hendecasílabo, vide Endecasíla­
bo. 

* Hendér, yo Hiéndo, to cleaue asun­
der, to riue as men riue or cleaue
blockes.

Hendedúra, f. cleauing asunder, a riuing,
a cranie or rift.

Hendíble, that which may be cleaued or





riuen with wedges, or such like.

Hendído, m.cleaued asunder, riuen.

Hendimiénto, m.cleauing or riuing with
wedges or otherwise.

* Henechár, vide Enechár. 

* Henfadádo, vide Enfadádo, wearied,
tired, offended.

Henfadár, vide Enfadár. 

* Henfádo, vide Enfádo. 

* Hengañár, vide Engañár. 

* Hengañóso, vide Engañóso. 

* Hengarrafár, vide Engarrafár. 

* Hengasgár, vide Engasgár. 

* Hengastár, or Engastár, to carue in
mettall, stone, &c.

* Hengaviládo, vide Engaviládo. 

* Hengordár, vide Engordár, to make
fat, to waxe fat.

* Hengorrár, vide Engorrár, to staie, to
delay, demurre, driue off, or prolong
time.

* Hengrandecér, vide Engrandecér. 

* Hengullír, vide Engullír. 

* Hengúrria, vide Engúrria. 

* Henjezádo, vide Enjezádo. 

* Henivelár, vide Enivelár. 

* Henlaçár, vide Enlaçár. 

* Henlardár, vide Enlardár. 

* Henlatádo, vide Enlatádo. 

* Henlaviár, vide Enlaviár. 

* Henlazár, vide Enlazár. 

* Henlevár, vide Enlevár. 

* Henllenár, vide Enllenár. 

* Henlodár, vide Enlodár. 

* Henlozár, vide Enlozár. 

* Héno, haie for cattle to eate.

Henpleár, vide Empleár, to fillfull.

* Henpuxár, vide Enpuxár. 

* Henquadernár, vide Enquadernár. 

* Hentedár, vide Entedár. 

* Hentexár, vide Entexár. 

* Henríque, vide Enríque. 

* Henriscár, vide Enriscár. 

* Henristrár, vide Enristrár. 

* Henrodeládo, vide Enrodeládo. 

* henRuviár, vide enRuviár. 

* Hensangrentár, vide Ensangrentár. 

* Hensartár, vide Ensartár. 

* Hensayár, vide Ensayár. 

* Henseñár, vide Enseñár. 

* henSeñoreár, vide enSeñoreár. 

* Hensénsio, vide Ensénsios. 

* Hensillár, vide Ensillár. 

* Hensoalçár, vide Ensoalçár. 

* Hensobervecér, vide Ensoberve­
cér. 

* Hensordecér, vide Ensordecér. 

* Hensuziár, vide Ensuziár. 

* Hentabiár, vide Entabiár. 

* henTablár, vide enTablár. 

* henTallár, vide enTallár. 

* Hentallecér, vide Entallecér. 

* henTapiár, vide enTapiár. 

* henTapiçár, vide enTapiçár. 

* henTenebrecér, vide enTenebre­
cér. 

* henTerrár, vide enTerrár. 

* Hentesár, vide Entesár. 

* henTexér, vide enTexér. 

* henTibiár, vide enTibiár. 

* Hentiscár, vide Entiscár. 

* Hentollár, to put in the durt or mire.

* Hentonár, vide Entonár. 

* Hentorcér, vide Entorcér. 

* Hentormecér, vide Entormecér. 

* Hentorpecér, vide Entorpecér. 

* Hentortár, vide Entortár. 

* henTossicár, vide enTossicár. 

* henTraçár, vide enTraçár. 

* henTristecér, vide enTristecér. 

* Henturbiár, vide Enturbiár. 

* Henvarár, vide Envarár. 

* Henvejecér, vide Envejecér. 

* Henvelesádo, vide Envelesádo. 

Henvestír, vide Envestír. 

Henxerír, vide Enzerír. 

* Henxabonár, vide Enxabonár. 

* Henxaguár, vide Enxaguár. 

* Henxalmár, vide Enxalmár. 

* Henxalvegár, vide Enxalvegár. 

* Henxambrár, vide Enxambrár. 

* Henxergádo, vide Enxergádo. 

* Henxerír, vide Enxerír, to graft in.

* Henxugár, vide Enxugár. 

* Henxúllo, vide Enxúllo. 

* Henxúndia, vide Enxúndia. 

* Henxúto, vide Enxúto. 

* Henyessár, vide Enyessár. 

* Hépta, the number of seauen in Greeke.

* Heptámeron, a worke of seuen daies, or
seuen parts.

Héra, age, time. Als a threshing floore, a
plot of ground, or bed in a garden. A
yard or court of a house.

* Heradór, vide Herradór, a ferrier, a
smith that shooeth horses.

* Herál, vide Erál. 

* Herário, vide Erário. 

* Herbáto, vide Erbáto. 

* Herbátum, an herbe called hogs Fennell
or Brimstone-wort.

* Herbéro, m.the gullet or throat boll.
Also one that gathereth herbes.

* Herbolátio, m.an herbarist, one that
hath skill in herbes.

* Herbór, vide Hervór, heate, chafing, rage.

* Herberóso, vide Herveróso, feruent,
hoat, hastie, quickly mooued to anger.

* Hercúleo, of or partaining to Hercu­
les.

* Heredád, vide Eredád, inheritance, possession.

* Heredár, to inherite, to possesse by inhe­
ritance.

* Heredéro, m.an heire, an inheritor.

* Herége, or Hereje, an heretike, one
that holdeth erroneous opinions.

* Heregía, or Herejía, heresie, error in
matters of faith and of saluation.

* Heremíta, vide Eremíta, an hermi­
tafe or solitarie place.

* Hermitáño, vide Eremitáño, an her­
mite.

* Heréncia, f. inheritance.

* Hereñuéla, a kinde of musicall instru­
ment, vsed in inchantments.

* Héria, vide Féria, a faire, a market.

Herída, a blowe, a wound.

* Herída de las álas, the clapping of the
wings, as cocks vse before they crow.

Herído, m.striken, wounded, smitten.

Heridór, m.a striker, one that vseth to
fight and slash, a cutting companion.

* Herimiénto, m.striking, wounding,
cutting.

Herír, yo Hiéro, to strike, to wound, to
smite, to beate.

Herír de púnto, to thrust with a wea­
pon, to run desperately vpon, to runne
through with a sword, &c.

* Herizár, vide Erizár. 

* Herízo, vide Erizo, 

* Hermafródita, one that is both man
and woman, an hermaphrodite.

* Hermána, f. a sister.

* Hermána de abuélo, a great aunt.

* Hermanárse, to ioyne in one as bre­
thren, to make a league of brotherhood,
to become sworne brethren.

* † Hermandád, f. brotherhood, the or­
der or fraternitie of friers.

* Hermaníco, m.a little brother.

† Hermáno, m.a brother, an owne bro­
ther.

Hermaphródito, one that is both man
and woman.

* Hermíta, vide Ermíta, an hermitage of
an hermite.

* Hermitáno, an hermite, one that hath
forsaken the world and betaken him­
selfe to a solitarie life.

* Hermofródita, vide Hermafródita. 

Hermosaménte, fairely, beautifully,
comely, orderly, in very good sort.

* Hermoseádo, m.made faire, become
beautifull, ordered very commenda­
bly, decked, garnished, set out.

Hermoseár, to make faire, to make beau­
tifull, to adorne, to decke, to set out.

* Hermosíssimo, m.most faire, most
fine, most neate, most handsome.

Hermóso, m.faire, fine, neate, handsome,
trim, well decked, comely, beautifull.

Hermosúra, f. beautie, fairenesse, fine­
nesse, trimnesse, handsomenesse, delecta­
blenesse.

* Héroes, famous woorthie men of great





valor, courage, vertues, which for
their notable exploites were deemed
woorthie to be numbred for gods.

* Heróico, or Eróico, valiant, couragi­
ous, heroicall, valorous, couragious
woorthie men.

* Heróldo, a herald at armes, a royall
messenger to carrie speeches of truce or
defiance betweeene princes.

Herráda, f. a paile to fetch water in, a
bucket to draw water with.

Herrádo, m.bound or shod with iron.

Herradór, m.a ferrier, a smith that
shooeth horses.

* Herradór de pípas one that hoopeth
pipes of water or beere with iron hoops.

Herradúra, f. a horse shoo.

* Herráje, much iron worke.

† Herrámbre, or Herrúmbre, rust of
iron, drosse or scales of iron.

* Herramentál, a place where ferriers
dwell or vse.

* Herramiénta, iron tooles, iron worke.

* Herramiénto, m.shooing of a horse,
iron worke.

Herrár, to shoo with iron, to marke with a
hot iron.

† Herrén, m.maslin, wheate and rie to­
gither, prouender for horse, bullimong,
that is, diuers sorts of graine sowed to­
gither.

* Herrería, f. a smithes forge, smithes
worke.

Herréro, m.a smith, one that worketh
in iron or steele.

Herreruélo, m.a long cloake or soldiers
cassocke.

* Herreruélos cavállos, horsemen that
serue with petronels, pistolets and ma­
ces being well armed, swart rutters.

* Herréte, m.a marking iron to marke
leather. Also the tag of a point.

* Herrójo, a bolt or iron to bar a doore.

* Herrón, as jugár al herron, a kinde of
play vsed in Spaine, to cast with a dart
that hath an iron or pike in it. Also to
plaie at coites.

* Herrór, vide Errór, an error.

* Herváto, m.an herbe called Hogs Fen­
nell, Sulphurwoort, or Maidenweede.

Hervér, yo hiérvo, to be hot, to boile, to
seeth.

Hervéra, or Ervéra, the throate boll, the
gullet.

Herviénte, hot, seething, boiling, fer­
uent.

* Hervílla, f. a button, a claspe.

Hervór, m.heat, feruentnes, rage.

* Hervoróso, m.hot, hastie, feruent,
soone mooued.

* Herymántho, vide Erymántho. 

* Hespáña, vide Espáña, the countrey
called Spaine.

* Hespañól, vide Españól. 

* Hespañoládo, vide Españoládo. 

* Hespavillár, vide Espavillár. 

* Hespéria, f. a countrie now called Italy,
so named of Hesperus.

* Heteróclito, declined otherwise then
the common nounes.

* Heterogénio, of another kinde, not of
the common kind, contrarie to Home­
génio, or Omegénio.

* Hestíercol, vide Estíercol, the dung or
ordure of a man, a priuie or iakes.

* Hético, a kinde of disease.

Hevílla, f. a button, a claspe, a tacke, hooks
and eies of siluer, a buckle.

Hevillár, to button, to claspe, to buc­
kle.

Hevilléta, a little button, a little claspe.

* Héxe, vide Éxe, m.an axeltree of a
cart, wagon, &c.

* Héys, id est avéys, yee haue.

† Héz, f. dregs, the lees of wine, the
grounds of ale or beere, &c.

† Heziénto, m.full of dregges, full of
grounds, or lees.



* Hí, as Quíen viéne hí?, who commeth
there? ho.

* Hi, Hi, Hi, when folke laugh fondly, or
giggle.

* Hía, or ía, as Perdérse hía, id est, Per­
dería a se Parescérme hía, id est
Parescería a me, as Hablárle hía,
id est Hablaría a el, hee were to cast
away himselfe, it woulde seeme vnto
me I shoulde speake vnto
him.

* Hibérnia, f. the countrie called Ire­
land.

† Híça, hoise, or hale vp, as marriners crie
as hoising saile.

* Hicáco, a kinde of fruite in the Indies.
Also a kinde of money there.

† Hiçár, to hoise, to lift aloft.

* Hichádo, vide Hinchádo, swollen,
puffed vp.

* Hidalgaménte, like a gentleman, gen­
tlemanlike.

Hidálgo, m.a gentleman, the sonne of a
man of some woorth.

* Hidálgo de solár, a gentleman of an­
cient house.

Hidalguía, f. gentrie, noblenes of birth,
gentilitie.

* Hidepúta, the sonne of a whoore, a
whoores sonne.

* Hidespútas, the sonnes of whoores.

Hidióndo, vide Hedióndo, stinking,
filthie, vnsauorie.

* Hiéde, Hiédo, vide Hedér, to stinke.

* Hídra, a monster with seauen heades,
with whom Hercules fought, who cut­
ting off one head, still two did rise in
the place.

Hiél, f. gaule, the gaule, the seate of me­
lancholie.

Hiél de tiérra, the lesser centorle, an
herbe so called for the bitter taste,
though it be medicinable.

Hiélo, vide Yélo, ice.

Hiéltro, m.a felt.

* Hiéna, f. a kinde of beast of all other the
most subtill: it is like a woolfe with a
mane like a horse, which comming in
the night vnto shepherdes houses will
counterfeit a mans voice, and by har­
kening learne ones name and call him
foorth, to the end to deuoure. Also
a beast knowen by the smell of his dung
which is ciuet.

Hiénda, f. dung, ordure, filth.

* Hiende, Hiéndo, vide Hendér, to 
cleaue asunder.

Híenes, vide Síenes, the temples of the
head.

* Hiéno, vide Héno, hay.

* Hierarchía, f. the state ecclesiasticall,
the order of priesthood, a holy gouer­
nance or principalitie.

* Hiére, Hiéro, vide Herír, to smite, to
strike.

* Hiermár, to ruinate, to make waste, to
make desolate as Yérmo, a wilder­
nesse.

* Hierman los zánganos a las colmé­
nas, the drone bees marre and destroy
the beehiues.

* Hiérmo, vide Yérmo, a desart.

* Hiérno, vide Yérno, a sonne in law.

Hiérro, m.iron, a marking iron to brand
sheepe, horses, &c. a surgeons instru­
ment to cut with.

* lo haré de mi Hiérro, I will set my
brand on him, I will marke him for
mine owne.

* Hiérro del fuégo, a marking iron for
cattell.

* Hiérros de pózo, an iron with three
hookes to cast into a well to catch holde
of any thing that is lost or fallen
therein.

* Hiérto, vide Yérto. 

* Hiérve, Hiérvo, vide Hervír. 

* Hierúsalem, a great citie of the Iewes
in times past, so called.

* Hiestár, vide Enhestár. 

* Hiésto, vide Enhiésto. 

Híga, f. as Híhas dár, to put the thumbe
betweene the fore finger and the mid­
dle finger, vsed in Spaine in scorne or
contempt of one.

Higadillo, m.a little liuer.

Higado, m.the liuer, the receptacle of
blood.

Hígo, m.a fig. a disease in the head, a
kinde of piles about the fundament.

* Higo del río, an herbe in riuers and





waters called Nenuphar or Water­
lilly. 

Higuéra, f. a fig tree.

* Higuéra lóca, a Sycamore tree.

Higuéra, an herbe called Palma Christi,
groweth in Egypt, and beareth a
seede like a tike.

* Higuéra de infiérno, an herbe called
Spurge.

Higueral, an orchard of figs.

* Higueruéla, f. a little fig tree.

Híja, f. a daughter.

* Hijadálgo, a gentlewoman, a maide or
woman of good bringing vp: and Hi­
jodálgo, a gentleman.

* Hijáda, vide Hijádas. 

Hijádas, vide Yjádas, the flankes, the
small guts, sometimes the collike.

* Hijadrár, to pant in the flankes as horses
doe when they be hot.

Hijáres, or Yjádas, the flanke.

Hijastra, f. a daughter in lawe, a step­
daughter.

Hijástro, m.a sonne in law, a stepsonne.

Híjo, m.a sonne.

* Hijo dálgo, or Hidálgo, a gentleman.

* Hijuélo, m.a prettie little sonne.

* Hila, f. lint that surgeons vse. Also a
rowe, a ranke, an order, a threed.

* † Hilácha, a threed.

Hiláda, f. a ranke, a rowe, an order, or
threed spun.

Hiladéra, or Hilandéra, a spinster, one
that vseth to carde and spinne.

* Hiládo, m.spunne, threed or such like
spunne.

Hilár, to spinne.

* Hilar tráma, to spinne oute yarne.

Hilázas, threeds, small strings, dregs in
wine, and such like. Also it signifieth
wool worke in any sort.

* Hiléra, f. a ranke of men, a file of soul­
diers, or a wing in a battle.  Also anie
other thing in a ranke.

* Hilláda, the rankes or orders of laying
brickes or stones in a walke, &c. vide 
Hiláda.

Hílo, m.threed, the edge of a thing, a row,
a ranke.

* Hilo de acaréto, a packethreed.

* Hilo de Cáñamo, a hempen threed.

* Hilo de carréto, vide Hilo de aca­
réto. 

* Sudár hílo a hílo, to sweate a pace,
droppe by droppe.

* Hilo de génte, a rowe of people.

* Andár al Hilo de génte, to goe after
the multitude, to do as others do.

* Hímno, m.a song, a dittie, a hymne, a
psalme, singing to the praise of God.

Hincádo, m.fastened, made sure or fast,
pinned to, driuen in.

* Hincapíe, a fastening the foote, a ta­
king sure hold.

Hincár, Præs. yo Hínco, 1. Præt, yo
Hinqué, to fasten, to make fast or sure,
to fill full, to driue in, to sticke fast.

Hincár de rodíllas, to kneele, to bowe
the knees.

* Hincár roméro, to plant Rosemarie.
Also Hincarroméro vsed for a mus­
ket staffe, hauing a forke of iron, som­
what after the manner of gardeners
setting stickes, to set rosemarie and
other herbs.

Hinchádo, m.swelled, puffed vp, stuffed
full.

* Hinchadúra, f. swelling, puffing vppe,
stuffing, a windie swelling.

Hinchamiénto, m.swelling, puffing
vppe.

Hinchár, to swell, to puffe vp.

Hinchazón, f. swelling, puffing vp.

Hinchazoncíllo, m.a little swelling, a
wheale.

Hinchír, vide Henchír, to fill, to swell.

Hinéstra, vide Ventána, f. a window.

Híngle, vide Íngle. 

* Hiniésta, genísta, or retáma, broome.

† Hiñír, to knead dough or paste.

† Hinójo, m.Fennell, a knee.

† Hinójo maríno, Sampire vsed in
sauce.

* Hínque, vide Hincár. 

* Hipérbole, a figure called Hipérbole,
an excesse in declaring, shewing, or set­
ting foorth any thing, beyonde all cre­
dite, estimation or likelihoode of truth.

* Hiperbólico, beyond all likelihoode of
truth, hyperbolicall.

* Hipothéca, f. a morgage, a bill of sale.

* Hipocresía, f. hypocrisie, deceitfull dea­
ling.

* † Hípo en estómago, the hicket that
commeth of rawnes of the stomacke.

† Hippa, f. the hicket, the yeske.

Hippár, or Hipár, to haue the hicket.

* Híppo, vide Hípo, the hicket.

* Hippocrás, m.a pleasant made wine
called hippocras.

* Hippócrita, m.an hypocrite, a dissem­
bler, one that would seeme honest and
godly, but hath a wicked hart.

* Hiriéndo, striking, smiting.

Hirviénte, vide Herviénte, feruent, hot,
&c.

* Hirvír, vide Hervír, to be hot, to be fer­
uent or earnest.

Hiscál, a bason, a coard, a rope platted in
three.

* Hispáne, an herbe called spinage.

* Hisópo,  m.the herbe hysope, a holy wa­
ter sprinkle. Also a great pensill that
painters vse.

* Hissopíllo, m.a little pensill that pain­
ters vse, a little holie water sprinkle.

História, f. a historie, a booke of Chroni­
cles, Annales, a description of times
and accidents of princes and people from
yeere to yeere.

* Historiadór, m.a Chronicler, a writer
of histories, one that setteth downe the
notable deedes and accidents of coun­
tries in certaine yeeres happened.

* Histórico, m.pertaining to histories,
Chronicles or Annales.

* Historiográfo, an historiographer, a
writer of historie.

Híto, m.a marke, a white to shoote at.

* mudár Hito, to alter, to change, to be
variable, not to be as one was.

mirár en Hito, to looke earnestly vpon,
to behold.

* Híto de madéra, a woodden pinne or
pricke to shoote at.

* Hivernál, pertaining to winter, win­
terly.

* † Hiza, hoise, as mariners hoise vp saile.

* Híze, Hiziéra, Hiziésse, Hízo, vide 
Hazér. 


H O
† Hobácho, m.a greasie foggie iade vn­
able to doe seruice. By metaphor a hea­
uie, idle and lubberly fellow.

* † Hóbo, m.a fruit in the Indies. Also a
tree the roote whereof if a man holde
but a peece in his mouth, it yeeldeth so
much iuice that he shall feele no thirst.

* † Hoçár, to roote or dig vp by the rootes
as a hog doth.

Hóce, f. a sickle or hooke to reape corne
with, a sieth to mowe with, a hooke to
prune vines or trees with, &c.

* Hocicár, to turne vp as swine with
their snoutes doe, to butte or strike or
muzzle with the snout as beastes doe.

† Hocíco, m.a long snoute such as a hog
or badger hath.

* † Hocicúdo, m.long snouted like a
hog.

† Hocína, or Hocíno, a hooke or bill to
lop trees withall.

* Hodér, to haue to doe with or lie with a
woman.

* Hodidór, m.one that dealeth much or
lieth much with women.

* Hodído, m.abused carnally or bug­
gered.

* Honestaménte, vide Honestaménte, 
honestly.

† Hogáça, f. a loafe of bread.

† Hogár, the harth, the chimney, any
place to make fire in.

† Hoguéra, f. a great fire, a bonefire, such
as men vse at ioyful triumphes, a flame
of fire.

† Hoguéro, m.a harth whereon they





make fire.

† Hója, f. a lease of a tree or herbe, a thin
plate, the blade of a sword, a sheete of
paper, a leafe of paper.

* Hója górda, a fat leafe.

* Hója rayáda, a ragged leafe.

* Hója de Milán, white thinne plating,
such as they vse to plate cupboords for
to keepe meate in.

Hojálde, f. a custard, a tarte.

* Hojáldre, idem. f. 

* † Hojeár, to turne leaues of a booke, to
eie or marke. Also to driue away birds
or foule, as in English, shue.

Hojecér, to beare leaues.

* Hójo, vide ójo, m.an eie.

† Hojóso, full of leaues. Also for ojóso,
full of eies.

Hojuéla, f. a pancake, a fritter, a fine
cake.

* Hóla, a voice of calling as hoa.

* Holánda, or Olánda, the Prouince
called Holland. Also Holland cloath.

* Holandéses, or Olandéses, Hollan­
ders, people of Holland.

* Holfato, m.the sence of smelling.

* Holgaçán, vide Holgazán, an idle fel­
low.

* Holgaçáno, vide Holgazáno. 

Holgádo, m.rested, sported, feasted,
make merrie, delighted.

* Holgánça, f. rest, ioy, quietnes, delight.

Holgár, yo Huélgo, to delight, to con­
tent, to be quiet, to rest, to be glad.

* Holgazán, m.one that delighteth, re­
steth, quieteth. An idle fellow, one that
followeth nothing but idlenes.

* Holgazáno, idem. 

Holgura, f. rest, ioy, quiet, delight.

* Hólla vide ólla, a crocke, a pot for to
dresse meate.

† Holládo, m.troaden, or trampled on.

Holladúra, f. treading or trampling on,
renting.

† Hollár, yo Huéllo, to tread or tram­
ple like a horse, to rent.

* Holléja de las culébras, the skin that
a snake casteth off.

Holléjo, m.the skin, the huske, the pill, the
shale that any seed or corne is in.

* Hollería, f. a place where they make or
sell pots.

* Holléro, vide Olléro, m.a potter.

† Hollín, m.smut, soote, such as falleth or
is swept from chineis. The oare of
brasse, a stone called Calaminaris,
whereof is made a certaine medicinable
brasse.

* † Hollinár, to besmut with soote.

† Holliniénto, sootie, besmeered with
soote, full of soote.

* Hollinimiénto, besmutting with
soote.

Hollóres, swellings.

Homarráche, m.vide Moharráche, a
vizard, such as men weare before their
faces because they would not be known,
a maske.

Hómbre, or Ómbre, a man.

* Hómbre sábio, a wise man, a man of
skill, a man of experience.

* Hombrecíllo, m.a little man, a
dwarfe.

Hombrecíllos, or Hombrezíllos, hops
vsed in brewing of beere. Also little
men.

* Hombríllo, vide Hombrecíllo. 

Hómbres de ármas, armed men on
horsebacke, or Lanciers.

* Hómbro, m. a shoulder.

* Homenáge, o Homenáje, waging of
lawe, an oath in lawe, the toppe of a
towre.

Tórre de Homenáge, a castle holden by
doing homage to the King for the
samet.

* Hástas hómes, vsed in olde time in
war for this word, Arme, Arme.

* Homecída, m.a man-slear, a mur­
therer.

* Homezíllo, paying for murthering a
man, 100. duckets or more, vide Ho­
micidio.

* Homilía, a homilie.

* Homiziáno, a priuie murtherer, one
that goeth with a short swoord or such
like to murther one.

* Homogéno, m.of one kinde.

* Homonomia, when diuers things are
signified by one word.

* Hónça, vide Ónça, an ounce waight.
Also the beast called an Ounce.

* Honciguéra, vide Honcijéra. 

* Honcijéra, a grin to catch birds.

† Hónda, f. depth, a sling to cast stones
with.

Hónda pára tirár, a sling.

* † Hondáble, that may be sounded or
gaged to the bottome.

* Hondaménte, deepely, highly, from the
foundation.

* Hondeadór, m.one that soundeth the
bottome, or a caster, or thrower in
a sling.

† Hondeár, to gage or sound the bottom.
Also to cast with a sling.

* Hondído, vide Hundído, drowned.

Hóndo, m.deepe, far to the bottome.

Hondón, m.the depth, the bottome.

Hondúra, f. deepnesse.

* Honestaménte, honestly.

* Honestidád, f. honestie.

Honésto, m.honest.

Hóngo, m.a mushrom, a toadstoole.

* Hóngo péce, a kinde of sea fish.

Hongóso, m.full of mushroms, full of
toadestooles, soft as a mushrom.

* Honór, vide Hónra, honor, worship.

* Honorifico, honorable, worshipfull.

Hónra, vide Ónra, honor or worship.

* Honradaménte, honorably, worship­
fully.

* Honrosaménte, or Onrosaménte,
honorably, worshipfully.

* Honróso, or Onróso, m.honorable,
worshipfull.

Honsário, or Hossário, a place to put
dead mens bones in, a charnell.

Hontanáles, m.places of springs, spring
heads.

* Hóque, m.bribes.

Hóra, f. an hower.

Horadado, m.boared through, pearsed,
boared.

Horadár, to boare, to pearse.

Horádo, m.a hole.

* Horário, m.a diall.

Hórca, f. a forke, a paire of gallowes, a
gibbet.

* Hórca de cebóllas, a rope of onions.

* Horcajadúra de válle, the hanging or
side of a hill.

* Horcájo, m.a forke to pitch hay with.

Horcár, vide Ahorcár, to hang.

Horcáso, m.a forke to make or pitch haie
with.

* Hórco de cebóllas, a rope of Ony­
ons.

* Hórden, vide órden, f. 

* Hordenár, vide Ordenár. 

* Horeár, vide Horcár. 

* Horéndo, vide Horréndo. 

* Horganísta, vide Organísta, an orga­
nist, a plaier on the organes.

* Horganízo, vide Organízo. 

* Hórgano, vide órgano. 

* Horizónte, vide Orizónte. 

† Hórma, f. a shooemakers laste to fit his
shooes on, or any other mould or blocke
to make any attire. Also a tracke, a
trace, a footestep.

* Hormár, to set shooes on the laste. Also
to tracke, trace, or follow by the foote­
steps.

Hormíga, or ormíga, f. an Emmet, or
Ante.

Hormigueár, to tingle in the feet, to haue
the feete a sleepe or benumnied.

† Hormiguéro, an ant-heape, a hillocke
where Ants breed and abide.

Hormigón de paréd, plaister or morter
wherewith they whiten and trim wals,
&c.

* Hornáça, a furnace where golde or o­
ther mettall is melted.





Hornagueár, to burne brakes on the
ground.

Hornaguéra tiérra, ground that is vsed
to be burned, as in Deuonshire and
Cornewall they vse much.

* Hornáto, vide Ornáto, adorning, dec­
king, or trimming.

Hornáza, f. a furnace where gold is mel­
ted, or any other mettall.

Hornázo, m.an egg-pie, a custard.

Horneár, to set bread into the ouen, to
set in the ouen.

* Hornéra, f. a woman that setteth bread
or other things into the ouen.

* Hornería, f. the worke or office of a
furner, to set things into the ouen.

Hornéro, m.a furner, one that setteth
bread into the ouen.

Hornezíno, m.a bastard, one that is not
lawfully begotten.

† Horníja, f. a bauen to heate the ouen
with.

† Horníllo, m. a little ouen, a place in a
trench where the barrels of powder are
laide.

† Hórno, m.an ouen.

* Horodádo, m.boared, pierced.

* Horquílla, f. a little forke. Also a mus­
ket staffe.

* Horréndo, grieuous, horrible, fright­
full, gastly, grizley, vgly, hideous,
dreadfull, strange, to be eschewed.

* Horríble, horrible, greeuous, loath­
some.

* Hórrido, m.vgly, greeuous to see, hor­
rible, terrible, cruell, hideous, dreadful,
frightfull.

* Horrifico, that maketh one quake, ter­
rible, horrible.

* Horrisono, m.that hath a terrible
sound or voice, that maketh a grieuous
noise, fearefull, dreadfull.

† Hórso, one that of a bondslaue is be­
come a freeman, one whom his Lorde
hath namumitted and set free.

* Horrór, vide Orrór, horror, feare, ter­
ror, fright.

Hortalizas, f. herbes vsed to be eaten, all
holsome herbes for to bee eaten, or for
the pot.

* Horteláno, m.a gardener.

* † Hortéra, f. a wooden dish.

* Hortezuéla, f. a little orchard.

Hortíga, f. a nettle.

Hortíga muérta, a dead nettle, a nettle
that can not sting, Archangell.

Hortigár, to sting with a nettle, to nettle
one.

Hortiguílla muérta, an herbe called
Mercurie.

* Horúga, vide Orrúga. 

* Horújo, vide Orújo, orBorújo.

† Hósco, m. browne or dun of colour.

* Hóspada, vide Huéspeda, an hostesse,
a woman that keepeth an inne or vic­
tualing house.

* Hospedáble, giuen to hospitalitie, kee­
ping hospitalitie.

* Hospedádo, m.lodged, receiued as a
ghest.

* Hospedáje, m.an inne, a lodging place,
an alehouse or victualing house where
to lodge, lodging or entertainment for
a ghest.

* Hospedál, an hospitall for the poore, a
spittle.

* Hospedár, to host or lodge as a ghest,
to soiourne.

* Hospederia, f. a lodging with a friend,
a place of entertainment for strangers,
an inne, a victualing house.

* Hospício, a lodging for friends onely in
trauelling, friendship shewed in hospi­
talitie, entertainment into a house.

* Hospital, m.a hospitall, a place for the
poore or diseased.

* Hospitalidád, hospitalitie, keeping of a
good house.

Hossário, vide Honsário, a place for
dead mens bones, a charnell.

* Hóstia, f. sacrifice offered vp.

* Hostigádo, m.pricked forward, called
on, driuen forward, spurred on.

Hostigamiénto, m.driuing forward,
pricking on, vrging to, spurring for­
ward.

Hostigár, Præs. yo Hostígo, 1. Præt. yo
Hostigué, to call earnestly on, to pricke
or vrge forward, to driue on, to scarre,
to feare, to chastise.

* Hostigue, vide Hostigár. 

* Hóstigo, m.a whisking and blustering
winde.

* Hotéro, vide Ótero. 

† Hóto en Hóto, by egging and setting
on, by temptation of other, by others
enticement.

* Hovillár, vide Ovillár. 

* Hóvo, vide Óvo. Also a fruit in the
Indies.

* Hoxíco, vide Oxíco, m.

* Hoy, vide Oy, to day, at this present.

* Hoy de mañána, this day, very early.

Hóyo, or Cáva, a ditch, a pit.

Hoyuélo, a sawpit, a little ditch.

* † Hóz, f. a sickle or hooke to reape corne
with.

* Hozíco, or Hocíco, m.a snoute like a
hogge.

* Hró. id est, Heredéro, m.an heire, an
inheritor.


H V
* Huáno, id est, Humáno, courteus, gen­
tle, well mannered.

† Huébra, f. an acre of ground, a day work
of land.

Huéco, m.hollow.

† Huégo, m.fire.

* Huéle, Huélo, vide Olér, to smell.

* Huélga, Huélgo, Huelgue, vide Hol­
gár, to reioice, to rest.

Huélgo, m.breath.

Huélgo, I rejoice, vide Holgár.

Huélle, Huéllo, vide Hollár, to trample
vnder feete.

* Huérfana, f. a girle or yoong maid that
is fatherlesse and motherlesse, most pro­
perly without a father.

Huérfano, m.a boy that is fatherlesse and
motherlesse, without a father.

* Huérco, m.hell.

Huéro, m.an addle egge, a rotten egge,
the breast bone, or plate bone of the
breast.

* Huérra, vide Guérra, warre.

* Huérta, or Guérta, vide Huérto, an
orchard.

Huérto, m.an orchard.

* † Huésca ciudád, a citie so called in
Valencia in Spaine.

Huésped, m.an hoste that keepeth an
Inne or victualing house. Also a guest
that commeth to lodge.

* Huéspeda, f. an hostesse, or a woman
guest.

* Huéssa, f. a ditch, a pit, a graue, a sepul­
chre.

* Huessíllo, m.a little bone.

Huésso, m.a bone.

* Huésso de la gargánta, the chanell
bone.

Huéste, Huésto, an hose of men, an ar­
mie, a campe of souldiers.

Huévo, m.an egge.

* Huévo guéro, an addle egge, or rotten
egge.

* Huévo empolládo, m.an egge that
hath a chicken in it.

* Huévo de dos yémas, or amaríllas, 
an egge with two yolkes.

* Huévos de pescádo, m.the spawne of
fish.

* Ponér huévos, to lay egges.

* Yazér sobre huévos, to sit brooding
ouer egges.

* Hufáno, vide Vfáno, content.

* Húga, f. a Skatefish.

* Hugía, or Tremiélga, f. a rayfish, a
Skatefish, a Crampefish that benum­
meth the hands of such as touch it.

* † Huláno, m.some body, some one.

* Humanár, to make or be gentle, hu­
mane or courteous, to bee humane and
not deuine.

Humáno, vide Vmáno, m.curteous,
gentle.

* Humaréda, f. the smoke.





* Humbrál, the top of the roofe of a por­
tall or doore.

Humeár, to smoke.

Humedecér, or Humedescér, vide Vmedecér, to moisten, to make moist.

* Humeducido, Humedezído, or 
Vmedecído, m.moistened, made
moist.

Huméro, m.a tunnell for the smoke.

* Humidád, f. moisture.

* Húmido, m.moist, dankish, somewhat
wette.

* Humildád, f. humilitie, lowlines, meek­
nesse.

Humilde, vide Vmílde, humble, lowly,
meeke, creeping, crouching.

* Humildeménte, vide Humilménte, 
lowly, meekely, gently.

* Humilládo, or Vmilládo, brought
low, humbled, made meeke and gen­
tle.

* Humillár, or Vmillár, to humble, to
make meeke, to make lowly.

* Humilménte, vide Vmilménte, low­
ly, meekely, humbly, gently.

Húmo, m.smoke, fume.

Humóso, m.smoakie, full of smoke.

* Humór, a humour. whereof be fower in
the bodie ruling, id est, flegme, choler,
bloud, and melancholy, moisture, or hu­
mour.

Hundíble, that may be caste, founded, or
molten.

Hundición, f. casting, founding, or mel­
ting of mettall.

Hundído, m.caste, molten, founded like
mettall. Also drenched or drowned.

* Hundiéndo, founding, casting, or
drowning.

Hundidór, m.a fownder of bels or other
things in mettall, a myner.

Hundimiénto, m.sinking to the bottome,
or a casting of mettall.

Hundír, to found, caste, or melt mettall,
to sinke to the bottome.

* Húne, a hole in the top of a ship maste,
through which the coards are put.

Húra de cabéça, f. dandraffe on the
head of children, a kinde of scurffe.

* Hurgadór, m.one that draweth coales
out with a colerake, or sweepeth the
ouen with a mawkin.

* Hurgádo, m.drawen out with a cole­
rake, swept with a mawkin.

Hurganéro, m.colerake to drawe coles
out of the ouen with. Also a mawkin.

Hurgár, Præs. yo Húrgo, 1. Præt. yo
Hurgué, to plucke or get out of some
place with a coale-rake or mawkin.

* Hurgonázo, m.a blow or stroke with
a coale-rake or mawkin.

* Hurgoneár, vide Hurgár. 

* Hurgue, vide Hurgár. 

† Hurón, m.a firret to catch conies with.

† Hurráca, vide Picáça, f. a bird called a
Pie, or Hagster.

Hurtadaménte, by stealth, priuily, thee­
uishly.

* a Hurtadíllos, by stealth, priuily.

Hurtádo, m.stolen.

Hurtadór, m.a stealer, a theefe, a rob­
ber.

* Húrta água, a watering pot full of
hoales.

Hurtár, to steale, to purloine, to embesill
goods away.

Hurtible, that may be stolen or purloy­
ned away.

Hurtibleménte, theeuishly, by stealth.

* Hurtíllo, m.pilferie, miching, petie lar­
cenie.

* a Hurtíllos, vide a Hurtadíllos. 

Húrto, m. theft, robbing, stealing.

Husáda, or Maçórca, f. flaxe on the di­
staffe, as much flaxe as is vsed to be
put on the distaffe at once.

Husár, vide Vsár. 

Husillo, or Huzillo, m.a presse to presse
Sidar or Perrie with a wine presse.

Húso, m.a spindle.

* Hutía, f. a bird.

* Huviéra, Huviésse, or uviéra, uviésse,
vide Avér. 

Húvo, or úvo, vide Avér. 

Huýda, f. flight, running away.

Huydízo, a runnagate, a fugitiue, a va­
gabond.

Huýdo, m.fled, run away.

Huydór, m.he that flieth or runneth a­
way.

Huýr, to flie, to run away.

* Huzillo, m.a presse to presse Sidar,
Perrie, &c. a wine presse.


H Y
Hy, Hy, Hy, a laughing or giggling.

* Hýa, vide Hía. 

* Hyádas, the seuen stars. Some say fiue
stars in the head of the signe Taurus.

* Hýdra, f. a serpent with many heads in
the lake Lerna, whereof one being cut
away, two came in place, which Hercu­
les slew by fire when his sword would
not preuaile.

Hydrópico, m.one that hath the drop­
sie.

* Hydropesía, f. a watrish humour be­
tweene the skin and the bodie.

* Hýel, f. the gall.

* Hýo, vide Híjo, m.a sonne.

* Hýmnos, m.songs to the praise of
God.

* Hýpo, m.the hicket.

* Hypócrita, a dissembler, an hypocrite, a
double dealer.

* Hýta, as a Cálle hýta, all the streete o­
uer not missing a house.



I

* Ía, vide hía. 

* Ía, vide ýa. 

Jabonár, vide Xabonár. 

Jacínto, m.a precious stone called a Ia­
cint. Also a flower of that name.

Jáco, m.a iacke of maile.

Jactár, vide Jatár, to brag.

* Jaén, a kinde of Grapes. Also a citie in
Spaine so called.

† Iaézes, m.trapping for a horse.

* Iaézes de cáma, furniture for a cham­
ber.

* Jágua, vide Xágua, f. a herbe growing
among the Indians.

* Jaharrádo, plaister, parget.

* Jaharrár, to parget, to plaister.

* Jahézes, vide Jaézes. 

* Jajágua, f. an herbe in the Indians.

* Iazér, vide Yazér. 

Jálde, yellow.

Jamás, for euer, neuer.

Jamón, m.a gammon of bacon.

* Iáno, m.a drinking cup, an auncient
king of Italie, whom Numa Pompilius
honored for a God, and built him a
temple, which alwaies in the time of
war was open and in peace shut. Hee
was a most wise and prouident prince.

Jáola, vide Jáula, a coope, a cage to keepe
birds in.

* Jáque, vide Xáque. 

* Jaquéca, vide Xaquéca. 

Jaquéta, f. a kinde of iacket of maile
made close before, and open by the
sides.

* Jaquimí, vide Xaquimí. 

Jara, Xára, or Flécha, an arrowe, a
shafte.

* Jarál, vide Xarál. 

* Jaráma, vide Xaráma. 

* Jaramágo, vide Xaramágo. 

* Jarandilla, vide Xarandílla. 

* Jaráva, vide Xaráva. 

* Jaráve, vide Xaráve. 

* Járcias, vide Xárcias. 

Jardín, or Vergél, m.a garden.

Jardinería, f. gardening.

Jardinéro, m.a gardiner.

* Járes, the small guts.

* Jarétas, vide Xarétas. 

* Jaréte, vide Xaréte. 

* Jarócho, vide Xarócho. 

* Jarópe, vide Xarópe. 

* Jarrázo, m.a blowe with a cup.

* Jarretár, to hough, to cut the legs.

* Jarréte, m.the hip, a leg of mutton, or
veale, or such like.





Jarríllo, m.a cruse, a little pot.

Járro, m.a pitcher, a pot.

Járro de estáño, a pewter pot.

* Jarrúma, f. an herbe growing in the
Indies.

* Jasmín, vide Jazmín. 

Jaspe, m.a Iasper stone.

Jaspeádo, trimmed with Iasper.

Jassadór, m.a scarifier, a cutter of meate
for carbonadoes. Also to launce the flesh
to let out blood.

Jassadúra, scarifying, cutting of carbona­
does.  Also launcing the flesh to let out
bad blood.

Jassár, to scarifie, to cut or carue, to lay
on a gridiron, to launce the flesh to let
out bad blood.

* Jatáncia, f. boasting.

* Jatancióso, m.giuen to boasting, vaun­
ting or bragging.

* Jatár, to boast, to brag, to vaunt.

* Jattár, vide Jatár. 

* Javalí, m.a wilde boare.

* Jávega, vide Xávega, f. 

* Javeguéro, vide Xaveguéro. 

* Javelin, m.a wilde boare.

* Jávia, vide Jaula. 

Jaula, f. a coope for hens, capons, a cage for
birds.

Jayán, vide Gigante, a giant.

Jazmín, or Jasmín, a kind of white
flower very sweet much like the muske
rose, the wilde violet.


I B
* Ibéria, an auncient name so called of
Iberus.

* Ibéro, or Ébro, a chiefe riuer in
Spaine.


I D
* Íd, or Ýd, go yee, vide Ír or Ýr.

* Ída, f. a iourney, a going on the way.

Idéa, f. Dechádo, or Exemplár, a true
pourtraiture or semblance of a thing
conceiued in minde, whereby to paint
the like.

* Idióma, a proper forme of speech.

Idióta, one vnlearned, a simple soule, an
idiote.  Also sometimes vsed for a lay
man.

Idolátra, an idolater.

Idolatrár, to commit idolatrie.

Idolatria, f. worshipping of idols.

Ídolo, m.an idoll, an image to be wor­
shipped.

* Idóneo, m. meet, very fit.

Idiopesia, f. the dropsie.

Idiópico, m.sicke of the dropsie, possessed
with the dropsie.


I E
* Jélo, vide Yélo. 

* Jéme, vide Xéme. 

* Jenábe, vide Xenábe. 

* Jenáble, vide Xenáble. 

* Jenér, vide Xenér. 

* Jénero, vide Género. 

Jenézaro, or Genézaro, a Ianizarie, a
man of the Turkes guarde.

* Jérga, vide Xérga. 

* Jergón, vide Xergón. 

Jergueríto, vide Xergueríto. 

* Jerigónça, or Gerigónça, f. pedlers
french, a speech inuented and practizes
with rogues.

* Jeríngua, vide Xeríngua. 

* Jeringár, vide Xeringár. 

* Jérno, vide Yérno, a sonne in law that
hath married his daughter.

* Jervilla, vide Xervilla. 

* Jervilléta, vide Xervilléta. 

Ierusalém, vide Hierusalém. 


I G
Iglésia, vide Yglésia, f. a church, a con­
gregation of Christians.

* Ignipoténte, powerfull in fire.

Ignominía, f. reproch, shame, approbie, ill
report.

Ignominióso, m.reprochfull, ignomini­
ous, of an ill name, shamefull.

* Ignoradaménte, ignorantly, vnskil­
fully.

Ignorancía, f. vnskilfulnes, ignorance,
want of knowledge.

Ignoránte, one that is ignorant, vnskil­
full.

* Ignórar, to be ignorant, to want skill.

* Ignóto, vnknowen.

Iguál, vide yguál, equall, like in state or
condition.

* Igualádo, m.vide Ygualádo, made
equall, or of like estate and condition,
compared with, equalled.

Igualár, vide Ygualár, to make alike.

Igualdád, vide Ygualdád, equalitie,
likelines.

Iguáles, or Yguáles, equals, matches.

Igualménte, vide ygualménte, equallie,
one as well as another.


I J
Ijáda, or Yjáda, the small ribs, the collike,
the bellie peece of a fish, the flanke.

* Ijadeár, or Yjadeár, to pant as a horse
doth after running.

Ijáres, Hijáres, or Yjáres, the flanke.

* Jigóte, vide Xigóte, a legge of mutton
roasted.


I L
* Illegalidád, f. vnlawfulnes.

Ilicitaménte, vnlawfully.

Ilícito, m.vnlawfull.

* Ilíaco dolór, an obstruction or stop­
ping of the small guts causing a great
paine in the belly.

* Illiáca, or Troiána, of Troy.

* Illíon, Troy.

* Íllios, the Troians.

* Illuminación, f. limming with golde
or siluer, lightening.

* Illuminádo, m.lightened, limmed with
siluer or gold.

* Illuminadór, m.a lightener, a limmer
with colours.

Illuminadór de líbros, a limmer with
gold, siluer, or colours.

Illuminár, or Iluminár, to enlighten, to
illuminate, to lymme bookes, &c. with
gold or siluer, or colours.

* Illuminária, a lightening, an illumina­
ting.

* Illustrádo, m.made famous, made no­
table, made excellent, illustrated,
brought to light.

* Illustradór, m.one that maketh fa­
mous, notable, excellent or illustrious,
he that maketh knowen, he that brin­
geth to light.

* Illustrár, to make notable, famous, illu­
strious, or honorable, to make light or
cleere, to make knowen.

Illústre, famous, honorable, excellent, illu­
strious.

* Illustríssimo, m.most honorable, moost
excellent, most famous, most illustrious,
most cleere shining.


I M
* Imaculár, vide Immaculár. 

Imágen, f. an image, the semblance, or
pourtraiture of any person or thing.

Imaginación, f. imagination, conceit of
the minde.

Imaginádo, m.imagined, conceiued in the
minde, thought on.

Imaginár, to imagine, to cast or conceiue
in the minde, to suppose.

Imaginatívo, m.giuen to imaginations,
full of thoughts.

* Imaginétas, f. little pictures or small
images, puppets or babies.

Imán, vide Ymán, f. a loadstone.

* Iménso, vide Imménso, m.exceeding
great, huge, insatiable, vnmeasurable.

Imitación, imitation, following of ano­
ther in fashions or practises.

Imitadór, m.one that followeth another
in fashions or in doings.





Imitár, to imitate, to follow in fashions, or
in deeds.

* Imaculádo, or Immaculádo, vnspot­
ted, vndefiled, without spot, without
blemish.

* Immediataménte, immediately,
straight-way, without delay.

* Imménso, m.vnmeasurable, huge, mon­
strous great.

* Immérito, without desert, vndeseruing,
vnworthines.

* Immobíble, vide Immovíble, vn­
moouable, that cannot be stirred, vn­
changeable.

* Immóbil, vnmooueable, vnchangeable,
stedfast.

Immoderádo, or Imoderádo, vnmea­
surable, immoderate, that hath no
stay of himselfe, that keepeth no bounds.

Immortál, or Imortál, immortall, that
neuer shall die.

Immortalménte, or Imortalménte, e­
uerlastingly, without end.

Immortalidád, or Imortalidád, f. euer­
lasting life, continuance for euer.

Immovible, Imovible, vide Immobi­
ble. 

* Immudáble, vnchangeable, immuta­
ble.

* Immúndo, m.vncleane.

* Immunidád, f. freedome, priuiledge,
immunitie, exemption from taxe or
from seruice.

* Immutáble, vnchangeable, constant,
immutable.

Impaciéncia, f. want of patience.

Impaciénte, vnpatient, one that cannot
suffer or endure any thing.

Impacienteménte, vnpatiently, vnqui­
etly.

* Impalpáble, that cannot be felt.

* imPár, vnlike, vnequal, vnfit, no match,
ods, vnequall, vneuen.

* imPassíble, that cannot suffer or en­
dure.

* Impedído, m.hindred, letted, stopped,
debarred.

Impedimiénto, m.hinderance, letting,
stoppage.

Impedír, yo Impído, to hinder, to let, to
stop, to perturbe.

* Impelér, to constraine, to vrge, to com­
pell, to inforce.

* Impelído, m.enforced, vrged, compelled
forward, thrust violently.

Impelír, to constraine, to enforce, to vrge,
to compell, to thrust forward, to driue
violently.

* Impenitráble, that cannot be pierced,
impenetrable.

imPensadaménte, vnwittingly, not
thought.

* imPensádo, m.not thought on.

* Imperánte, ruling, swaying, raigning,
commanding.

* Imperár, to gouerne, to beare rule.

* Imperatívo, commaunding, impera­
tiue.

* Imperatívo módo, the imperatiue
moode.

imPerfécto, or imPerféto, m.vnperfect,
not made full vp, not finished.

Imperiál, belonging to the Empire, or to
the Emperour.

Imperiáles, or çahónes, startups or bus­
kins of thicke cloath, Gamasses.

Império, m.the Empire, the royall autho­
ritie.

* Impersonál, that hath no person, imper­
sonall.

* Impertinénte, not belonging to it, no­
thing to the purpose.

* Impérvio, ouerthwart, crooked.

* Ímpeto, vide Ímpetu, force, violence.

* Impetráble, that may be obtained or
gotten by entreatie or praying.

Impetración, f. obtaining, getting, pur­
chasing by praier or entreatie.

Impetrár, to obtaine, to get by purchase
or by endeuour.

Ímpetu, force, violence, rigour, a violence
in assault, earnest affection, a pang or
passion, vehement rage.

* Impetuosaménte, forcibly, rigorously,
violently.

Impetuóso, m.rigorous, forcible, vio­
lent.

Impíde, Impído, vide Impedír, to hin­
der, &c.

* Impiedád, impietie, vngodlinesse, vn­
righteousnesse, wickednes.

* Ímpio, m.vngodly, wicked, vngraci­
ous.

Implacáble, implacable, that cannot be
pacified, that cannot be appeased,
that will not be reconciled.

* Implorádo, m.besought, earnestly in­
treated, called vpon for helpe, intreated
with teares.

* Implorár, to beseech, to intreat ear­
nestly, to craue aide and succour.

imPonér, Præs. imPóngo, imPónes,
imPóne, 1. Præt. imPúse, imPusi­
ste, imPúso, Fut. imPondré, or im­
Porné, ás, á, Sub. Præs. imPónga,
Imperf. imPusiéra, imPusiésse, or
imPornía, Fut. imPusiére, to lay vp­
on, to impose, to charge, to put to.  Also
to accuse. Also to teach, traine, instruct
or bring vp.

* imPónga, imPóngo, vide imPonér. 

* Impórta, vide Importáncia. 

Importáncia, f. a matter of waight, im­
portance, a matter of charge, a thing of
moment.

* Importánte, of waight, important, of
moment, of force, earnest.

Importantissimo, m.of most great im­
portance, of most auaile.

Importár, to bring in, to inferre, to im­
port.

* importunación, f. earnestnes in sute,
vrging often of a matter.

Importunaménte, importunately, so
earnestly that he will haue no nay.

Importunár, to follow a sute diligently,
to speake for a matter often, to sollicite
daily, to accept of no deniall.

Importunidád, f. earnestnesse in sute,
importunitie, neuer giuing ouer vntill
he obtaine his purpose.

Importúno, m.earnest in sute, impor­
tune, still solliciting his case.

Imposición, f. laying on, charging with,
putting on.

Imposibilidád, f. impossibilitie.

Impossible, vnpossible, that cannot be
compassed, that which is beyond his
power.

Impoténcia, f. impotencie, weaknes, want
of naturall strength or of abilitie.

Impoténte, vnable, weake, impotent, dis­
eased.

Impremír, yo Imprímo, to imprint, to
presse or thrust in.

* Imprescriptíbile, that is without pre­
scription, or past the memorie of man.

* Imprésa, an attempt, an enterprise, an
vndertaking.

Impressión, f. imprinting, setting on
surely.

Imprésso, m.imprinted, hard or fixed
into, obstinate.

Impressór, m.a Printer, one that setteth
stamps on things.

* Impríme, Imprímo, vide Impremír. 

* Ímprobo, naught, wicked, ill, a caitife,
malapert.

* Impropérios, m.reproches, opprobries.

* Impróprio, m.vnproper, not fitting,
vnapt.

* Improváble, that may be found fault
with.

* Improvíso, sudden, at unawares, vn­
prouided.

imPrudénte, vnwise, vndiscreete.

imPrudenteménte, vnwisely, vndis­
creetly.

* imPuésto, m.imposed, laide on, put on,
charged with.

* Impugnár, to impugne, to striue a­
gainst.

* Impudénte, vide Desvergonçádo. 

* Impuníto, scot free, vnpunished.

* Impuridád, f. vilenesse, impuritie.

* Impúro, vncleane, impure, dishonest.

imPúse, imPusiéra, imPusiésse, imPú­
so, vide imPonér. 

* Impusición, f. laying on, imposing.





* Imputádo, m.laide to, imputed, ascri­
bed vnto.

Imputár, to impute, or lay to.


I N
Inábil, vnable, vnapt, vnmeet.

Inabilidád, f. vnablenesse, vnfitnesse, vn­
aptnesse, disabilitie.

Inabilitár, to disable, to make vnapt or
vnmeete.

Inabiliménte, vnfitly, vnaptly.

Inadverténcia, f. retchlesnes, carelesnes,
vnconsideratenes.

inAdvertído, m.inconsiderate, retchlesse,
carelesse.

* inAdvertír, yo inAdviérto, to aduise, 
to take heed, to obserue, to marke.

* Inalienáble, such as cannot be made
away, or cannot be alienated.

* Inanimáda, a thing without soule or
life.

* Inaudíto, m.not heard of, vncouth,
strange.

* Inaverténcia, vide Inadverténcia. 

* inCapáz, vncapable, of no conceit.

* inCáuto, m.vnwarie, vnheedfull, not
circumspect.

* Incéndio, m.kindling, setting on fire,
burning fire, kindled fire.

* Incerár, vide Encerár, to dresse or doe
with waxe.

* inCerrár, vide EnCerrár, to shut in, to
locke in.

* Incertidúmbre, vncertaintie.

* Incessáble, neuer ceasing, vncessant.

Incésto, incest, vnnaturall copulation
betweene father and daughter, or bro­
ther and sister, &c.

* Incestuóso, one that hath committed
incest with some of his neere kin, an in­
cestuous person.

* Inchár, vide Hinchár, to stuffe, to fill
full, to puffe vp.

Inchír, ynchír, vide Henchír. 

inCiérto, vncertaine, doubtfull.

* Incircunciso, vncircumcised.

Incitádo, m.stirred vp, incited, prouoked,
vrged forward.

Incitadór, hee that stirreth vp, hee that
vrgeth or prouoketh forward.

Incitamiénto, m.an incitement, a pro­
uocation, vrging, or moouing fore­
ward.

Incitár, to incite, to stirre or prouoke fore­
ward, to call vpon earnestly.

* Incitatíva, a kinde of letter written
from superior authority, to an inferi­
or iudge, willing him to further some
matter before him.

Incleménte, seuere, cruell, vnclement,
fell, sterne.

Inclinación, f. inclining, bowing, lea­
ning to, an addicting.

Inclinádo, m.bent, inclined vnto, addic­
ted vnto.

Inclinár, to bend, to incline, or leane vn­
to, to consent vnto, to giue some token of
liking.

* Ínclito, noble, high, famous, glorious, of
great renowne.

* Incluído, vide Inclúso, inclosed, shut
in, included.

* Incluír, to shut in, to include.

* Inclúso, included, shut in, inclosed.

* Incógnito, m.vnknowen, not acquain­
ted.

* Íncola, an inhabiter that dwelleth in
a countrey where he was not borne.

* Incómodo, troublesome, incommodi­
ous.

* Incomparáble, vnmatchable, incompa­
rable.

* Incompatíble, that cannot be dischar­
ged with the other, that cannot agree
in one.

* Incompensáble, that cannot be made
amends for.

* Incompeténcia, vnfitnes.

* Incomportáble, vnsufferable.

* InComprehensible, that cannot bee
comprehended, that is not contained in
any prescript place.

* Inconsideración, rashnes, vnaduised­
nesse, inconsideratenes, heedlessenes.

inConsiderádo, m.vnconsiderate, heed­
lesse, without due regard, rash, vnad­
uised.

inConsideráncia, vide inConsidera­
ción, f. rashnes, vnaduisednes, heed­
lessenes, want of due regard.

inConstáncia, f. vnconstancie, giddines
of braine, vnstablenes of minde.

InConstánte, vnconstant, vnstaied, gid­
dieheaded, variable, one while of one
minde, another while of another.

inConstanteménte, vnconstantly, vn­
stedfastly.

inContinéncia, f. incontinencie, want
of chastitie.

Incontinénte, incontinent, vnchaste, one
that hath not staie of his affections.

* Incontrastáble, firme, stable, that can
not be ouerturned.

inConveniéncia, vnconuenience, ill
agreeing togither, vnmeetenes.

inConveniénte, not conuenient, ill a­
greeing togither, vnmeete.

* Incórdio, m.kernels growing about the
groyne.

* Incorporádo, m.incorporated, made
into one bodie, enfranchised, matricu­
lated.

* Incorporár, to incorporate, to infran­
chise, to make a member of the same
bodie, to matriculate.

* Incorpóreo, hauing no bodie, incorpo­
rall.

* Incorrído, m.runne in, fallen in, in­
curred.

* Incorrigíble, blameles, not to be cor­
rected.

* inCorrimiénto, m.running in, incur­
ring, falling in.

inCorrír, vide Incurrír, to runne in, t
incurre.

* inCorruptíble, that cannot be corrup­
ted or marred.

* Incorrúpto, whole, sounde, vncorrup­
ted.

* Incredíble, incredible, maruellous.

* Incredulidád, f. vnbeleefe, incredulity,
distrust.

Incrédulo, m.incredulous, hee that will
not beleeue, distrustfull.

* Increménto, augmentation, increase, a
growing greater.

Increpádo, m.rebuked, reprooued, founde
fault with.

Increpár, to reprooue, to rebuke, to finde
fault with, to chide.

inCreýble, incredible, that is not to be be­
leeued.

* Íncubos, m.wicked spirits or diuels,
which taking the forme of men, lie
with women.  Also the night mare, or
badde spirites troubling men slee­
ping.

* inCúlto, m.vndressed, vntrimmed, vn­
handomse, ill apparelled.

* inCumbír, to lay to, to applie, to be di­
ligent at.

* Incuráble, that is past cure, that can­
not be cured.

* Incurrído, m.run into, incurred, fal­
len to.

* Incurrimiénto, m.running into, falling
into, incurring.

* Incurrír, to incur, to run into, to fall to.

* Indecéncia, vnseemelinesse, vnde­
cencie.

* Indecénte, vnseemely, vndecent, vn­
comely.

* Indecíso, m.not decided, not resolued
or determined vpon.

* Indeclináble, that cannot be declined.

* Indefénso, vndefended.

* Indetermináble, that cannot be deter­
mined or decided.

* Indeterminádo, vndetermined, vnde­
cided.

* Indevidaménte, vncomely, vnorderly,
not duly.

* In días, olde, in yeeres.

* Indicación, f. shewing, declarati­
on.

* Indício, m.a token, a shew.





Indiferénte, indifferent, meetely well,
so so.

Indigésto, m.vndigested, not well conco­
cted, not well taken.

Indigestión, f. want of good digestion,
rawnesse of stomacke, not well accep­
ting.

Indignación, f. wrath, disdaine, indig­
nation.

* Indignádo, m.disdained.

Indignár, to take in euill part, to disdaine,
to be offended.

Indignidád, f. vnwoorthines, indignitie.

Indígno, m.vnwoorthie.

* Indino, vide Indígno. 

* Índio, m.an Indian, a man of the In­
dians.

* Indirécte, vnorderly, without order.

* Indirécto, vnorderly, indirect, out of 
course.

* Indiscréto, rash, indiscreete, fond.

Indispuésto, m.sickly, ill at ease.

Indispusición, or Indisposicion, f. sick­
linesse.

Indivisíble, that cannot be diuided.

* Indomáble, that cannot bee tamed,
without rule or order.

* Indómito, m.vntamed, vnbridled,
headstrong.

* Indóto, vnlearned, ignorant.

* Indubitáble, assured, without doubt.

Indulgéncia, f. cockering, pardon, indul­
gence.

* Indúlto, m.suffered, borne withall, par­
doned.

* Indurár, to laste, to endure, to tolerate,
to suffer, to abide.  Also to harden or to
grow hard.

Indústria, f. industrie, diligence in follo­
wing his business, endeuour.

Industrióso, m.one that followeth his bu­
sines, one diligent about that which he
hath to do.

* Indúzga, Indúzgo, vide Induzír, to
bring in, to perswade, to induce.

Induzidór, m.a perswader, an inducer.

Induzimiénto, m.perswasion, induce­
ment.

Induzír, yo Indúzgo, to induce, to per­
swade.

* Inefáble, vnspeakable, that cannot be
vttered or pronounced.

* Inescusáble, that cannot be excusable,
inexcusable.

Inespérto, m.that is not experienced, that
hath no knowledge.

* Inespugnáble, that cannot be woon by
fight, impregnable.

Inestimáble, vnestimable, that cannot be
valued, or iudged of.

Inevitáble, ineuitable, that cannt be es­
chued or shunned.

* Inexháusto, m.not emptied, not dra­
wen out drie, consumed or wasted, not
satisfied.

* Inexoráble, that cannot be entreated,
that will not be perswaded.

Inexpugnáble, impregnable, that cannot
be woon.

* Infalíble, that neuer deceiueth.

Infamádo, m.defamed, ill reported of.

Infamár, to defame, to speake or report
euill of.

Infáme, infamous, of ill report, euill spo­
ken of.

Infámia, f. infamie, euill report, an ill
name, disgrace.

Infançón, m.an infant, a little sucking
child.

* Infándo, so wicked, haynous, or villa­
nous as is not to be spoken off.

* Infánta, f. euery daughter of a King
that is not heire, whether first, second,
or third, &c. the heire is called Prin­
césa, and the rest Infántas.

* Infantázgo, m.a dignitie or Prouince
in Spaine which was at first giuen to
the Infant, that is to the Kings second
sonne, now Dukes enioy the same.

* Infánte, m.a footman in war, or euerie
sonne of a king, so he be not heire, whe­
ther second, third, or fourth, &c. the
heire is called Príncipe, and the rest
Infántes.

Infantería, f. all the footmen in an armie.

* Infáusto, m.vnfortunate, dismall, vn­
luckie.

* inFelíce, vnhappie.

Inferiór, the lower, the inferiour.

* Inferioridád, f. inferioritie, the lower
part.

* Inferír, yo Infiero, to bring in.

* Infernádo, m.made hellish or pertay­
ning to the lower parts.

Infernál, being of, or belonging to the lo­
wer parts, hellish.

* Infernár, to lay below, to put to hell.

* Infestár, to annoy, to hurt vpon malice,
to enuie.

Inficionádo, m.infected, poysoned, misled
in opinions of errour.

Inficionár, to infect, to poison with er­
rours.

inFíel, vnfaithfull, vntrustie, false of his
word, an infidell that beleeueth not on
God.

inFieldád, f. infidelitie, or distrust in
God, vnfaithfulnesse in worde or in
deedes.

* Infiére, Infiéro, vide Inferír. 

Infiérno, m.hell, the lower part, below.

* Ínfimo, lowest, mst abiect, base, vile,
of no reputation.

Infinidád, f. infinitnes, without end.

Infinitaménte, infinitely, without ende,
for euer and a day, vnmeasurably.

Infiníto, m.infinite, endles, vnmeasura­
ble, without bounds.

Inflamación, f. an inflamation, a puf­
fing vp with heat, a hot swelling.

Inflamádo, m.inflamed, swollen or puf
fed vp with heat, burned.

Inflamár, to inflame, to set on fire, to swell
or puffe vp with heat.

* Influéncia, f. an influence, a flowing
in.

* Influér, to flow in.

* Inflúxo, m.a flowing in.

Información, f. information, giuing of
instructions, giuing notice or vnder­
standing.

Informár, to informe, to deliuer instruc­
tions, to giue to vnderstand.

* Infortúitos, misfortunes, mischaunces,
aduersitie.

Infortunádo, m.vnhappie, vnfortunate,
vnluckie.

* Infortúnio, mishap, mischance, misfor­
tune.

* Infrutífero, vnfruitfull, barren.

* Infrutuóso, idem. 

Infundído, m.powred in, infused.

Infundír, to infuse, to powre in.

* Infurción, f. the rent or payment for
tenements or landes holden from the
Ecclesiasticall dignitie, as from Deane
and Chapter, and such like.

* Infúso, infused, melted, powred in.

Íngas, the names of the kings of Mexico
before the conquest.

* Ingeniéra, a trappe or snare to catch
birds, &c.

* Ingeniéro, m.a maker of engines or
rare deuises, a cunning workman.

Ingénho, vide Ingénio. 

Ingénio, m.wit.

Ingeniosaménte, wittily.

Ingenióso, a wittie fellow, readie wit­
ted.

* Ingéño, vide Engéño, an engine or
rare deuise for to effect some strange
thing in wars, &c. Also Ingéño, vide
Ingénio.

* Inglatiérra, f. England.

Íngle, or Íngre, the groyne, the bottome
of the belly, the flanke.

* Inglés, m.an English-man.

* Ingratitúd, f. vnthankefulnes, ingrati­
tude.

* Ingráto, m.an vnthankefull man.

* Inguénte, m.an ointment.

* inHábil, vnapt, vnfit.

* Inhabilitár, to make one vnable, vnca­
pable or vnfit.

* inHabitáble, that no man can dwell
in.

* Inhibír, to inhibit, to forbid.

* Inhiésta, broome.

Inhiésto, m.lifted vp.





* inHumanaménte, vncurteously, vn­
gently, cruelly.

inHumanidád, f. discurtesie, inhumani­
tie, crueltie.

inHumáno, m.vncurteus, vngentle, vn­
ciuill, cruell.

* Inimicítia, variance, enmitie, hatred.

* Iniquitád, f. iniquitie, vniustnes, vn­
righteousnes.

* Iniquo, m.vniust, vnequall, vnrigh­
teous.

Injúria, f. wrong, iniurie, reproch.

Injuriádo, m.wronged, offered iniurie,
reproched.

Injuriadór, m.he that wrongeth, he that
reuileth.

Injuriadóra cósa, a wrongfull matter.

Injuriár, to doe wrong, to offer iniurie, to
reuile.

Injuriosaménte, wrongfully, iniurious­
ly, reprochfully.

Injurióso, m.wrong full, iniurious.

Injustaménte, vniustly, vnrighteously.

Injustícia, f. vnrighteousnes, iniustice.

Injústo, m.vniust, vnrighteous.

* Inménso, vide Imménso, m.vnmea­
surable, huge.

* Inmovible, vide Immovíble. 

* Íñigo, vide Ýñigo, the proper name of
a man.

* Inobedecér, or Inobedescér, to dis­
obey.

* Inobedecído, or Inobedescído, m.
disobeied, disobedient.

Inobediéncia, f. disobedience.

Inobediénte, disobedient, stubborne, re­
bellious.

Inocéncia, f. innocencie, harmelesnesse,
freenesse from euill.

Inocénte, innocent, harmelesse, free from
doing euill.

Inocenteménte, innocently, harmlesly.

* Inofficióso testaménto, a will or te­
stament bequeathing by legacie more
than the goods amount vnto.

† Inogíl, a garter.

Inojáles, the canion bone, or bone of the
knee pan.

† Inójo, or Rodílla, a knee.

* Inopinadaménte, vnlooked for, vn­
thought of, by hap or chance.

* Inordinádo, vide Desordinádo. 

Inórme, enormous, heinous, passing all
bounds of measure.

* Inpertinénte, vide Impertinénte. 

Inovación, f. innouatin, alteration,
change, bringing in of some new de­
uise.

Inovádo, m.altered anew, changed from
the old fashion, innouated.

Inovadór, m.one that bringeth in new
customes, a changer of ancient rites.

Inovár, to innouate, to alter ancient cu­
stomes, to bring in new deuises.

* inPonér, vide imPonér. 

* Inprobízo, Inprovíso, or Inbrovízo, 
at vnawares, on a sudden.

* inQuietádo, m.disquieted, put out of
quiet.

* inQuietadór, m.a disquieter, a brea­
ker of rest and peace.

inQuietadóra cósa, an vnquiet mat­
ter, a troublesome thing.

inQuietár, to disquiet, to bring out of
quiet.

inQuiéto, m.vnquiet, without rest, rest­
lesse.

inQuietúd, f. vnquietnes, restlesnesse.

* Inquisíno, m.one that hath no house of
his owne, but as he hireth for his mo­
ney, he that dwelleth where none of his
ancestors did, an inmate that dwelleth
within another.

Inquiridór, m.a searcher, an inquirer, an
inquisitor.

Inquirír, to inquire, to search, to make
inquisition.

Inquisición, search, inquirie.

Inquisidór, m.an inquisitor, a searcher.

* Inronía, f. scoffing, speaking by contra­
rie, speaking one thing, and meaning
nothing so.

Insaciabilménte, vnsaciably, neuer ha­
uing ynough.

Insaciáble, vnsaciable, one that neuer
hath ynough, or is neuer satisfied.

* Insáno, m.vnsound, vnholsome, mad,
out of his wit, froward, foolish, outra­
gious, fierce, wood.

* Inscrutáble, vnsearchable, vnscruta­
ble, not to be found out.

* Insensáto, m.senselesse, one that can
neither heare, see, nor vnderstand.

* Insensíble, senselesse, vnsensible, with­
out sense or reason.

* Inseperáble, that cannot be seuered, 
vnseparable.

* Insídias, f. ambushes, laying in waite,
priuie traps.

Insígne, or Insíne, notable, an ensigne,
a flag.

Insígnias, f. signes, marks or tokens of ho­
nor whereby euery estate is knowne, as
robes, maces, swoords. Also badges of
armes for gentlemen. Signes or colours
in the ensignes of captaines, armes or
scutchions of gentlemen.

* Insíne, vide Insígne. 

* Insípido, m.vnsauorie, without any
taste or smacke, without relishe. Also
fond.

* Insipiénte, a foole, an vnwise bodie,
without discretion, an ignorant person,
sot or idiote.

* Insistír, to stand or stay vpon a matter,
to inforce, to labour earnestly, to pursue
diligently, to abide fast and firme.

* Insoléncia, f. pride, insolencie, want of
knowledge of a mans selfe.

* Insolénte, proud, insolent, hautie, vn­
woont, not accustomed.

* Insólito, vnaccustomed, strange, vn­
used.

Insonóro, vntunable, that cannot be set
in tune.

* Insoportáble, vntolerable, vnsuppor­
table, vnsufferable.

* Inspiración, f. inspiration, breathing
in.

* Inspirár, to breathe in, to inspire, to
blowe into.

Instabilidád, f. vnstedfastnes, vncon­
stancie, follie, vnstaiednesse.

Instáble, vnstedfast, vnconstant, vn­
staied, vnwise.

Instáncia, f. instant, earnestnes, standing
to a matter.

Instánte, instant, earnest in a matter,
one that will not giue ouer.

Instár, to be instant, to be earnest, to fol­
low a matter without giuing it ouer.

* Instauración, f. renewing, repairing.

* Instaurár, to repaire, to make new, to
reforme.

* Instigádo, m.set on, prouoked, pricked
forward.

* Instigár, Præs. yo Instígo, 1. Præt. yo
Instigué, to set on, to pricke forward,
to prouoke.

* Instigue, vide Instigár. 

* Instillación, dropping or putting in by
little and little, instillation.

* Instillár, to drop in by little and little,
to instill.

* Instimuládo, m.pricked on, spurred on.

* Instimulár, to pricke or spurre on.

Instínto, m.naturall disposition or incli­
nation.

Institución, f. instruction, appointment,
ordinance, a decree or statute.

Instituír, to instruct, to appoint.

* Institúto, or Institución, an appoint­
ment, order, a decree, institution.

* Instrución, f. shewing what to doe, in­
instruction.

* Instrúcto, m.instructed, taught what
to doe.

* Instruýr, to instruct, to teach what to
doe.

Instruménto, m.an instrument, an eui­
dence, a toole to worke with, an instru­
ment of musicke.

* Insuficiéncia, insufficiencie, vnable­
nesse.

* Insuficiénte, vnable, insufficient.

Insuffríble, that cannot be endured, into­
lerable.

* Ínsula, f. an ile.

* Insultár, to insult or leape on, to tri­





umph or vaunt ouer in disdainfull
manner.

* Insúlto, m.an assault, a setting vpon, a
leaping vpon, a vaunting ouer one.

* Integridád, vprightnes, integritie, in­
nocencie, honestie, vpright.

* Íntegro, whole, sound, entire, not bro­
ken. Also righteous, vpright.

* Intelectuál, belonging to the vnder­
standing.

* Intelegéncia, f. vnderstanding, intelli­
gence, knowledge, sense.

* Inteletuál, belonging to the vnderstan­
ding.

* Inteligénte, vnderstanding, knowing,
perceiuing, intelligent.

* Inteligíble, that may be vnderstood.

Intención, f. purpose, intent, meaning.

* Inténso, set foorth or prooued to the
vttermost, strained, diligently bent or
set to a thing, earnest, and vehement,
wholy bent and fixed.

* Intentádo, assaied, tried or prooued,
threatened.

* Intentadór, m.an assaier, a threatener.

* Intentár, to assay, to threaten, to me­
nace, to charge.

* Inténto, m.intent, purpose.

* Ínter, or Ínterim, in the meane space.

* Interceptár, to intercept, to take vp by
the way.

* Intercessión, f. making a way, spea­
king or intreating for.

Intercessór, m.an intercessor, one that
requesteth for another.

* Interés, or Interésse, interest, profite,
auaile.

* Interessádo, m.interessed, hauing right
in.

* Interessár, to graunt right in, to in­
teresse.

* Ínterim, or Ínter, in the meane space.

Interiór, m.the inward.

* Interioridád, f. inwardnes, being with­
in.

* Interioraménte, inwardly.

* Interlocución, f. an interposition of
speech, an interlocution.

* Interlocutória senténtia, the aduise
of a iudge in a matter in controuersie.

* Interlocutório aúto, a plea of appeale.

* Interlocutór, m.a speaker betweene, or
that replieth by the waye.

* Intermédio, the intermeanes.

* Interponér, to set in the meane time.

* Interpósita persóna, one set on to doe a
thing for another.

* Interposición, f. a putting betweene.

Interpretación, f. an expounding, a ma­
king plaine of that which is difficult.

Interpretár, to expound, to interpret.

Intérprete, an expounder, an interpretor,
one that maketh doubtfull things
plaine.

* Interpúesto, interposed, put betwixt.

Interrogatório, that asketh by way of
question.

interRompér, to breake off, to interrupt.

* interRompído, m.interrupted, broken
off.

* interRompimiénto, a breaking off be­
tweene, an interruption.

* Interrúpto, interrupted, broken off.

Interválo, a distance or space betweene.

* Intervención, f. comming betweene.

* Intervénga, Intervéngo, vide Inter­
venír. 

* Intervenír, Præs. Intervéngo, Inter­
viénes, Interviéne. 1. Præt.  Inter­
víne, Intervíniste, Intervíno. Fut.
Intervendré, or Interverné, ás, á.
Sub. Præs. Intervénga. Imperfect. In­
terviniéra, Intervernía, or Intervi­
niésse. Fut.  Interviniére, to come be­
tweene or in the meane time.

* Intervíne, Interviniésse, Intervíno, 
vide Intervenír. 

* Interveniénte, that commeth be­
tweene.

Intestíno, m.an entrall, an inward part, a
bowell.

* Intestína guérra, ciuill war, war be­
tweene people of one and the same nati­
on and kingdome.

* Intestínos, the bowels, the guts.

* Intimación, f. a giuing to vnderstand,
a signifying, a denouncing, or declaring
of a thing.

* Intimádo, m.intimated, signified, giuen
to vnderstand.

* Intimár, to signifie, to intimate, to giue
to vnderstand.

* Íntimo, most inward, in the hart, en­
tirely beloued, hartie, affectionate,
deepely rooted in the hart.

* Intituládo, m.intituled, quoted, named,
as the name of a booke.

Intitulár, to intitle, to giue a name to a
booke or writing.

* Intoleráble, vnsufferable, intolera­
ble.

* Intoleráncia, impatience, intolerable­
nes.

* Intractabilidád, f. vntractablenes,
headstrongnes.

Intractáble, vntractable, one that cannot
be perswaded nor brought to any order,
not to be dealt with.

* Intratáble, idem. 

Intricádo, m.intricate, hard to vnder­
stoode, snarled in many foldes, intan­
gled.

Intricár, to entangle, to snarle in difficul­
ties.

Intrínseco, m.inward, familiar, acquain­
ted.

Introdución, f. a preparation or perswa­
sion to a matter, a bringing in.

Introduzído, m.brought in.

Introduzír, yo Introdúzgo, to bring
in.

* Intrusión, f. an intruding, intrusion.

* Intrúso, intruded.

* Inválido, of no strength or force, feeble,
weake, of no power.

Invención, f. an inuention, a deuise, a plot
imagined.

* Invencíble, inuincible, that cannot be
conquered.

Inventár, to inuent, to finde out.

Inventário, m.an inuentorie, a findall,
that is found to be so.

Inventór, m.an inuentor, a finder out, a
plotter, or practiser of plots.

Invernál, pertaining to winter, the west
winde.

Invernár, yo Inviérno, to winter, to con­
tinue in winter.

* Investidúra, f. an inuesting, a placing in
his office.

* Investigáble, that may be searched, sif­
ted or sought out.

Investigár, Præs. yo Investígo, 1. Præt.
yo Investigué, to search out, to enquire
out, to search by the steps of the feete.

* Investigue, vide Investigár. 

* Investír, yo Invísto, to inuest or place
in his office. Also to inuest or to run one
within an other, as battles in warre or
ships at sea.

* Invictissimo, m.most vnconquered.

* Invídia, hatred, rancor, enuie, repining,
malice, grudge, griefe.

* Invidiár, to spite, maligne, enuie, hate,
grudge, repine.

* Invidióso, full of malice, spite, enuie, ha­
tred, enuious, hatefull, spitefull.

* Inviérne, Inviérno, vide Invernár. 

Inviérno, m.winter.

* Invioláble, that may not be broken, vi­
olated or corrupted.

Invisíble, that cannot be seene.

* Invíste, Invistír, vide Investír. 

Inumeráble, innumerable, without num­
ber, that cannot be reckoned.

* Invocación, f. a calling vpon, an inuo­
cating for aide.

* Invocár, to call vpon, to require helpe.

* Inusádo, m.vnused.

* Inusitádo, vnused, out of custome or
vse, not wont.

* Inútil, vnprofitable.

* † Inxerír, to graffe.

* † Inxerído, m.graffed.






I O
* Io, vide yo, 

Job, Iob, a most patient good man.

* Sacár de camíno vn Job, to moue or
vexe a saint.

* Jocúndo, m.iocund, mery, pleasant.

* † Jonjoli, an apothecary drugge.

* Jontár, vide Juntár, to ioyne, to assem­
ble, to set togither.

* Jórfe, a walle of drie stone.

Jornáda, f. a iourney, a dayes worke, a
battel. Also an act in a comedy.

Jornál, wages, or hyre for a day, a booke
of dayly reckonings.

Jornaléro, m.a day laborer, a hyreling
that worketh by the day.

Jórro, as llevár la náo a Jórro, to tow a
ship, or to draw hir along.

Jóta, a iot, a scrap, any little, the Queene
at cardes, a iewell.

* Jóven, m.a yong man, a man of able
yeeres.

* Jovencílla, f. a pretty yong girle.

* Joveníl, pertaining to a yong body.

* Joventúd, f. lustie youth.

* Jovído de bóca, blowing with the
cheekes full of winde, puffed.

Jóya, f. a iewell, houshold stuffe.

Joyél, a tablet, a chaine, a carcanet.

Joyéro, m.a ieweller.

Jóyo, m.cockle, darnell.

Jóyo silvéstre, wilde darnell, wall barly.


I P
Ipocresía, f. hypocrisie, dissimulation,
double dealing.

Ipócrita, m.an hypocrite, a dissembler.


I R
* Ír, to goe.

Íra, or Yra, f. anger, wrath, displeasure.

* Ír abájo, or Ír abáxo, to go belowe.

* Iracúndo, or Yracúndo, angrie, wrathfull, displeased.

Irádo, or Yrádo, m.angrie, displeased,
wrathfull.

* Ironía, f. a figure in speaking when one
meaneth the contrarie to that hee
saieth, a scoffing, flowting or mocking.

* Irracionál, Yrracionál, without rea­
son.

Irregulár, or Yrregulár, without rule,
without order.

Irregularidád, or Yrregularidád, f. ir­
regularitie, out of order.

Irregularménte, irregularly, contrarie
to order.

* Irremisibleménte, without pardon or
remission.

Irreparáble, past recouerie, that cannot be
repaired.

* Irreprováble, irreprooueable, not to be
reprehended.

* Irrevocáble, that cannot bee called
backe.

* Irritable, easily prouoked to anger.

* Irritár, to stir vp, to prouoke, to incense,
to anger.

* Irronia, vide Ironía. 


I S
Ísla, or Ýsla, f. an ile.

* Isládo, or Ysládo, m.made an ile, com­
passed about with water.

* Islanda, f. the countrie of Island.

* Islandés, a man of Island.

* Isléño, or Ysléño, belonging to an ile, a
man or dweller in an ile.

* Isléo, vide Ysléo. 

* Isléta, vide Ysléta, f. a little ile.

* Isopázo, washing with hysope, wate­
ring with the holy water sprinkle.

Isópo, or Ysópo, m.a holie water sprin­
kle. Also the herbe hysope.

* Isquiérdo, or Ysquiérdo, the left.

Istória, or Ystória, f. an historie, a booke
of records.

Istoriadór, or Ystoriadór, m.a writer of
histories.

Istoriál, or Ystoriál, pertaining to histo­
ries.

* Istórico, vide Istoriadór. Also of or
pertaining to histories.

* Istoriógrapho, a writer of histories.

* Istruménto, vide Instruménto. 


I T
* Ítem, also.

* Íten, idem. 

* Iterár, vide Reiterár, to reiterate or
repeate.

Iterícia, f. a disease called the iaundise.

* Itinerário, a booke of remembrance,
containing things don in iourneys. Also
the kalender of miles, with the di­
staunce of places, & the time of aboade
in euery place.


I V
* Íva, the preterimperfect tense of the in­
finitiue mood of ýr, he went, it went, or
did goe.

* Juán, m.the proper name Iohn.

* Juanéte, the toppe of a mast, in a shippe.

* Juaníco, as they say in english iockey,
iack.

Juaníllo, idem. 

* Jubetéro, m.a maker or seller of doub­
lets.

Jubiládo, m.freed from trauell.

Jubilár, to be free from trauell and labor.

Jubiléo, m.the iubilee, a time when folke
cease from labour and keepe festiuall
time.

† Jubón, m.a doublet.

* Júca, f. an herbe in the Indies with the
roote whereof they make breade.

* Júdas, m.Iudas that betrayed Christ.

Judería, f. the Iewish religion.

Judía, vide Frisóles, Also a woman
Iewe.

Judicatúra, f. iudgement, the sentence of
the iudge.

Judiciál, belonging to iudgement.

Judiégo, pertaining to a Iewe.

Judihuélo, m.a Iewe. Also a small kinde
of white pease.

Judío, m.a Iewe.

* Juéga, Juégo, vide Jugár, to play.

Juégo, m.play, sport, pastime.

* Juégo de cáñas, skirmish with throw­
ing canes on horsebacke one at another.

* Juégo del avejón, vide Abejón. 

* Juégo de táblas, table play.

Juéves, m.thursday.

Juéz, m.a iudge.

Jugadór, m.a plaier, a gamester.

* Jugadór de mános, to iuggle or to tell a
tale with the hand.

* Jugár de oréja, to talke or speake in
ones eare.

* Jugár de píca, to tosse a pike.

† Juglár, m.a iugler.

Iugo, vide Yúgo, a yoke.

* Jugóso, vide Xugóso. 

* † Juguétes, m.trifles, toyes to play
withall.

Jújuba, vide Açoféyfa. 

Juýzio, iudgement.

† Julépe, a kinde of potion called a iulep.

* Julián, m.a proper name.

Júlio, m.the moneth called Iuly.

Juncál, a place where rushes growe.

Júncia, iuniper.

* Júncia avellánda, gallingale.

Júnco, m.a rush.

* Júnco maríno, salt marsh rush, hard
rush.

* Júnco áve, a birde in the Indies with a
very long and narrow taile.

* Júnco odoróso, galingale.

* Júnco, a kinde of boate vsed in China.

* Júnco amacoroçádo, or Bohórdo, 
an herbe called Water-torch or Cats-
taile.

Juncóso, m.rushie, full of rushes.

Júnio, m.the moneth called Iune.

* Junquíllo, m.a little bulrush.

Júnta, f. an assembly, a counsell, a synode.





Juntádo, m.come togither, ioyned, assem­
bled.

* Júnta para hablár, a meeting to confer
togither.

Juntaménte, togither, iointly, with one
accord.

Juntár, to ioine, to assemble, to set togi­
ther.

* Juntíllas, f. ioyned togither, close togi­
ther.

* a pie Juntíllas, with the feete close to­
gither.

Júnto, m.close to, ioyned.

Júnto, or Cábe, neere, hard by.

Juntúra, f. ioyning, coupling, tying togi­
ther.

Júra, f. an oath.

Juradería, or Juradorío, f. a Conestable­
ship.

Jurádo, m.sworne, a Conestable.

Jurádos, m.magistrates, officers.

Juramiénto, m.an oath, swearing, taking
of an oath.

Jurár, to swear, to call God to witnes.

* Juridicaménte, like a iudge, according
to order of law.

Juridición, f. iurisdiction, the circuit of
his authoritie.

* Jurídico, m.like a iudge, belonging to
law, a court day.

* Jurisconsúlto, a counseller at law.

* Jurisperíto, m.a man skilfull in law.

* Jurísta, m.a lawyer.

* Júro, as Júro de heredád, right of in­
heritance.

* Ser de júro, to be according to the cu­
stome.

Jusbárba, f. Knecholme or Butchers­
broome.

* Iusión, or Iussión, a precept, a comman­
dement.

Jústa, f. a iusting, a running at tilt on
horsebacke.

* Justadór, m.a tilter, a runner at tilt or
tourney.

Justaménte, iustly, righteously.

Justár, to iust, to runne at tilt or tour­
ney.

Justícia, f. iustice, equitie, law, righteous­
nes.

* Justiciádo, m.hauing had the law, one
that hath suffered according to iu­
stice.

Justiciár, to doe iustice, to execute the
law.

Justiciéro, m.a seuere iudge, a iusticer,
one that without partialitie admini­
streth iustice indifferently.

Jústo, m.iust, righteous, vpright.

Juveníl, youthfull, belonging to lustie
youth.

* Juventúd, f. lustie youth.

* Júysio, Júyzgio, vide Júyzio, iudge­
ment.

Juýzio, iudgement, giuing of sentence.

* Juzgádo, m.iudged, the office or place of a
iudge.

* Juzgadór, m.a iudge, a pronouncer of
sentence.

Juzgár, Præs. yo Júzgo, 1. Præt. yo
Juzgué, to iudge, to pronounce sentence
how it shall be.

* Juzgue, vide Juzgár. 



K
* KAléndas, the first of euerie
moneth.

 
L

LA, shee, or it, an article of the femi­
nine gender.

* Labáca, f. an herbe called Sower docke.

* Labáda, vide Abáda. 

* Labánca, f. a water fowle, a kinde of
ducke.

* Labánco, idem. the male or drake.

* Labandéra, f. a laundresse, a washer of
cloathes.

* Labár, to wash.

Lábios, m.lips.

Labór, f. worke, labour, trauell.

Laborcíca, f. a small worke.

Labór de cámpo, husbandrie, plowgh­
mans trade.

* Laborióso, laborious, painefull.

* Labrádo, m.wrought, tilled as ground,
wrought with the needle.

* Labrádo de agúja, needle woorke.

Labradór, m.a workeman, a ploughman,
a husbandman, a labourer.

Labránça, f. tillage, husbandrie.

Labrandéra, a seamster, a woman that
getteth her liuing with the needle.

Labrár, to worke, to till the ground, to
worke with the needle.

* Lábrios, vide Lábios, lips.

* Laçáda, vide Lazáda. 

Lacárgama, an herbe called wilde Eu­
glosse.

Lacáyo, m.a footman, a lackie.

Lácha pescádo, a kinde of fish.

Lácio, weake.

* Láço, vide Lázo. 

Lácre, merchants waxe.

* Lacrimár, vide Llorár, to weepe, to
wayle, to lament.

* Lacrimóso, vide Lloróso, full or wee­
ping.

Ladeár, to leane the bodie to one side, as a
ship, &c. that goeth aside, to hitch vp
and downe.

Ladéra, f. the side of a hill.

† Ladíllas, f. crablice, nits on the eie­
browes.

* Ladinaménte, speaking a toong or lan­
guage well and perfectly.

Ladíno, m.a man that speaketh anie
toong well and perfectly.

Ládo, m.a side, a flanke.

* Ladradór, m.a barker, one that barketh
and bayeth.

Ladrár, to barke, to bay.

Ladrár, barking, baying.

Ladrído, m.the barking.

Ladrilládo, m.paued, brickworke.

Ladrillár, to paue with brickes, to tile.

Ladrilléjo, m.small brickes.

Ladríllo, m.bricke, tile.

Ladrón, m.a theefe, a robber by the way,
a breaker into houses.

Ladroncíllo, m.a yoong theefe, a petie
theefe.

Ladronía, f. the very stealing.

Ladronício, theft, robberie.

* Lafriéra, a kibe on the heele, a chilblane
on the hand.

* Lága, f. vide Lágo. 

Lagáña, f. filth on the eielids, matter in
the eies.

* Lagñóso, m.bleere eied.

Lagár, a great fat or tub to tread Grapes
in.

Lagár de víga, a wine presse, the poast
ouer the presse to wring out the wine.

* Lagardízo, vide Lagárto, a lizard.

Lagaréta, f. a small tub that the wine
runneth into from the presse.

Lagartíja, f. an efte, a swift, a lizard.

Lagárto, m. a lizard, a swift or eft, a little
serpent so called.

Lágo, m.a lake, a meere, or great pond ha­
uing springs that feed it.

* Lágos, a towne in Portugall.

Lagósta, a locust, a grashopper.

Lagostínes, a kinde of fish.

Lágrima, a teare from the eies.

Lágrima, f. the bleeding or dropping of a
vine when it is cut.

Lagrimál del ójo, the corner of the eie,
the bleeding of a vine, &c.

Lagrimár, to weepe, to drop or bleede
as a vine doth after the cutting.

Lagrimóso, m.still weeping, full of teares.

Lagúna, f. a lake, a moore.

* Laíco, a lay man, a secular man, a tem­
porall man.

Láma, f. durt, mire, mud.

* Láma de hiérro, a thin plate of yron.

* Lambér, vide Lamér, to licke.

Lamedál, m.a puddle, a slough, a loach to
licke vp.

Lamedór, m.a licker, one that vseth to
licke. Also a Pothecarie drug.

Lamedúra, f. a licking, a loach or medi­
cine.





Lamentáble, lamentable, woorth the
weeping for, pitifull.

Lamentación, f. lamentation, mourning,
weeping.

Lamentár, to weepe, to wayle, to lament.

Lamér, to licke.

* Lámia, a certaine dog-fish called a
Breaknet. Also a fish that hath so great
a iaw, an is for rauenous, that he wil &
can deuoure an armed man. Also a
witch or an hag.

* Lamiéndo, licking.

Lámina, f. a plate of mettall, a leafe of
mettall.

* Lamináda, plated with plates, done o­
uer with leaues of plate.

* Lámio, a rayfish, or skatefish.

Lámpara, f. a lampe to burne.

* Lamparáda, f. a spot of a lampe, oyle of
the lampe or something else falling from
the lampe.

Lamparílla, f. a little lampe.

Lamparónes, or Puércas, kernels, a
swelling in the necke or armepits, the
Kings euill.

† Lampázo, m.an herbe called a Burre­
docke.

Lampíño, m.smooth, without beard.

Lampréa, f. a fish called a Lamprey.

* Lampríño, vide Lampíño. 

* Lampúgo, m.a fish that hath finnes all
along from the head to the taile.

Lána, f. wooll.

* Lána peynáda, wooll combed.

* Lána carmonáda, f. carded wooll.

* Lánça, f. a launce, a dart.

* Lánça ginéta, a light horse mans
speare.

Lánça de rístre, a launce.

Lançáda, a blow with a launce, a vomi­
ting.

Lançadéra, f. a weauers shuttle.

* Lançádo, m.a vomiting, a casting out.

Lançár, to throw out, to strik out, to strike
with a launce.

* Lançár del el Demónio, to cast the
diuell out of him.

Lançarótes, a kinde of gumme to close
wounds with, called Sarcocolla.

Lánce, a blowe, a stripe, a cast. Also a
good hap in any businesse.

* Lanceár, vide Alanceár. 

Lancéro, m.one that maketh or selleth
lances. Also a lancier, a demilance.

Lancéta, a small dart, a iauelin, some­
times vsed for a surgeons launcer.

Lançón, m.a knife to let blood with, &c.
a great launce.

* Lançúda, vide Lançáda. 

* Lançuéla, f. a small launce.

Lándre, f. kernels in the necke or thigh,
the blaines, botches, the pestilence.

Landrezílla, f. blaines.

* Lánes, vide Ladrónes. 

Lanéro, m.a clothier, a woolman.

* Laneváda, nep or cats mint.

Langósta, f. a great grashopper, a locust
which spoileth the wheate.

* Lánguido, faint, languishing, weake,
lingring, pining, drooping.

* Languír, to pine, faint, languish, linger,
droope.

* Lanílla, f. a kinde of stuffe made of
blacke wooll or camels haire.

* Láña, f. an iron that they vse in buil­
dings to hold the stones togither.

* Lañár, to set irons in buildings, to holde
the stones fast togither.

* Lantéja, f. lentils, a kinde of pulse.

Lantérna, f. a lanterne.

* Lantísco, m.a certaine tree, the wood is
good to picke the teeth, it beareth no
fruit.

Lanúdo, m.woollie.

Lápa, the hollownesse vnder a banks side,
the purging of wine.

Lapidário, m.one that hath skill in preci­
ous stones, and knoweth the difference,
nature and propertie of each of them.

* Laquéy, vide Lacáyo, a lackey, or foot­
boy.

* Lardár, to larde or dresse with larde.

Lárdo, m.larde, bakon.

* Lárdo rancióso, restie bakon.

* Laredóma, id est, La redóma, the vi­
all of glasse.

* Láres, supposed houshold gods, whom
the heathen imagined to haue power of
them and of their houshold.

* Lárga, a la Lárga, vide A lo Lárgo. 

Largaménte, at large, largely.

Largár, to set at large, to set at libertie.

Lárgo, large, wide, broad.

* hazérse a lo Lárgo, to keepe a loose, to
step out as men doe at drawing their
weapon, or as ships when they fight.

* Largór, the largenesse or greatnes of a
mate.

Larguéza, f. franknes, liberalitie.

* Larguíllo, somewhat large.

Largúra, f. length, largenesse, longitude.

* Lárho, vide Lárgo. 

* Las, f. those.

Lasáña, f. a pancake.

* Lascívia, wantonnesse, lust, lasciuious­
nes, vncleannes of life.

* Lascívo, wanton, lasciuious, lecherous.

* Láso, vide Lázo, a snare, a grin, a
trap.

* Láso, vide Lásso, wearie.

* Lásso, wearie.

Lastár, to pay, to endure punishment, to
pay debt for another.

Lástima, f. grieefe, hurt.

Lastimár, to be sorie, to hurt, to grieue, to
wound.

* Lastiméro, vide Lastimóso. 

* Lastimóso, or Lastimózo, full of
griefes, troubles or wounds.

Lastrár, to ballast a ship.

Lástre, m.ballast for ships.

† Lárte, id est, la árte, f. art, cunning.

* Láta, as óro de láta, f. plate, gold bea­
ten to plates.

* Latído, m.the leaping of the heart, the
beating of the heart.

* Latiénte, a leaping thing, as the beating
of the heart.

Látigo, a leather strap, or a hempen lashe
of a whippe.

Latín, latin.

Latinidád, f. the perfection of latine, vse
of latine.

* Latíno, m.latine, or a man of Latium.

Latír, to pant, to breath.

* Latitúd, f. the breadth or largenes of a
thing.

* Latolábo, m.a garment vsed among the
Romanes in signe of honor.

Latón, m.a fine kinde of brasse called
latton.

* Larrocínio, m.robbery, thefte.

Lavadéro, m.a washing place.

* Lavádo, m.washed.

Lavadór, m.a washer.

Lavadúra, f. washing.

* Lavajál, Lavájo, wallowing in water
or durt, to wash as swine doo, a puddle.

* Lavájo, idem. 

* Lavánça, vide labánça. 

Lavánco, a drake, a mallard.

* Lavandéra, f. a laundres, a woman that
vseth to wash clothes.

Lavár, to wash.

* Lavatório, m.a lauer to wash at, a
bathe.

Lavázas, filth washed off, dish wash, &c.

* Laúd, m.a lute.

Láudano, the gum Labdanum vsed in
pomanders.

* Láudes, f. praises.

* Lávios, vide Lábios, m.lips.

* Láuma, vide Láunas. 

* Láunas, vide Láminas, plates to make
corslets with, the blade of a sword. Also
a laund or plaine of a downe.

* Lavór, vide Labór, worke, labour.

* Lavorcíca, a small or little worke.

* Laureádo poëta, a poet laureate or
crowned with laurell.

Lauredál, a place where many laurell or
bay trees doe growe.

Laurél, m.a bay tree.

Lauréola, f. an herbe called laurie. Also 
the herbe periwinkle.

* Lautiéro, m.a bay tree.

* Láura, f. the proper name of madame
Laura whom Petrark so long loued.

* Láuro, vide Laureádo. 





* Láxa, as dár Láxa a cánes, a leash, to
let dogs slip off the leash.

* Laxibia, a fish called a cuttle, whose
blood is blacke as inke.

Lazáda, f. a snare, a riddle, a laced but­
ton, a loopehole for lace, button or such
like, &c.

* Lazádas, idem. 

* Lazerádo, m.miserable, niggardly.

Lazéria, f. miserablenesse, niggardise.

Lazíllo, m.a little snare, a little trap, a
little knot.

Lázo, a knot, a grin, a trap.

* Lazúl, a bright blew stone called a lazul
stone.



* Léa, Léo, vide Léer. 

Leál, faithfull, loyall.

Lealménte, faithfully, loyally.

Lealtád, f. loyalty, faithfull trustines.

Lebráda, f. bare broth or pottage made
with a hare, hare worts, sawce for a
hare.

Lebrastílla, f. a leueret or yong hare.

Lebrél, m.a harrier, a greyhound.

† Lebríllo, m.an earthen pot, an earthen
pan.

Lebrilléjo, m.a little bason of earth.

* Lebrixa, f. a towne of Andaluzia, called
in Latine Nebrissa, of which AElius
Anton. Nebrissensis, was so called.

Lebrúno, m.pertayning to a hare.

Lección, or Leción, a reading, a lesson, a
lecture.

Lechál, made of milke, pertayning to
milke.

Léche de gallína, a white field onion.

Léche, f. milke.

* Léche azéda, rennet, such as they make
cheese with.

* Léche de mantéca, butter-milke,
churnmilke.

* Léche de pésce, the milt of a fish.

Lechéra piédra, a pretious stone called
Galactite.

* Lechéra, f. a bed of timber worke to lay
a peece of ordinance on. Also vide Le­
chetrézna.

Lechetrézna, f. an herbe called Spurge.

* Lechia, a kinde of plum.

Léchiga, f. a beere to carrie dead bodies
on.

Lechín, a kinde of long Oliue. Also the
galling or wearing off the hair of horse
or mule when they first beginne to
worke.

Lécho, m.a bed.

Lechón, m.a sucking pig.

Lechúga, f. a lettuce.

Lechúga créspa, a curled or ragged lea­
fed lettuce.

* Lechúga parráda por el suélo, a Cab­
bage lettuce, a leafed or headed Let­
tuce.

* Lechuguílla, f. the ruffe of a ruffe band.  Also a little Lettuce.

* mángas de Lechuguílla, f. sleeues of
lawne or fine linnen that women weare
which haue ruffes at hands.

* cuéllo de Lechuguílla, a ruffe band.

Lechuguíno, m.small Lettuce.

† Lechúza, f. an owle.

Leción, or Lección, reading, a lesson.

Lectúra, vide Letúra. 

* Léda fáz, f. a merrie countenance.

Ledaménte, merrily, ioyfully, gladly.

* Leéldo, id est, Leéd lo, read it.

Léer, to read.

Legacía, f. a legacie, an embassage, a mes­
sage from a Prince.

Legádo, m.an ambassadour, a legate.

Legájo, m.a bundle of papers, a file of
writings.

* Legál, of or pertayning to the law, tri­
able by law, lawfull.

* Legalidád, f. lawfulnes.

* Legalizádo, made lawfull, or legiti­
mate.

* Legáto, a legacie or bequeast of a Te­
stament or will.

* Legénda, f. a legend, a booke to be read
often, scripture, a writing.

* Legereménte, vide Ligereménte, lightly, nimbly.

* Legeréza, vide Ligeréza, nimblenes,
liuelines.

* Legéro, vide Ligéro, light, nimble, ac­
tiue.

* Legíble, that may be read, legible.

Legión, an armie of souldiers consisting
of 6100. footemen, and 730. horse­
men.

* Legislatór, m.a lawgiuer, a lawma­
ker.

Legísta, m.a lawyer.

* Legitimádo, made lawfull, become le­
gitimate, or as one lawfully borne.

Legitimár, to make legitimate, or capa­
ble by law.

Legítimo, m.lawfully borne, legitimate.

* Légno, m.léño, a blocke.

Légo, m.laie, prophane, a lay man, one of
the vulgar sort.

† Légua, f. a league, three miles, three
miles and three quarters as some saie.

Legúmbre, f. Pulse, as Beanes, Pease,
Vetches, &c.

* Leído, vide Leýdo, m.read.

* Leíble, vide Leýble, that may bee
read.

Léna, f. breath.

Lençál, any thing of flaxe.

Lencéro, m.a linnen draper.

* Lendárse, vide Leudár. 

* Lendéro, m.a linnen draper.

* Léndre, vide Liéndre, f. a neete, the
spawne of a louse.

Lendréro, m.a place where neets breede.

Lendróso, m.full of neets.

Léngua, f. a toong.

Léngua de buéy, buglosse, called also
Lange-de-beuf.

Léngua de Ciérvo, an herb called Harts 
toong.

Léngua de pérro, an herbe called hounds
toong.

Léngua de cordero, an herbe called
lambes toong.

Léngua de balánça, the toong of the ba­
lance shewing which ballance is hea­
uiest.

* Léngua cervína, Harts toong.

Léngua de cavállo, an herbe called
horse toong, or lawrell of Alexandria.

* Lenguádo, m.a fish called a soale.

Lenguáge, or Lenguáje, language, the
proprietie of a speech.

* Lenguáz, full of toong, full of wordes.

Léña, f. wood.

Léña hacináda, f. wood piled vp.

Leñadór, m.a woodmonger, a carrier or
maker of wood.

* Léña enligáda, f. limed twigs.

Léño, a blocke.

* Léño, a fisherboate.

Lentecér, or Lenterscérse, to waxe
weake, to waxe slender.

Lentéja, a kinde of pulse called Len­
tils.

Lentéja de água, an herbe called duckes
meate.

* Lentérno, a lanthorne.

Lentísco, m.the masticke tree.

* Lénto, m.slowe, bowing, pliant, softe,
negligent.

* Lentorpecér, id est le Entorpecér, 
to make him dull, heauie, or senseles.

Lentúra, f. bowing, bending, a slowe go­
ing or creeping.

* Lenzería, f. a place where they sell lin­
nen. Also much linnen togither.

* Lenzón, m.cloath of canuas, or verie
course linnen cloath.

León, m.a lyon.

Leóna, f. a lyonesse, a shee lyon.

* Leóna, a cittie of Cappadocia so cal­
led.

Leonádo, m.lyon coloured.

Leoncíllo, m.a lions whelpe.

* Leonéra, f. a place to keepe lions in.

* Leonpárdo, m.a leopard.

* Lépanto, a sea so called.

Lépra, f. the leprosie.

Lepróso, m.one that is troubled with the
leprosie, a lazer.

* Lepúsquia, f. the principall prouince in
Biscay.

Lérdo, m.slowe, lazie, cowardly.

* Lesión, f. dammage, hurt.





* Lesnordéste, the east northeast, or the
northeast by east.

* Léste, m.the east.

Letanía, f. the letanie, a certaine order
and number of praiers.

* Lethargía, f. the drowsie sicknes where­
of men die beastly.

* Léthe, a riuer of hell as poets faine, the
water whereof being drunke maketh
men to forget all whatsoeuer they haue
done or said.

* Letiéra, f. a horse litter.

Letór, or Lectór, m.a reader.

Létra, f. a letter.

Letrádo, m.learned, a lawyer.

Letréra, f. a rowe of letters, a writing.

Letrína, f. a sinke, a draught, a priuie.

* Letuárto, an electuarie.

* Letúra, a reading, a lecture, a lesson.

* Léva, a presse or taking vp men for the
war.  Also a weighing of anchor.

Leváda, f. a thing lifted vp. Also prooued,
tried, assaied. Also a bout or turne at
fence.

Leváda en juégo, a bout at fence.

Levadár, vide Lleudár, to leuen bread.

* Levadiza puénte, f. a draw bridge.

Levádo, m.taken vp, weighed anchor.

Levadúra, f. leuen for bread.

* Levandiza puénte, f. Levadíza
puénte. 

Levantádo, m.that which is aloft, raised
vp.

* Levantádas las mésas, f. the tables be­
ing taken vp.

Levantamiénto, m.a setting vp, lifting,
arising, rising, rebelling.

Levantár, to lift vp, to raise, to swell, to
puffe vp, to weigh anchor, to rise in re­
bellion.

Levánte, m.a lifting vp, the east, the east
winde.

* Levár, to arise, to lift vp.

* Leudár, to leuen bread.

* Leudo, leuened as bread.

* Léve, light, easie, not burdensome.

* Levécho, m.east, southeast.

Lexáno, m.far off.

† Lexia, f. lie to wash withall.

* Lexión, a lie for diers with which they
make a false glasse on their colours.

Léxos, far off.

Lexúra, f. farnesse, distance off.

Léy, f. a law.

* Léy de buéno júro, by the faith of an
honest man I sweare.

Leýble, legible, that may be read.

Leýdo, m.read.

* Leyénte, one that readeth.

* Leyéndas, f. legends of saints.

* Léyla, an ancient custome of dauncing
among the Moores.

* Léyno, vide Línde, a limite, a bounde.


L I
* Lía, f. a with of Osier twigs to binde
withall.

* Liáça, f. a bundle of osiers.

* Liár, to binde with withs of osier rods,
or such like: to make or binde vp a bun­
dle.

Libación, sacrifice offered. Also a ta­
sting in offering.

* Libano, m. the frankincense tree.

* Libár, to taste, to assay, to cull out or of­
fer in sacrifice.

* Libélo, m.a libell, a defaming libell, a
pasquine. Also a declaration of a mans
plea or processe.

Liberál, liberall, bountifull, honest, cur­
teous, gentlemanlike.

Liberalidád, f. liberalitie, bounty, honest
dealing.

Liberalménte, liberally, bountifully, ho­
nestly, curteously.

* Liberaménte, vide Libreménte, 
freely.

* Líbero, m.free, cleere, enfranchized, set
at libertie.

Libertád, f. freedome, libertie, fran­
chise.

Libertádo, m.set at libertie, made free,
enfranchized.

Libertár, to set at libertie, to make free,
to discharge, to enfranchise.

* Libertíno, a free man, one that is ma­
numissed and set at libertie, a liber­
tine.

* Líbia, f. the countrey called Lybia.

* Libidinóso, libidinous, lustfull, luxu­
rious, fleshly, incontinent.

Líbra, f. a pound waight. Also a constel­
lation in the firmament being one of
the twelue signes of the zodiake.

Librádo, m.deliuered, freed.

Librádo, serued or vsed.

Librádo, as el mejor Librádo, hee that
sped best, dispatched, paide his money.

Libradór, m.a deliuerer or discharger.
Also one that giueth a bill or warrant
to receiue money by.

Libramiénto, m.freeing or discharging.
Also vide Libránça.

Libránça, f. a bill of receit, a warrant to
receiue by.

Librár, to deliuer, to make free, to giue a
bill or warrant to receiue money by, to
dispatch or rid.

Líbre, free.

Libréa, f. a liuerie.

* Libreádos, m.such as haue liueries.

* Libreménte, freely, frankely.

* Libremiénto, m.freedome.

Librería, f. a librarie of bookes.

* Libréro, m.a booke-seller, a keeper of a
librarie.

Libréta, f. a little pound waight.

* Libríllo, m.a little booke. Also a little
earthen pot or pan.

Líbro, m.a booke.

* Líbro de cáxa, or Líbr de raciónes, 
a booke of accounts, a reckoning booke.

* Líbro de memória, a note booke.

Líça, or Tránçe de ármas, a cumbat,
a battle.

Licéncia, f. a licence, leaue, libertie.

Licenciádo, m.licenced, a bacheler of
lawe.

Licenciár, to licence, to giue leaue or li­
bertie.

* Licencióso, sensuall, luxurious, licen­
tious.

* Licio, a man of Licia.

* Lición, a lesson, a reading.

* Licitaménte, lawfully, freely.

Lícito, m.lawfull.

Licór, or Liquór, m.liquor, moysture.

Líd, f. contention in law, strife, debate,
fighting.

Lidiár, to goe to lawe, to striue, to con­
tend.

* Lidiádo tóro, a baited bull.

Liébre, f. a hare.

* Liébre de már, an vgly fish called a sea
hare.

Liénço, m.linnen cloath. Also vsed for a 
picture or protraiture which, are done
in cloath.

* Liénço sutíl, fine linnen cloath.

* Liénço de murálla, the curtaine of a
wall.

* Liéndre, f. a nit, the spawne of a louse.

Liénto, bowing, bending, leaning, pliant,
slow.

* Liéua, a taking vp, a leauying vp.

Líga, f. a league or band of amitie, bird­
lime, a band, a garter, misseltoe, a green
shrub growing on apple tree, crabbe
trees, &c.

Ligádo, m.bound, tied.

Ligadúra, f. a band, a tying, binding.

* Ligaménto, m.a band, a tying, binding.

Ligár, Præs. yo Lígo, 1. Præt. yo Ligué,
to binde, to tie, to make fast.

Ligeraménte, lightly, nimbly, actiuely.

Ligeréza, f. lightnes, nimblenes, actiuenes.

* Ligeríssimo, m.most nimble, most ac­
tiue, most swift, most light.

Ligéro, m.light, actiue, nimble.

* Ligue, vide Ligár. 

* Lijéro, or Ligéro, m.light, nimble, ac­
tiue.

Líma, f. a file, a limon.

Líma, or Limón, a Limon, or a Lymon
tree.

* Limáça, f. a snaile.

* Limáda, f. a deformed kinde of dog­
fish.





* Limadaménte, exquisitely, trickly.

* Limádo, filed, tricked.

Limadúra, f. filing, saw-dust, pindust,
whatsoeuer commeth of the filing or
sawing of any thing.

Limár, to file.

* Limáza de úvas, the garden snaile.

Liméra, f. a Limon tree.

Liméta, f. a glasse, a small viall.

* Limitáneo, m.which is limited or ap­
pointed his bounds.

Limitár, to limit, to appoint the bounds.

Límite, m.a bounde, a limit, a compasse.

Límo, m.mud, durt.

* Limóges, or Limójes, a citie in France
within the Dukedome of Aquitane.

* Limón, m.a Limon. Also a Limon
tree.

* Limón del cárro, the long snoute that
goeth betweene the oxen in a waine.

* Limón, a towne in Poictow in France.

* Limonár, a place where Limons grow.

Limósna, f. almes.

* Limosnár, to giue almes.

* Limosneadór, one that beggeth or as­
keth almes.

Limosneár, to aske or beg almes.

Limosnéro, m.an almoner.

Limóso, m.durtie, mirie.

Limpiadaménte, cleanly, neatly.

* Limpiadéra, a brush.

Limpiadéro, m.an instrument to make
cleane with.

Limpiadúras, f. the parings of any thing.

Limpiaménte, cleerely, finely, neately,
handsomly.

Limpiár, to cleanse, to make cleane, to
make fine and neate.

Limpiéza, f. cleannes, puritie, neatnesse,
finenesse.

Límpio, m.cleane, pure, bright, fine,
neate.

* Limpión, m.a cleanser of priuies, a
iakes farmer, a goldfiner.

Lináge, m.a stocke, a linage.

* Lináje, vide Lináge, m.

Lináloe, the tree of Aloes.

Linár, a bed wherein flaxe is sowed or
groweth.

Lináza, f. line seede.

* Línce, m.a spotted beast called a Lynx
that is very quicke sighted.

* Lincóya, m.a proper name of an In­
dian.

Lindáço, m.a bound, a border.

Lindaménte, cleanly, finely.

* Lindár, to border, to bound out.

Línde, f. a bound, a border, a coast.

Lindéro, m.a bounder or butter out.

Lindéza, f. finenes, neatnes, cleanlines.

Líndo, m.cleane, neate, fine, handsome.

* Líndo, a citie in the ile of Rhodes.

Línea, f. any kinde of line, streake or
draught, line of kindred. Also with
Mathematicians a length without
bredth or thicknes.

Linea-véra, vide Carcáx. 

Líno, m. flaxe or linnen.

Líños, or cabéros de la víña, the ranges
or ranks in vines as they are set and
placed.

* Lintérna, f. a lanterne.

Lío, m.a fardle, a packe.

Liquecér, to melt.

* Liquidación, f. a cleering or making
cleere of any thing.

Líquido, m.moist, liquid.

* Liquór, or Licór, m.liquor.

Líra, f. a harpe.

* Líria, f. birdlime to catch birds with.

Lírio, a lillie.

Lírio cárdeno, garden flag, flower de­
luce.

Lirón, m.a dormouse.

Lironcíllo, m.a little field mouse, or lit­
tle dormouse.

* Lisaménte, smoothly.

Lisiádo, m.hurt.

* Lisiár, to hurt.

Lisión, f. a hurt.

Líso, or Lízo, m.smoothe, balde.

Lisongeádo, m.flattered, smoothed vp in
words.

Lisongeár, to flatter.

Lisongéro, m.a flatterer, a smoothbootes
a clawbacke.

Lisónja, f. flatterie.

* Lisónjas de óro, embroderie with
golde.

* Lisonjeár, or Lisongeár, to flatter.

* Lisonjéro, or Lisongéro, a flatte­
rer.

Lísta, f. the list of cloth, a roll of names.

Listáda, striped with many colours.

Listónes, garters, listes.

Lisúra, f. smoothnes.

* Litargía, vide Letargía. 

* Litargírio, the froth or foame of siluer.

Litéra, f. a horse-litter.

Líteras, vide Létras, letters.

* Litigadór, m.a wrangler, one that go­
eth to law.

* Litigánte, one striuing, wrangling, or
going to law.

Litigár, Præs. yo Lítigo, 1. Præt. yo Li­
tigué, to chide, to brawle, to go to law.

Litigióso, m.full of strife, contentious.

* Litigue, vide Litigár. 

* Litispendéncia, a demur in law.

* Litór, m.a kinde of sergeant.

Livianaménte, lightly.

Liviandád, f. lightnes.

Liviáno, m.light, idle headed.

* Liviáno viénto, a small pleasant fresh
breathing of the winde.

Liviénos, or Bófes, the lungs.

* Livrádo, or Librádo, deliuered, freed.

* Livramiénto, or Libramiénto, deli­
uerance, freeing, or a bill of warrant to
receiue money.

* Livrár, or Librár, to set free, to deliuer,
to giue a bill or warrant, to receiue mo­
ney.

* Liuréa, a liuerie garment.

Líxa, f. a skatefish.

Líxo, vide Ciéno, mudde.

Lízo, m.a web of cloth, the webbe in the
loome.

Lízos para texér, the owse or threed of
linnen wounde vp on the two beames,
which the sleie doeth weaue vppe and 
downe.


Ll A
Llága, f. a wounde, a stripe.

Llagádo, m.wounded, beaten with
stripes.

Llagár, Præs. yo Llágo, 1. Præt. yo
Llagué, to wounde, to strike.

Llagóso, m.full of wounds, full of stripes.

* Llague, vide Llagár. 

Lláma, f. a flame of fire, a crie.

Llamádo, m.called.

Llamadór, m.a caller.

* Llmálde, id est Llamád le, call him.

Llamamiénto, m.a crying, a calling.

Llamár, to crie, to knocke or call at the
gate.

* Llamaráda, f. on a burning fire.

Llanaménte, plainly.

* Llanár, to make plaine, to make easie.

* Llanéza, f. plainnes, sinceritie, simple­
nes.

Lláno, m.plaine, simple.

Llánta, f. a plant. Also the binding iron
about the wheeles of carts.

Llanteár, to bewaile, to bemone.

Llantén, m.the herbe called Plantaine.

Llánto, m. a complaint, a crying out.

Llantúra, vide Llanúra. 

Llanúra, plainnesse, a plaine.

Lláres, or Olláres, pot hangers.

Lláve, f. a key.

Llaverizo, a key bearer.

* Llavéra, f. a key clog.

* Llaúto, m.a kind of platted wire which
the Indians weare on high on their
foreheads garnished with golde and
checker worke, with many precious
stones, in which they set their plumes
(which they are much delighted in) but
they weare not this in war, for then
they vse head peeces.


Ll E
Llegáda, f. an assemblie or meeting.

Llegádo, m.assembled, gotten togither,





come neere to.

Llegár, to gather togither, to come neere.

* Llegár a cáso, to coine togither by
chance, to come in the nicke.

* Llenár, vide Henchír, to fill or stuffe
full.

* Lléña, f. wood.

Llenadór, m.a woodmonger, a maker,
hewer or carrier of wood.

Lléno, m.full.

Llevadór, m.a bearor, a lifter.

Llevár, to bring, to beare, to carrie, to
draw, to lift, to take away, to take vp,
to leuie or gather.

* Llevár en buélo, to run away with, to
carrie quite away.

* Llevár en la cabéça, to carrie on the
head.

* Llevár en la riénda, to leade by the
bridle.

* Llevár a jórro, to towe a barke or
boate.

* Lleudádo, vide Lleúdo. 

* Lleudár, to leuen bread.

* Lleúdo, m.leuened as bread.

Lléxos, vide Léxos, far off.


Ll O
* Lloradéro, m.a place where they weep,
a place to mourne in.

* Llorádo, m.wept, lamented.

Llorár, to weepe, to waile, to lament.

Llóro, m.weeping, wailing.

Llorosaménte, weepingly, with wailing
and lamentation.

Lloróso, m.mournfull, lamentable, piti­
full.

* Llotrár, vide Aquillotrár, to make an
end, to dispatch.

Llovediza água, raine water.

Llovér, yo Lloévo, to raine.

* Llovido, m.rained.

Lloviznár, to drizzle, to mizzle, to be
showrie.


Ll V
Llúbia, vide Llúvia, f. raine.

* Lludár, to leuen bread.

* Lludir, idem. 

* Llueve, Lluévo, vide Llovér. 

* Lluvezita, f. a little small drizzling
raine.

Llúvia, or Llúbia, f. raine.

Lluvióso, m.rainie, showrie.


L O
Lo, it, that.

* Lóa, f. praise, commendation.

Loáble, praise woorthie.

Loableménte, commendably, laudably.

* Loádo, m.praised.

Loár, to praise.

Lóba, f. a shee woolfe, a ridge, a kinde of
cassocke.

* Lóba, as Lóba frizáda, a freeze cas­
socke or cottoned cassocke.

* Lóba de la puérta, a great key for a
great doore or gate.

* Lóba entre súlco y súlco, a space be­
tweene furrow and furrow.

Lobadádo, m.a swelling about the iawes,
swollen with bunches.

Lobádo, m.bunches in the flesh, a disease
in a horse, called the fashions.

* Lobagánte, a fish called a Lobster.

Lobaníllo, m.a swelling called a carbun­
cle or plague soare, a bile or push.

Lobéra, f. a cassocke furred with woolfe.
Also the den of the woolfe.

Lobézno, or Lobillo, m.a woolfes whelp.

Lobillo, or Lobézno, or Lobito, idem. 

Lobíto, Lobillo, or Lobézno, idem. 

* Lobítos en tal gésto, a flouting speech,
id est, Come my pretie little munkie
face, pretie little woolfes face.

Lóbo, m.a woolfe.

Lóbo maríno, a sea calfe.

* Lóbo cervál, a linx.

Lóbrego, darke, sad, mournefull.

Lobúno, m.belonging to a woolfe.

† Lóça, f. vessels of earth.

* Ánde la lóça, let dishes walke, let vs
make good cheere.

* Lóca, f. a shee foole.

* Locáce, a prating fellow full of words.

Locaménte, foolishly, madly.

Locanía, f. brauerie, gallantnes, wanton­
nes.

Loçáno, m.wanton, braue, gallant, fro­
like, a lustie blood.

Lóco, m.a foole, a frantike man.

Locúra, f. foolishnes, madnes.

Lódo, m.durt, mire.

Lodóso, m.durtie, mirie.

Lógica, f. logicke, the arte of reasoning,
skill how to prooue and disprooue by ar­
guments cunningly.

Lógico, m.a logitian, a cunning fellow in
reasoning.

Lográdo, as malLográdo, vnfortu­
nate.

Lográr, to win, to gaine, to get by vsurie,
to enioy any thing a long while.

Logréro, m.an vsurer.

Lógro, m.vsurie, gaine.

* Logústa, f. a creuish, a sea lobster. Also a
worme, a destroier of wheat corne.

* Lóma de montána, the ridge of a
mountaine.

Lómas, ridges, tops of hils.

* Lo de más, the remainder, the resi­
due.

Lombárda, f. a peece of ordinance.

Lombardéro, m.a gunner.

Lombriguéra yérva, Southernwood.

Lombriz, f. an earth-worme, a worme in
the belly.

* Lomísmo, id est, lo mísmo, the selfe
same.

Lómo, m.the loines, the backe, a ridge.
Also the lift of cloth.

Lómo de libro, the bosse of a booke.

* Lómo entre súlco y súlco, a ridge of a
lande.

* Lóndres, the citie London in England.

Longaníza, f. a pudding, a sawsige.

* Longanizéro, m.a sawsige maker, a
pudding seller.

* Longitud, f. the length.

* Longuetón, a shell fish liuing in the
sand of the sea of the length and bignes
of ones finger.

Longúra, f. length.

Lónja, f. a great peece or part.

Lónja de tocíno, a lunch of bakon.

Lónja de mercadéres, a row or place for
merchants to walke and confere in, for
to do their busines.

Lónja de cása, a lowe walke vnder pil­
lers like a cloyster.

* Lonja, or passeadéro, idem. 

Lóor, m.praise, laud, commendation.

Loqueár, to bee foolish, to be frantike or
madde.

Lo que, that which.

* Loquilla, Loquillo, a little foole, hee,
or shee.

* Loquíta, Loquíto, idem. 

Loríga, f. a brestplate, a maile, a haber­
geon.

Lorigádo, m.armed with a habergeon.

* Loriguíllo, an herbe with which diers
die withall.

Lóro, m.dun coloured. Also a parret.

Los, they.

Lósa, a trap for birdes, a pauement.

Losádo, m.paued.

Losár, to paue.

* Lóvo, vide Lóbo, a hee woolfe.

* Loýtia, a knight of China.

* Lóza, vessels of earth.


L V
* Lúbrico, m.slipperie, inconstant.

* Lucentór, painting for the face to
make it cleere and bright.

* Lucéro, vide Luzéro. 

† Lúcha, f. wrestling.

Luchadór, m.a wrestler.

* † Luchamiénto, m.wrestling.

† Luchár, to wrestle.

* Lucidíssimo, vide Luzidíssimo, most
bright shining, most cleere.

* Lúcido, vide Lúzido, bright shining
or cleere





* Luciénte, v. Luziénte, bright, shining.

Luciérnaga, f. a glow- worme that shi­
neth by night in the hedges like a little
candle.

* Lucíllo, vide Luzíllo, a tombe.

* Lucír, vide Luzír, to shine bright.

Ludír, to rubbe one thing with another.

Luégo, then, therefore, by and by.

* Luegoteniénte, vide Lugár-teniénte, 
 a lieutenant.

Luénez, long, farre off. Also a man in 
Spaine.

Luengaménte, at length.

Luéngo, m.long.

* Luéña, vide Léxos. 

Lugár, m.a place: also a village.

* Lugár, a village.

Lugaréjo, m.a little village. Also a
little place.

* Lugarteniénte, or Lugár- tiniénte, m.
a lieutenant, a deputie,

* Lúgubre, mournefull, lamentable, with
wailing and weeping.

Lumbrál, the threshold, or groundsell of a
house.

Lúmbre, f. light, the fire, the peece of tim­
ber ouer the doore, the brow peece, the
transom or lyntell.

Lumbréra, that which giueth light.

* Lumbríz, f. wormes in the belly, earth­
wormes that be reddish and long.

Lumbróso, lightsome, full of light.

Luminación de líbros, limning of
bookes.

Luminadór de líbros, a lymner of
bookes.

Luminár líbros, to lymne bookes.

Luminária, lights in the night.

Lúna, f. the moone.

* Lúna lléna, the moone at full.

* Lúna cuernúda, the moone at the
prime.

Lunár, the moone light, a spot in the bo­
die.

Lunár piédra, a stone called Selenites.

Lunático, m.one that is sicke, or mad at the
full or change of the moone, lunatike.

* Lúnco, m.a kinde of boate, or small ship
vsed in China.

Lúnes, m.munday.

* Lupercál, a place vnder the hill Pala­
tine at Rome dedicated to Pan, who
was said to keepe the woolfe from de­
uouring the sheepe.

* Lúpo, or Robálo, a fish called a base.

* Lúpulos, a kinde of hearbe.

* Lusárte, m.a portingale, a man of por­
tingale.

* Lusitánia, f. the countrey of Portingale.


* Lusitáno, m.one of Portingale, a man of
Portingale.

Lústre, the shew, the glistering or glasse of
any colour.

* Lustróso, full of shew, glistering.

Lutádo, m.clad in mourning apparell.

* Lúteo, m.made of clay, or durt.

* Lutheráno, m.one of the opinion of Lu­
ther.

* Lutíco, a mourner.

Lúto, m.mourning, lamentation, mour­
ning apparell.

Luxúria, f. leachery, wantonnes, excesse in
ryot.

Luxuriár, to be leacherous, to exceede in
riot.

Luxuriosaménte, leacherously, riotously.

Luxurióso, m.leacherous, riotous, wan­
ton.

Lúz, f. light.

Luzéro, the morning starre.

* Luzidíssimo, m.most bright shining,
most cleere.

* Lúzido, m.bright shining.

Luziénte, bright shining.

Luzíernaga, or Luciérnaga, a glow­
worme.

Luzíllo, m.a tombe.

Luzimiénto, m.the lightning.

Lúzio, m.shining, glistering.

Luzír, to shine, to shew bright.


L Y
* Lýra, a harpe, a skatefish.

* Lýrios, lillies.



M

* MÁbos, pestles in oile milles, paper
milles, &c.

* † Máça, f. a mace or club with iron
prickes, or plated with iron so that it
cannot be cut, a hammer, a beetle.

* Máça de ruéda, the naue of a wheele
wherein the spoakes stand.

† Maçacóte, m.lyme and sande mixed
togither, the stuffe whereof glasse is
made.

* Maçágua, f. a fruit in the Indies.

* † Maçamórra, the crums or fragments
of bisket bread.

* Maçán, or Maçanéro, m.a mace bea­
rer, one that carrieth a mace.

* Maçán de puérco, vide Mazán de 
puérco. 

* Macána, f. a kinde of weapon in the In­
dies as a clubbe done at the ende with
flint stone.

Maçapán, m.a marchpaine.

* Macarronádo, m.made or done with
fresh cheese and creame. Also like that
fashion.

Macarrónes, fresh cheese and creame.

* Máças, a spice called mace.

Macéro, m.a mace bearer.

* Macéta, f. a flower pot of earth. Also a
mallet.

* Macéte, a little mallet.

* Machér, m.a village in the kingdome
of Granada in Spaine.

* Machérra, f. vide Machórra, a bar­
ren woman.

* Machéte, m.a great knife that the pe­
sants and olde men vse in Spaine to
weare at their girdles like a butchers
knife, or a cookes knife.

* Máchina, f. an engine, a frame, a peece
of workmanship, a subtle deuise or shift,
a complot, a conspiracie.

Mácho, m.the male kinde of any crea­
ture, the man, a smithes sledge, or great
hammer. Also a hee goate.

* Mácho de herréro, a smithes sledge or
greatest hammer, wherewith he wor­
keth great bars of yron.

* Mácho de sílla, a maile for a saddle. A
nag or gelding to ride on.

* Machóra, vide Machórra. 

† Machórra, f. barren, fruitlesse, child­
lesse.

Machucádo, m.stamped, beaten in a
morter.

* Machucadór, m.a stamper, one that
stampeth in a morter or otherwise.

Machucadúra, f. stamping, powning in a
morter.

Machucár, Præs. yo Machuéco, 1.
Præt. yo Machuqué, to pounde, to
stampe.

* Machuque, Machuéco, vide Machu­
cár. 

Maciás, m.the proper name of a yoong
man, Page to a King of Spaine, which
died for loue he bare to his mistres, and
is called the Idoll of louers.

Maciçár, to make sound or whole.

Macicéz, f. soundnes.

Macíço, m.sound, solide, whole.

* Macíço de la plúma, that which is a­
boue the hollownes of a pen, the solide­
nes of a pen.

* Macísso, a kinde of massie paste to cast
vnto the fish in angling.

* Macizéz, vide Macicéz, f. solidenes,
soundnes.

Máço, m.a hammer, a beetle.

* Máço de hiérro, an yron mace, a battle
axe.

* Maçonadúra, f. a ramming in, a beating
in.

Maçoneár, to driue downe with a ham­
mer or beetle.

Maçonería, f. a free masons arte or
worke.

Maçórca, f. flaxe on the distaffe, as much
as is set on at one time.

* Mácula, f. a spot, a blot, a blemish, an
infamie, reproch, discredit, or shame.





* Maculádo, m.spotted, blotted, defa­
med, reproched, blemished, discredi­
ted.

* Maculár, to spot, to blemish, to reproch,
to discredit.

* Madéja, vide Madéxa, a skaine of
thread or silke.

Madéra, f. timber.

Maderádo, m.timbered, done with tim­
ber, planchered, boorded.

Maderamiénto, m.doing with timber,
planchering, boording.

Maderár, to do with timber, to boord, to
plancher.

Madéro, m.wood, a rafter, a plancke.

Madéro, a beame, a rafter, a shingle, a
quarter, a gibbet.

† Madéxa, f. a skaine of thread.

† Madexíta, f. a little skaine of thread.

Madrásta, vide Madrástra, f. 

* Madrástra, or Madrásta, f. a stepmo­
ther, a mother in law.

Mádre, f. a mother, a dame.

Mádre de río, the chanell.

* Mádre, or Matríz, the matrix or wombe
wherin the child is conceiued.

* Madréja, a disease in a woman called the mother.

* Mádre, or Alvañár, a common sincke or
retraict.

* Madrecílla, vide Madrezílla. 

Madresélva, f. Wood-binde, or Hony-suc­
kle.

* Madrezílla, f. a poore wretched olde
woman.

* Madrigéra, vide Madriguéra. 

Madriguéra de conéjo, a conie hoale, a
burrough for conies.

Madrína, f. a godmother.

* Madrína de la bóda, she that accom­
panieth and bringeth home the bride to
the bridegroomes house.

Madríz, f. the wombe where the childe or
yoong thing is conceiued. The chiefe or
Metropolitane citie.

† Madróño, or Medróño, or Héyro, a
kinde of wilde Orenge, the Strawberry
tree, an Arbute tree or Wilding tree.

Madrugáda, f. the twilight in the mor­
ning.

* Madrugádo, m.vp early at the dauning
of the day.

Madrugár, to rise early, to rise before the
sunne be vp.

Maduraménte, ripely, aduisedly, in due
time.

Madurár, to ripen, to grow mellow, to doo
with aduise or discretion.

Maduréza, f. ripenes, mellownes, discre­
tion.

Madúro, m.ripe, mellow, aduised.

* Maéle de Cámpo, vide Maéstre de 
Cámpo, a camp maister.

* Maéstra, f. a mistres.

* Maéstral, or viénto maéstro, the north
west winde.

Maestrázgo, m.a mastership.

Maéstre, m.a master.

* Maéstre de cámpo, vide Maéstro de
cámpo, a campe-master.

Maéstre escuéla, a head schoolemaster, a
chancelor or chiefe gouernour of the
vniuersitie.

Maéstre sála, a gentleman vsher. Also a
caruer, a taster for the king or great
noble man.

Maestría, f. mastership, cunning.

* Maéstro, a master.

* Maéstro de gramática, a schoolmaster
that teacheth grammar.

* Maéstro, or Maéstre de cámpo, a
campe-master.

* Mága, f. an enchantress.

* Magáñas, f. coosenings, deceits, guiles.

* Magárça yerva, motherwoort, fether­
few.

* † Magazén, a storehouse.

Magestád, or Majestád, f. maiestie, dig­
nitie of a great prince.

* Mágica árte, f. art magicke, the blacke
arte.

* Mágico, a magitian, an inchanter.

Magnánimo, m.valiant, couragious, of a
noble and puissant minde.

Magnanimidád, f. valor, courage, noble­
nes of minde.

Magnanimamiénte, valiantly, couragi­
ously, like one of a noble and couragious
minde.

* Magnífica cósa, a stately matter, a
worshipfull thing. Also the song of our
Ladie called Magnificat.

Magnificaménte, stately, worshipfully,
bountifully.

Magnificár, to magnifie, honor or ad­
uaunce.

Magificéncia, f. magnificence, bounti­
fulnes, statelines.

Magnífico, m.worshipfull, beautifull,
stately.

* Mágo, m.a magician, an inchanter, a
sorcerer, a diuiner, a wise man, a great
learend philosopher.

* † Magrán, tribute or toll.

Magrecér, or Magrescér, to be leane, to
pine.

Magréza, f. leannesse.

Mágro, m.leane, lanke, gant.

* Maguer, albeit, although.

Maguéra, although, albeit.

Magulládo, m.brused, beaten blacke and 
blew.

Magulladúra, f. brusing, beating blacke
and blew.

Magullár, to bruse, to beate blacke and
blew.

Maherimiénto, m.pressing of soldiers.

Maherír, yo Mahiéro, to presse soldiers.

* Mahiére, Mahiéro, vide Maherír. 

* † Mahóma, m.Mahomet the false pro­
phet of the Turks.

† Majáda, f. a lodging, a folde for sheepe,
a sheepe house.

† Majadéro, m.a pestell to stampe with,
a blocke head, a dolt.

* Majaderuélo, a little pestle. Also the
bones or wooden things that women
make bone lace with. Also a little dolt
or asse-head.

* Majádo, m.powned, or stamped.

† Majadór, m.a stamper, a powner, he that
beateth with a pestle or hammer, a
baker.

† Majadúra, f. stamping, powning, ham­
mering.

* † Majagráncias, one that beateth out
the huskes of the wheate or corne to
make it pure and fine.

† Majár, to stampe or beate with a pestle
or hammer.

* Majestád, or Magestád, maiestie or
dignitie of a great prince.

* Maiór, vide Mayór. 

Majorána, or Mayorána, vide Amo­
radúx. 

Majuélas, f. hawthorne berries.

Majuélos, vines new planted.

* Maíz, or Maýz, m.a kinde of graine of
which they make bread in China and
the Indians.

Mál, ill, naught, a disease.

* Mál criádo, ill brought vp.

Hazér mál a cavállo, to manage a
horse.

Mal estár, to be sicke, to be displeased.

* Malácia, f. a disease of the stomacke co­
ueting to eate coales and such like
thing.

* Malagorár, to deuine or prophesie some
euill towards one.

Malaguéta, f. Cardamomum, or graines
of paradise.

Malaménte, naughtily, ill.

* Málas, as Andár a Málas, to be fallen
out, to wrangle.

Malático, m.sicke, ill at ease.

Maláto, vide Malático. 

Malaventurádo, or Malabenturádo,  
m. vnfortunate, vnluckie. Also a hard
nigardlie and couetous wretch that will
not spare one pennie out of his purse.

Malavéz, or Malavés, very little, hard­
ly, scarcely.

* Malbaratár, to make an ill market, to
sell for little.

* Malcinadór, m.vide Malcín. 

* Malcín, or Malsín, m.a promoter, an
informer.

* Malcinár, to play the informer, or pro­





moter.

* Malcriádo, ill brought vp.

Maldád, f. naughtines, wickednes, lewd­
nes, mischiefe.

Maldadóso, m.naughtie, lewd, wicked.

Maldadosaménte, naughtily, lewdly.

* Maldéxas de séda, vide Madéxas. 

Maldezír, Præs. Maldígo, Maldízes,
Maldíze, 1. Præt. Maldíxe, Mal­
dixíste, Maldíxo, Fut. Maldiré, rás,
rá, Sub. Præs. Maldíga, Imperfect.
Maldixéra, Maldiría, Maldixésse,
Fut. Maldixére, to speake ill, to curse.

Maldícho, m.ill spoken, or bespoken, ac­
cursed.

Maldición, f. euill speaking, cursing, a
curse.

* Maldíga, Maldígo, vide Maldezír. 

* Maldiría, vide Maldezír. 

Maldíto, m.accursed.

* Maldíxe, Maldixéra, Maldixésse,
Maldíxo, vide Maldezír. 

Maldizidór, a curser, an euill speaker.

Maldiziénte, ill speaking, cursing.

Maldizimiénto, m.an euill speaking, a
cursing.

* Maldoládas Razónes, reasons that
are but ill hewed, vnpolished reasons.

* Maldoládo, m.rough, vnpolished.

Maleár, to bring foorth before the time.

Malefício, m.an euill deede, an offence.

Maléfico, m.an offender, a malefactor.

* Malencolia, f. melancholie.

* Malencólico, m.a melancholike man.

Malenconía, f. melancholie, choler adust
or blacke choler.

Malencónico, m.a melancholike man.

Maléta, f. a budget, a pouch, a maile, a
clokebag.

Maléza, f. a brier bush, a place full of
weedes, a yong orchard, a nurserie for
trees.

* Malezíllo, somewhat euill.

* Malfetría, f. an ill intreating or vsage of
a lord towards his tenants.

* Malhadádo, m.vnfortunate, vnluckie.

* Malharquiána yérva, f. sea mosse.

Malhécho, m.misdone, an euill deede.

Malhechór, m. a misdoer.

* Malhorquiána, or Malharquiána, sea 
mosse.

Malícia, f. malice, enuie.

Maliciosaménte, maliciously, enuiously.

Malicióso, m.enuious, malicious.

Malignidád, or Malinidád, f. naughti­
nes, ill affection or disposition.

Malígno, or Malíno, m.naughtie, wic­
ked, ill minded.

* Malílla, f. a carde picked out and agreed
vpon, to make of him any carde in the
packe, that he that hath him, may make
him king, queene, knaue, ace, ten, nine,
&c. &c. that at two or three sorts of
games.

* Malíno, vide Malígno. 

Málla, f. a maile or habergion.

Málla de laiéd, the meash of a net, a
meash.

Malléro, m.a maker of mailes, or haber­
gions.

* Mállo, m.a hammer, a mallet.

Mal mirádo, m.vnaduised, inconside­
rate.

* Mallórca, and Menórca, two ylandes
by Spaine so called.

Málo, m.naught, wicked, euill.

* Malocegállo, a cocke that is an euill
treader.

* Málo, a citie in Sicilie so called.

* Malpíca, f. an herbe called Cresses.

Malquerér, to wish euill.

* Malquerído, vide Malquésto. 

Malqueriénte, one that wisheth ill.

Malqueriéncia, f. euill will.

Malquísto, m.ill beloued.

Malsín, or Malcín, a promoter, an infor­
mer, a pickthanke.

* Malsinár, to informe as a promoter, to
picke a thanke.

* Maltalládo, m.euill proportioned, ill fa­
shioned.

* Maltíempo, m.foule weather.

* Maltratádo, m.euill handled, euill delt
withall. Also ill apparelled.

Málva, f. an herbe called mallowes.

Malvadaménte, naughtily, lewdly, wic­
kedly, vngraciously.

Malvádo, m.a lewde vngracious person,
wicked, naught.

Malvár, a place where mallowes grow.

* Malvasía, m.wine called malmesey.

Malvavísco, m.marsh mallowes.

Malvavísco salváje, cut or iagged mal­
lowes.

* Malzín, vide Malcín. 

* Malzinár, vide Malcinár. 

Máma, f. a dugge, pappe, or teate. Also
mam, as infants call their mothers or
nurses.

* Mamaís, a tree bearing fruite in the
Indies.

Mamantón, or Mamón, a sucker, one
that sucketh.

Mamár, to sucke.

* † Mamelúco, a Lords sonne.

* Maméys, m.a fruite in the Indies big­
ger than a quince hauing a peele as the
orenge, an a great stone or kernell in
the middle, and the meate verie dain­
tie.

* Mamón, a fruite in the Indies. Also
vide Mamantón.

Mamparár, vide Amparár. 

* Mampastór, vide Manpostéro. 

Mampesáda, or Mampesadílla, a dis­
ease called the mare, that taketh away
the breath by night. Also a weighing
any thing by hand.

Maná, f. manna, a kinde of dewe where­
with the Israelites were fed.

Manáda, f. a flocke of cattell, a droue.

* Manáda água, flowing water.

Manadéro, m.a streame.

Mananciál, a spring, a fountaine.

Manár, to flowe.

* Manatís, a fishe in the Indies, hauing a
face like a man.

* Mancádo, m.maymed, wounded.

† Mançána, f. an apple.

† Mançanál, an orchyard.

* Mançanéro, a costermonger, a fruiterer.

Mançanílla, f. an herbe called camomill.

Mançanílla bastárda, an herbe called
maudine.

† Mançanílla lóca, an herbe called oxe
eye or mayweed.

* Mançaníllos de la bárva, the two lit­
tle balles on the chinne.

† Mançáno, m.an apple tree.

Mancár, Præs. yo Mánco, 1. Præt. yo
Manqué, to want, to mayme.

Mancéba, f. a yong girle, a harlot.

Mançebía, or Mocedád, f. youth.

Mancebía, f. the flewes where harlots are
kept.

* Mancebíto, m.a little boy.

Mancébo, or Mancévo, m.a youth, a
yoong man.

* Mancéra, vide Manzéra. 

* Mancéva, vide Mancéba. 

* Mancevía, vide Mancebía. 

* Mancevíto, vide Mancebíto. 

* Mancévo de hiérro, a load stone.

Máncha, f. a spot.

Manchádo, m.spotted.

Manchár, to spot.

* Mancílla, f. a blot, a spot, mercie, com­
passion.

* Mancillár, to spot, to blot, to take pittie
or compassion on.

Mánco, m.maimed.

* Mancomún, iointly.

* Mánda, f. a bequeathing.

Mánda de Testaménto, a legacie be­
queathed.

Mandádo, m. a commandement, a man­
date, commanded, bequeathed.

Mandádo, or Comissión, a commission,
a matter giuen in charge.

Mandadór, m.a commander, one in au­
thoritie, an imperious fellow.

Mandadéro, m.he that is commanded.

Mandamiénto, m.commandement.

* Diez Mandamiéntos, the ten com­
mandements, the ten fingers.

Mandár, to command, to bequeath by
will.

* Mandarécha, vide Manderécha, the 
right hand.





Mandatório, m.he to whom any thing is
bequeathed.

* Mandáto, m.a command.

* Manderécha, the right hand.

* Mandídas cárnes, vide Manídas, 
tender, soft, delicate flesh.

* † Mandíl, m.vide Delantál, also a
pandor, an applesquire, a baud.

Mandiléte, a baud, a pandor, an apple­
squire.

† Mandillón, vide Mandiléte. 

Mándo, m.a commandement, authoritie.

* Mandóble, a blowe stroken with dou­
bling the hande backward.

Mandón, m.one that commandeth much.

Mandrágora, f. an herbe called a Man­
drake.

Mandrágula, idem. 

Mandrón, m.a kinde of instrument. A
throwing vnder hand.

Maneár béstias, to fetter beastes.

* Manéça, or Manílla de máno, f. 
braslets for the hands.

* Manejamiénto, m.the handling, mana­
ging.

Manejár, to handle, to manage.

* Manéjo, m.handling, managing/

Manéra, f. the manner, the fashion, the
guise, the sleeue of a garment.

Mánga, f. a sleeue. Also a cloakebagge or
portmantew.

* Mánga de píca, the arming of a pike.

* Mánga de broquél, vide Mángo, the
handle of a buckler.

* Mánga de Madéra, vide Mángo. 

Mangádo, m.long sleeued.

* Manginilla, f. the herbe Camomill.

* Mángo, m.the haft, the halue.

Mángo de cuchillo, the haft of a knife.

Mangonáda, f. a bob on the nose, a toy
to mocke withall.

Mangorréo Cuchillo a knife hafted.

Manguíllo, a snufkin, a gauntlet.

Maniáco, m.vnapt, vnfit, vntowardly,
foule and lubberly.

* Maníaco, m.brainsicke, depriued of
commonsense.

* Manjáva, he did eate.

Manjár, to eate. Also a messe of meate, a­
ny meate.

* Manjár blánco, a white meate made of
the breast of a hen, milke, sugar, rice
beaten, mixed all togither, one of the
daintiest meates they make in Spaine.

* Maniatádos, m.the hands tied.

* Maniatár, to tie the hands.

Manída, f. a lodging. Also a tender thing.

* Manída cárne, soft and tender flesh.

* Manído, m.soft, tender.

* Manifactúra, or Manifatúra, handie­
worke.

Manifestación, f. making manifestation, she­
wing abroad.

* Manifestádo, m.made manifest, decla­
red to all.

Manifestaménte, manifestly, openly.

Manifestár, yo Manifésto, to make ma­
nifest, to shew abroad.

* Manifiéste, Manifiésto, vide Manife­
stár. 

Manifiésto, m.manifest, euident to all.

Maníja, vide Manílla. 

Manílla, or Maníja, a braslet.

* Mánjo, vide Manójo. 

* Maniótas, f. fetters for the feete of hor­
ses.

* Manípulo, a company or band of ten
souldiers vnder one Captaine, a hand­
full, a bunch, a little bundle. Also a
string of silke which the priest tieth
about his left arme when he goeth to
say masse.

Maniróto, m.prodigall, vnthriftie, wast­
full.

Máña, f. wit, quicknes of spirit, skill, de­
ceit, cunning.

Mañána, to morrow, the morning.

Mañaneár, vide Madrugár, to arise
early in the morning.

Mañeár, to deuise subtilties.

Mañéra, f. a barren woman.

Mañéro, or Mañóso, m.subtill, cunning.

Mañóso, or Mañéro, idem. 

* Mañosaménte, subtilly, cunningly.

Mañótas, f. fetters for the forefeet of
beastes.

* Manójo de trigo, a hand gripe, or
handfull of wheat. Also a sheafe of
wheate.

Máno, f. the hand.

* Máno de béstia, the forefoot of a beast:
although Máno, bee a hande, yet the
Spaniard alwaies terme the forefeete
of all beastes Mános, and the hinder
feete Pies.

* Ýr a la máno, to stay one, or to with­
hold him from fighting, or do any thing
to hinder, to stoppe, to let from his pur­
pose.

* Tomár la máno, to begin to take vpon
him.

* Venír a las mános, to come to handie
blowes.

* Máno derécha, the right hand.

* Máno ysquiérda, the left hand.

Máno de papíl, a quier of paper.

Manójo, a handfull.

Manópla, a gauntlet.

* Mános de béstias, the forefeete of
beastes: the Spaniard calleth the hinder
feete of beastes Pies, and the forefeete
Mános.

* Manópola, idem. 

* Manoseár, to handle.

* Mános de carnéro, sheepes feete, trot­
ters. Also forefeete of a sheepe.

Manpesáda, or Manpesadílla, the night
mare that taketh the vse of speech
from a man in his sleepe. Also the
weighing of any thing with the hand.

* Manpostéro, m.one that setteth or put­
teth any thing with the handes.

* Manpostería, f. that which is set or pla­
ced with the hands.

* Manpuésto, m.a good aime.

* Mánque, vide Mancár. 

Mansaménte, meekely, gently, mildely.

Mansedúmbre, m.meekenes, gentlenes,
mildenes.

Mánso, m.milde, meeke, gentle, tame.

* Mánso, a captaine sheepe that leadeth
all the flocke.

Mánta, f. a mantle, a blanket, a horse
cloath, hangings for a house, an enging
of warre as great as a cart, made so
that men may go vnder it, to vnder­
mine the gates or wals of a cittie.

Mánta de paréd, hangings for a house.

* Mánta de cavállo, a horsecloath.

* Mánta de cáma, a blanket.

* Mantaeádo, m.canuassed in a blanket or
sheete.

* Manteadór, m.a canuasser or tosser in
a blanket or sheete.

* Manteár, to canuas or tosse in a blanket.

Mantéca, f. butter, also sewet of a hogge
or beast.

Mantél, m.a table cloth.

* Manteléro, a maker or seller of table­
clothes, napkins, &c.

* Mantél, or Panizuélo, a table nap­
kin, a towell.

* Mantelínes de la már, men among the
Indies that haue charge and ouersight
of their seas.

Mantenér, Præs. Manténgo, Mantié­
nes, Mantiéne, 1. Præt. Mantúve,
Mantuvíste, Mantúvo, Fut. Man­
tendré, or Manterné, ás, á, Sub.
Præs. Manténga, Imperfect. Mantu­
viéra, Mantuviésse, or Manternía,
Fut. Mantuviére, to maintaine, to
vphold, to keepe, to nourish, to feede, to
eate, to get his liuing.

* Manténga, Manténgo, vide Mante­
nér. 

Mantenimiénto, m.maintenance, foode,
nourishment.

* Mantéo, a priestes long garment, or
long cloake. Also a garment that wo­
men weare next their smocke downe to
the foote in winter.

* Mantéo con las ármas, a coate ar­
mour, such as heralds vse to weare.

Mantequíllas, vide Nátas. 

Mantéro, m.one that maketh or selleth
either Mantas, or Mantos.

* Mantérna, Mantérne, Manternía, vide Mantenér. 





* Mantíllo, m.a little Manto, for maids
in Spaine.

* Mantíllo de níño, a childes mantle, or
bearing cloth.

* Mánto, the vpper garment of women in
Spaine, couering the head & body,
much like a dutch womans huke, a man­
tle or couering.

* Mánto escúro del aýre, a darke cloudie
weather.

* Mantúve, Mantúvo, vide Mantenér. 

* Mantuviéra, Mantuviésse, Man­
tuviére, vide Mantenér, 

Manuál, pertaining to the hand.

* Manuál líbro, a booke to carrie in the
hand, a little booke.

* Manuéla, f. a leauer of woode.

* Man ysquiérda, the left hand, or side.

* Manzána, vide Mançána, an apple.

* Manzanál, vide Mançanál, an or­
chard.

* Manzanéro, vide Mançanéro, a co­
stermongar.

* Manzanilla, vide Mançanílla, cam­
momill.

* Manzaníllas de la bárva, vide Man­
çanillas de la bárva, the two little
balles on the chinne.

* Manzáno, vide Mançáno. 

Manzéra, f. the plough taile, vpon which
one laieth hold with the hand. Also the
middle of a bowe where one taketh hold
with the hand.

Manzilla, f. a spot, pitty, mercy, compassi­
on.

Manzílla avér, to pitie, to haue mercie.

Manzilládo, m.full of spots.

Manillár, to spot, to pitie, to haue mer­
cie.

* Mápa, f. a map, a globe, a description f
a countrey.

* Mapócho, the name of a faire valley
where the Spaniards fortified the citie
S.yágo, whereby they are called the
people of Mapócho.

Maquí, a spice called Mace, a kinde of
Ginger.

* † Maquíla, f. the toll that a miller taketh
for his grieft or grinding.

* † Maquilón de molína, one that ta­
keth toll of grinding.

Máquina, f. an engine or subtle deuise.

Már, f. the sea.

* Mára, f. a shrub.

Maráña, f. intangling, making intricate.

Marañádo, m.intangled, brought into a
perplexitie.

Marañadór, m.an intangler.

Marañár, to intangle, to wrap in.

† Maravedí, m.a peece of plate being of
the value of the thirtie and fourth part
of a ryall of plate, id est, 34, of them to
an English sixepence.

Maravílla, f. a woonder, a maruell, an a­
stonishment.

Maravilládo, m.woondering, astonied.

* Maravilladór, m.a woonderer, one that
maruelleth.

* Maravillamiénto, m.woondering,
maruelling, astonishment.

Maravillár, to maruell, to woonder.

Maravillosaménte, woonderfully, mar­
uellously.

Maravillóso, m.woonderfull, maruellous.

Márca, f. a marke, a note.

* Márca mayór, the largest volume,
large paper.

Marcádo, m.marked, noted.

palábras Marcádas, words woorth the
noting.

* Marcadór, m.a marker, one that setteth
a marke vpon any thing.

Marçál, of March.

Marcánte, vide Mercadér, a mer­
chant.

Marcár, Præs. yo Márco, 1. Præt. yo
Marqué, to marke, to set the marke on.

* Marçár, vide Marchár. 

* Márcha, f. a marching of souldiers.

* Marchamádo, marked.

* Marchándo, marching.

* Marchár, to march as souldiers do.

Marchitáble, that may wither or fade
away.

Marchitár, to wither, to fade away, to
pine.

Marchíto, m.withered.

Marchitúra, f. withering.

* Marclúz, a stockfish.

Márço, m.marche, the moneth.

Márco de pláta, a marke of siluer, the
value of 65. ryals, id est of English mo­
ney xxxii.s.iij.d.

Márco de óro, a marke of golde.

* Marcóla, a hedging bill, a bramble
syeth.

Marcomadór, m.one that setteth marke
on any thing.

Maréa, f. the tide of the sea, the tide or
ebbe, the working of the sea this way or
that.

* Mareádo, tossed to and fro, sea sicke,
wet by sea.

* Trígo mareádo, wheate wet, or spoi­
led at sea.

* Mareántes, vide Marinéros. 

Mareár, to vomit at sea, to be sea sicke.
Also to set saile and to passe and saile
at sea.

Maréta, f. a rough tide.

* Marfil, m.iuorie.

Margaríta, f. a pearle, a precious iewell.
Also the proper name of a woman.

Márgen, f. the margent of a booke.

Margomár, to feather, to furnish with
feathers.

Marhojadór, m.one that scrapeth off
mosse.

* Marhojár, to scrape off mosse.

Marhójo, m.mosse.

Maridáble, marriageable, old enough to
be married.

* Maridádo, m.married.

Maridár, vide Casár, to marrie, to be
espoused.

Marído, m.a husband.

* Marihuéla, a little girle called Marie.

* Marína, a creeke of the sea.

* Marinería, f. marinership.

Marinéro, a sayler, a marriner.

Maríno, belonging to the sea.

Maripósa, Maripóso, or Pavelión, a
butterfly.

Mariscál, a marshall.

Marísco, of the sea.

Marísma, the sea shore, a certaine herbe
growing on the sea shore.

Marítimo, neere the sea.

* Marmáje, Marsh mallow.

* Marméllo, vide Membríllo, a Quince.

* Mármo, a white fish like a gilthead.

Marlóta, a cassocke vsed of the Moores.

Mármol, or piedra marmobéna, mar­
ble stone.

Marmoléjo, a small pillar of marble.

* Marmóreo, made of marble.

* Marmoléño, of marble, belonging to
marble.

Marmóta, a munkie, a marmoset.

Maróma, a cable for a ship.

* Maronía, a coard running in a pulley or
windle to draw with.

* Marón, a name of Virgill.

* Maróne, a chestnut.

Marqués, f. a Marquesse.

Marquésa, a lady marques.

Marquesádo, a marquessate.

Marquesíta, a fire stone, a marquesite, a 
stone of brasse colour.

* Marquesóta, lead ore, and siluer ore, a
gallant long high feather, such as
great nobles vse to weare on their
heads.

Márra, want. Also vide Amárra.

Marráno, a hog of a yeere old.

Marrár, to want, to erre, to misse.

* Márro, want, missing.

* Marrójo négro, black horehound.

Marroquí, a kinde of red leather to make
buskins with.

Marrúbio, horehound.

* Marrúvio négro, black stinking hore­
hound.

Marsópa, a fish called a whirlepoole, a
porpuise.

Márta, a beast that carrieth the sable
furre.  Also a proper name of a woman.

Mártas, the furre so called.

* Márte, a beast called a marten, bearing





the foynes furre. Also Mars the fained
god of warre.

* Marteládo, vide enamorádo. 

* Martél, a horsemans mace.

Martéllo, a boxe tree.

Mártes, tuesday.

Martilládas, blowes with a hammer.

* Martilladór, a worker with hammers.

Martillár, to hammer, to worke with a
hammer.

Martilléjo, m.a small hammer.

Martillo, m.a hammer.

Martilógio, m.a kalender.

* Martilójo de Peápa, the spelling let­
ters.

* Martinéte, a high standing feather in
the hat. Also the iack of a virginall
that striketh vp the string. Also a kinde
of Instrument vsed in warre.

* Martiniéga, f. a kinde of subsidie, tri­
bute or custome.

Martir, m.a witnes, one that ventureth
his life in testimonie of truth, a martyr.

Martírio, m.martyrdom, testimony of
truth.

* Martirizádo, m.martyred.

* Martirizár, to make a martyr, to put to
death for testimony of truth.

* Martragár, to be drowned or sunk vp
at sea.

* Marvisía, f. the wine called malmesie.

* Marzapáne, marchpane, sugarbread,
ginger.

* Márzo, vide Márço. 

* Mas, more but, moreouer.

* Más antes, but rather, afore that, nay
rather.

* dé más de ésto, moreouer.

* Los de más, the residue.

* mas présto, more readily, rather.

* a mas Andár, with all haste & speed.

Mascádo, m.chewed, eaten.

Mascár, to chew, to eate, to gnaw, to bite.

Mascár, vide Máscara. 

Máscara, f. a maske to couer the face with.

Mascarádo, masked, couered with a
maske.

* Masgozéte, m.the heuer of a helmet.

* Masmórra, vide Mazmórra, a prison,
a dongeon.

* Masmorrilla, vide Mazmorrílla. 

Mássa, f. a masse, a lumpe, dough, paste.

* Massácre, m.a massacre, a murther, a
slaughter of people.

Massár, to heape vp.

Mastegár, to chew in the mouth.

Mástel, m.a maste of a ship.

* Masticár, to chew, to eate, to chaw, to
play on the bit, to champ.

* Mástil, vide Mástel. 

* Mástil de gávia mayór, the maine
mast.

Mastin, m.a mastiue dog.

Mastrándo, an herbe called wilde Mint.

Mastrátos, wilde Sage.

* Mastrésala, a gentleman vsher.

* Mastrescuéla, a head schoolmaister, a
superintendent in a colledge or schoole,
a vicechaucellor in an vniuersitie.

* Mástro de cámpo, vide Maéstro de
cámpo, a camp-maister, or marshall of
the field.

Mastuérço, an herbe called Cresses.

* Másza, Máza, vide Máça. 

Máta, f. a bush, a shrub.

* Máta de váras o vérgas, a bauen.

* Matáda háca, a nag or hackeney gau­
led.

* Matadéro, a slaughter house, a place
where they kill beastes.

* Matádo, m.slaine or murthered. Also
gauled as a horse.

Matadór, m.a murtherer, a killer.

Matadúra, f. killing, murthering. Also a
gauling or wringing horse backes.

Matadúras, gauled horse backes, the wi­
thers of horse gauled or wrung.

† Matalahúga, or Matahálva, Anis
herbe or seed.

Matalotáge, victuals for the sea.

* Matalóvos, an herbe called Woolfes­
bane.

Matánça, f. slaughter, murther.

* Mantánza, idem. 

* Matapozúelos, a place in Spaine so cal­
led.

Matár, to kill, to murther, to destroy, to
combat, to put out a candle, to wring or
gaule a horse backe.

Mátas, f. thornes.

* Máte, mate at chesse.

* Mateláz, a mattresse.

* Matemática, vide Mathemática. 

* Matelazéro, a maker of mattresses, or
of flockheds.

Matéria, f. matter or substance of any
thing. Also matter, rottennes or filth of
a soare. Also a copie in a writing booke
giuen to write after, or such like.

* Matéria, or Pódre, matter of a soare.

* Matéria de níño, a childes copie writ­
ten, which he is to follow and learne to
write after.

Materiál, concerning some matter, sub­
stantiall.

* Matérno, m.pertaining to the mother.

* Mathemática, the mathematicall artes
or speculatiue sciences.

* Mathematicál, of or pertayning to the
mathematickes.

* Mathemático, or Matemático, m.one
that hath skill in the mathematickes.

Matíz, f. the shadow of a picture, the glasse
or glistering shew of colours.

Matizádo, painted, shadowed in pain­
ting.

Matizár, to shadow in painting.

* Matorráles, a place where many bushes
or shrubs grow.

Matorrizáles, vide Matorráles. 

Matráca, f. a floute, a scoffe, a gibe. Also a
rattle or toy for a childe.

Matrácas dár, to laugh at, to mocke, to
scoffe at.

* Matráno, m.a barrow hog.

* Matréro, m.one that loueth his mother.
Also a cunning craftie sly fellow.

Matricária, an herbe called Feuerfew.

* Matrecida. one that killeth his mo­
ther.

* Matricídio, m.killing of the mother.

Matrícula, f. a roll of names, a catalogue.

Matriculár, to matriculate, to inroll, to
set him name in as one of the society, t
enregister into an vniuersity.

Matrimoniál, pertaining to wedlocke.

Matrimónio, m.wedlock.

Matróna, f. a matrone, a graue woman of
great modesty.

Matronál, belonging to a matrone.

* Maulladór, m.a maulling cat.

* Maullár, to mawle or wrall like a cat.

* Mauórcio, m.belonging to Mars the
feigned god of warre.

* Maxavilla, vide Maravílla, meruaile,
wonder.

* Maxcádo, m.chewed, bitten, eaten.

† Maxcár, vide Mascár, to chew, to bite.

* Máxcara, vide Máscara, a maske.

* Maxílla, vide Mexílla, a iaw bone.

* Maximaménte, most of all, chiefely.

* Máxime, idem. 

* Mayése de pláta, i. Maéstro de plá­
ta, a master of the siluer or Treasure:
when the king sendeth to the Indies his
fleet, he appointeth two maisters, one of
the ship, the other of the siluer & Tre­
sure they bring home.

* Maymonéta, f. the saile yard.

* Maynár la véla, to strike saile.

Máyo, m.the moneth may.

* Mayométa, a peece of wood, or great
timber pin, whereabout they winde the
sheat or saile cord, least it should slip
whilest the ship is vnder saile.

Mayór, the greater, the elder.

Mayorál, the chiefe, the principall herd­
man.

Mayorána, f. sweet marierom.

Mayorázgo, the eldership, the elder bro­
ther, the heire.

Mayordomía, f. a stewardship, a baily­
wike.

Mayordómo, m.a steward, a bailife of
husbandrie.

* Mayordómo de la artillería, a master
of the ordinance.





* Mayoría, greatnes, principalitie.

Mayorménte, chiefly.

Maytinéro, m.one that saieth or singeth
mattens.

Maytínes, m.mattens, morning praier.

Mayuéta, f. the herb that beareth straw­
berries.

Mayuéte, a strawberrie.

* Maýz, a kinde of graine in India of
which they make bread.

* Mayzál, a place where Mayz groweth.

* Máza, Máça, or Másza, a mace, a
hammer, a beetle or naue of a wheele
wherein the spokes of a cart stick.

* Mazacóte, vide Maçacóte. 

* Mazága, vide Maçagua. 

* Mazamórra, vide Maçamórra. 

* Mazán de puérco, an herbe called
sowes bred.

* Mazána, vide Maçána. 

* Mazapán, or Maçapán, a marchpane.

* Mázas, vide Máças. 

* Mazéro, vide Macéro. 

* Mazéta, vide Macéta. 

* Mazéte, vide Macéte, a little mallet.

* Mazicéz, vide Macizéz, soundnesse,
solidenesse.

* Mazíço, vide Macíço, sound, solide.

* Mazico de la pluma, vide Macíco
de la plúma, 

* Mazísso, vide Macísso, massie paste.

† Mazmórra, f. a prison, a dungeon.

Mazmorílla de baldréses, a leather
whip.

* Mázo, vide Máço, a hammer.

* Mazonadúra, vide Maçonadúra. 

* Mazonería, vide Maçonería. 

* Mazórca, vide Maçórca. 


M E
Meáda, f. pissing.

* Meadéro, a pissing place.

Meádo, m.pissed.

Meádos, vrine, piss.

* Meadúra, f. a pissing.

Meája, f. a little white in the yelke of an
egge. Also a pound waight.  Also vsed
for the halfe. Also a crum.

Meár, to
pisse.

Mecánico, m.mechanicall, of handie
craft.

* Mecénas, a patrone of learning.

† Mecedór, m.a mingler. Also one that
rocketh a childe in the cradle.

Mecedéra, f. an instrument wherewith
sande is mingled or beaten with lyme,
to make morter withall.

* Mecedéro, m.idem. 

Mecedúra, f. mingling, medling. Also a
rocking of a cradle.

† Mecér, or Mescér, to mingle, to meddle
or temper togither. Also to winck with
the eie.

Mecér el ójo, to twinkle with the eie.

† Mécha, f. a tent for a wound, a weeke of
a candle, a match for soldiers.

Mécha de candil, a weeke of a lampe
candelestick.

† Mechéro, the nose of a candlesticke, the
nose of a lampe where they put the
weeke to burne.

* Mecído, m.mingled.

* † Mecído, m.the weeke of a candle.

* Meciéndo, or Mesciéndo, by mixing,
by twinckling the eie.

Medálla, f. metall, old mony, a brooch or
iewell to weare in the hat.

Médanos, m.a kinde of fruit of the Indies.

* Mediádo, m.iust in the middest, the
middle.

Medianaménte, meanly, indifferently,
reasonably well.

Medianaría, f. mediation, working by
meanes.

Medianéro, a mediator, one that persua­
deth or sueth for another, a broker.

Medianía, f. mediocritie, a meane.

Mediáno, m.meane, indifferent.

* Mediánte, by meanes of.

* Médiánte el quál, by meanes of which.

Médias, f. stockings, kneehosen.

Medicaménto, m.a medicine.

Medicína, f. physicke, a medicine.

Medicináble, that may be cured by me­
dicine.

Medicinál, medicinall, that cureth.

Medicinár, to cure by physicke or by me­
dicine.

Médico, m.a physition.

* Medíço, m.twins.

Medída, f. a measure.

Medído, m.measured.

Medidór, m.a measurer.

Médio, m.a meane, the middle, the halfe.

Médio día, noone, mid-day.

* Médio jórno, the south winde.

* Mediócre, moderate, indifferent,
meane, not too little, not too big.

Medír, yo Mído, to measure.

* Medír la píca al enemígo, to come to
push of pike with the enemie.

* Meditación, a meditation.

* Meditár, to meditate, to muse.

* Mediterráneo, m.that of the mid land,
or that in the middle of the earth.

Médra, f. thrift, profit.

* Medrádo, m.thriftie, one that hath
thriuen.

Medrár, to thriue.

Medróso, m.fearfull.

* Medúla, or Medúlla, marrow.

* Meércle, verily, in truth.

Mejór, better.

* Mejóra, a bequeath, a legacie.

* Mejorádo, one that hath a legacie be­
queathed him, bettered.

Mejoramiénto, m.a bettering, mending,
a bequeathing.

Mejorana, vide Majorána, marierom.

Mejorár, to mende, to growe better, to
bequeath or giue by will.

Mejoría, f. mending, making or growing
better.

Meitád, vide Mitád, the moitie, the halfe.

* Melancolia, f. melancholie, choler a
dust.

* Melancólico, m.one full of melan­
cholie.

Melanconía, f. idem. 

Melancónico, one full of melancholie.

* Melaránja, or Melaranza, f. an O­
renge.

* Melarchía, a kinde of disease.

Melcochéro, or Melochéro, m.he that
maketh sugar pils, or sodden hony paste.

* Melcócha, sugar pils, bread made with
honie.

Melcócho sugar pils, bread made with
honie.

Meléna, f. a horse collar.

* Meléra, a place in Spaine.

Melezína, vide Melecína, a medicine.

Melilóto, an herbe called Melilote.

Melíndre, louing lookes and countenan­
ces.

* Melindróso, verie nice, precise, coy,
daintie.

Mélla, f. a gap or breach in a knife, sword,
or other thing. Also the gap of a tooth
wanting in the mouth. Also the like of
any other thing.

Melládo, m.left or made with a gap or
sharde, as a sword, knife, or such like, or
a gappe betweene the teeth some being
wanting.

Melladúra, f. a gap or breach in sword,
knife, or any thing, the gap of
teeth wanting in the mouth, &c.

Mellár, to make a gappe or breach in a
sword, knife, or any other thing. Also to
make a gap by wanting a tooth or teeth
in the mouth.

Mellíza, f. a kinde of pudding made with
honie and flower.

Mellízo, m.twins.

Mellón de pája, a heape of chaffe.

* Melochéro, vide Melcochero. 

Melocotón, m.a peach.

Melodía, f. melodie, sweete musicke.

* Melodióso, melodious.

* Melója, vide Melóxa. 

† Melón, m.a Melon. Also a badger.

Melonár, a bed of Melons.

* Melongéne, a loue apple.

* Melóso, all-honied.

Melóxa, f. water that honie is so in, Me­
theglin.





Melóxa, wine sodden to the third part.

Membrána, f. parchment, the skin ouer
the braine.

Membrár, to recite, to remember.

* Membrilláda, f. conserue of Quinces.

Membríllo, or Marméllo, a Quince.

* Mémbro, vide Miémbro. 

Membrúdo, m.large limmed, well made.

* Memoráble, worthie remembrance.

* Memoralito, m.a remembrancer.

Memoralménte, memorably, by hart.

Memória, f. a remembrance.

Memoriál, a memoriall, a remembrance,
a bill or petition in writing.

* Memorióso, m.verie full of memorie.

Mención, f. mention, remembrance in
speech.

* Mendigánte, a beggar.

Mendigár, Præs. yo Mendígo, 1. Præt. 
yo Mendigué, to beg.

Méndigo, m.a beggar.

* Mendigue, vide Mendigár. 

Mendiguéz, f. beggery.

Mendrúgo, m.a cast of bread.

Meneár, to wag, to weeld, to shake off.

* Menéo, m.a countenance and gesture
with grauitie, a carrying of a mans
selfe, his behauiour.

Menestér, want, penurie, need.

Menesteróso, m.needie, wanting, bare.

* Menéstra, vide Potáje, pottage, broath.

* Menestrál, a trades-man.

Menestril, m.a minstrel, a fidlar.

Méngua, want, pouerty, discredit, penury.

Menguádo, m.in want, empouerished,
diminished, poore.

Menguánte de lúna, the wane of the
moone.

Menguánte de la már, the ebbing of the
sea.

* Menguánte, waning, decaying, failing.

Menguár, to diminish, to empouerish, to
faile, to wane, to decay.

Menique dédo, m.the little finger.

Menjuy, a kinde of sweet odor.

Menór, the lesser, vnder age.

Menorár, to make lesse, to diminish.

* Menórca, & Mallórca, two yles neare
Spaine so called.

Menoría, f. nonage.

* Menoriár, to lessen.

Ménos, lesse, lesser.

Menoscabádo, or Menoscavádo, di­
minished, impaired, or made lesse then
it was, made worse by diminishing or
taking from a thing.

* Menoscabár, or Menoscavár, to em­
paire, to lessen, to take away some thing
from any thing, to make it woorse.

Menoscábo, or Menoscávo, m.a ma­
king lesse or diminishing of any thing
to make it woorse.

* Menospreciádo, m.despised, contem­
ned, set light by.

Menospreciándo, despising, contempt,
setting at naught.

Menospreciár, to despise, to contemne, to
set at naught.

Menosprécio, m.despising, setting light.

Menságe, m.a message.

Mensagéro, m.a messenger.

* Mensáje, a message, an errand.

* Mensajéro, m.a messenger.

* Mensayár, id est, Me ensayár, to assay
my selfe.

* Menstruál, menstruall, that which
commeth monethly to women, their
monethly disease.

* Ménstruo, m.womens monthly course.

* Ménta, f. the herbe called mint.

* Mentádo, m.mentioned, spoken of, made
mention of.

Mentár, to make mention of, to speake of,
to name.

Ménte, f. a minde, the highest and chiefest
part of the soule, the mind, the wit, vn­
derstanding, wil, intent, thought, memo­
rie, remembrance, aduise, counsell, opi­
nion, iudgement, wisedome, prudence.

* Ménte capto, foolish, frantike, out of
his wits.

* Mentida, f. the lie.

* fé Mentída, the faith falsified.

Mentír, yo Miénto, to lie, to speake false.

Mentíra, f. a lie, a false tale.

Mentirosaménte, lyingly, falsely.

Mentiróso, m.giuen to lying.

* Mentremetér, id est, Me entreme­
tér, to thrust my selfe in.

Menudaménte, particularly, seuerally,
by little and little, thickly, often.

Menudéncias, f. small matters.

* Menudíco, m.very little, very small.

* Menudillos, that which is drawne from
birds, fishes, and such like, when they
dresse them:  to eate the guts, the gar­
bage.

Menúdo, m.small, little.

Menúdo a Menúdo, often.

Meóllo, m.the braine, marrow, the pith of
bread, the kernell of a nut.

* Meóllo de nuéz, the kernell of the
nut.

Meóllo de árbol, the sap or pith of a
tree.

* Méra, f. a place in Flaunders.

Mercadeár, to play the merchant.

Mercadería, f. merchandise.

Mercadér, m.a merchant.

* Mercadéro, vide mercéro, a mercer, a
grocer.

Mercádo, m.a market, a faire.

* Mercaduría, f. merchandize.

Mercancia, f. traffike, dealing in mer­
chandize, &c. betwixt one nation and
another, entercourse of merchandize.

Mercár, to buy.

Mercéd, curtesie, worship, pleasure, re­
ward.

Mercedéro, m.a maulkin to make cleane
an ouen with.

* Mercenál, vide mercenário. 

* Mercenário, that laboreth for hire.

Mercería, f. mercery, or grocery.

* Mercéro, a mercer. Also a haberdasher
of small wares, a grocer.

Merchánte, vide Mercadér, a merchant.

Mercuriál, an herb called mercurie. Also
belonging to the planet Mercury.

* Mercurio, the god of eloquence & mer­
chandize, he as also called the messen­
ger of the gods.

Mérda, f. a turde, ordure.

Merdóso, m. beraied, beshitten.

* Merecedór, m.one that deserueth.

Merecedóra persóna, a man of good de­
sert.

Merecedóra cósa, f. a matter of desert.

Merescér, or Merecér, yo Merésco, to
deserue, to merit.

* Merecido, m.deserued.

Merecimiénto, m.desert.

* Merénda, or Meriénda, f. an after­
noones nunchions or drinking, a beuer.

Merendár, to eate after noone, to make a
beuer or drinking betweene dinner and
supper.

* Merésca, vide Merecér. 

* Mergueríte, m.the little finger.

* Meridiáno, m.the meridian, the south
part.

* Meridionál, of or belonging to the
south.

Meriénda, f. afternoones eating.

* Meriénde, Meriéndo, v. Merendár. 

Merína, f. sheepe driuen from the winter
pastures to the sommer pastures, or the
wooll of those sheepe, the finest wooll.

* Merindád, a kinde of iusticeship.

* Meríno, m.a iudge in Galizia called
Merino.

* alcálde Meríno, idem. 

* Meritaménte, worthily.

* Mérito, a desart, a merite.

* Meritório, meritorious.

* Mérla, f. a blacke bird.

* Merlúza, f. a fish called a whiting.

Mérma, f. want in measure, losse in mea­
sure.

* Mermár, to want in measure, to become
lesse in measure.

Mermeláda, f. marmelade, conserue of
quinces.

Mermellón, a vermillion red colour.

* Méro, simple, meere, pure, without mix­
ture, very right.

* Méro, or libre Señór, a mere free
Lord.

* Mérula, a cookefish.





Més, m.a moneth.

Mésa, f. a table.

Mesadúra, f. tearing or renting of the
haire.

Mesár cabéllos, to teare the haire.

Mesaraícas vénas, veines that goe from
the stomacke to the liuer.

* Mesciéndo, or Meciéndo, rolling vp
and downe as the eies, rocking as a cra­
dle, twinkling with the eies.

* Méscla, vide Mézcla, f. a mixture of
lime and sand, of colours, or any other
medley.

* Mescladúra, vide Mezcladúra, f.
mingling, medley.

* Mesclár, vide Mezclár, to mingle.

Mésmo, or Mísmo, the same.

Mesnáda, f. an host of men. Also vide A­
posénto.

Mesón, m.an Inne, an alehouse.

* Mesón de la estrélla, the signe of the 
starre, an alehouse. Also by a metaphore
the open and wide field, where the stars
are the signe.

* Mesón de la puénte, a lodging house at
the bridge.

* Mesonéra, f. an hostesse.

Mesonéro, m.an hoste that keepeth lod­
ging.

* Mespéra, f. a fruit called a Medlar.

* Mespéro, m.the Medlar tree.

* Mesquíno, m.wretched, miserable.

* Messál, vide Missál. 

Messána véla, the misne snaile.

Messár, vide Mesár cabéllos, to teare the
haire.

* Messía, an Hebrew word signifying our
Sauiour Iesus Christ and annointed
Lord.

Messória, a bucket.

* Mésta, a monethly faire among heard­
men. Also the ordinance that al owners
and keepers of cattell are to obserue.

Mesténgo, or Mostrénco, a strayer.

* Mestízo, m.that which is come or sprung
of a mixture of two kinds, as a blacke­
Moore and a Christian, a mungrell dog
or beast.

Mésto, a kinde of tree that beareth mast or
acornes.

Méstruo, m.a womans flowers.

* Mestúra, f. mingling.

Mesturár, to mingle.

Mesúra, f. modestie, grauitie, curtesie. Al­
so measure.

* Mesúra muy profúndo, very low obei­
sance, a low leg, humble making of
curtesie.

Mesuradaménte, curteously, modestly.

Mesurádo, curteous, graue, modest.

Mesurárse, to put on a graue countenance.

Metád, or Mitád, the halfe, the moy­
tie.

* Metafísica, things supernaturall, the me­
taphisickes.

* Metafísico, one that professeth the me­
taphisickes.

* Metáfora, a metaphor, a borrowed
speech.

* Metafórico, metaphoricall.

Metál, mettall, all that is digged and sear­
ched out of the veines of the earth.

Metaládo, m.metalled.

* Metamorfosís, or Metamorphosís, a
transformation or chaunging one like­
nes or shape into another.

* Metáphora, f. a metaphor, a borrowed
speech, when figuratiuely we expresse
one thing by naming another.

* Metatesis, a figure, a transposition, 
when one letter is put for another.

* Methéore, Meteors, imperfect mixt
things ingendred in the aire.

* Metheorológica, f. the science of Me­
teors, as of stars and planets with their
operations, of exhalations of vapours
causing comets, of the nature of mine­
rals.

* Méthodo, a method.

Metído, m.put, set, placed.

* Metrópolis, a chiefe citie, the mother
citie or head citie.

* Metropolitáno, m.a gouernour of the
head or principall citie, pertayning to
the chiefe citie.

Metér, to put, to set.

* Metódico, methodicall.

* Método, vide Méthodo. 

* Metrificádo, made into rhthme or
verse, made in meeter.

* Metrificár, to make in meeter, rithme,
or verse.

Métro, m.meeter, rime, verse.

* Mexicáñas, women of Mexico, things
of Mexico.

* Mexicáno, m.a man of Mexico.

Mexillas, f. the lawes, the cheekes, mushles
of the sea.

* Mexquíno, vide Mesquíno, a wretch,
a miserable man.

* Meyár, vide Meár, to pisse.

* Meyór, vide Mejór, the better.

* Meytád, vide Mitád, f. the halfe, the
moytie.

Mezána, or Messána, f. the misne saile of
a ship.

* Mezanía, vide Medianía. 

Mézela, Méscla, or Mezcladúra, a med­
ley, mingling.

Mezcladaménte, by mingling or med­
ling togither.

Mezcládo, or Mescládo, m.mingled,
medled.

Mezcladúra, or Mescladúra, f. mingling
of things.

Mezclár, or Mesclár, to mingle or meddle
togither.

Mezquinidád, or Mesquinidád, f. wret­
chednes, miserablenes, couetousnes.

Mezquinaménte, or Mesquiniménte, 
miserably, wrethedly, couetously.

Mezquíno, or Mesquíno, m.a wretch, a
miserable man, a couetous man.

Mezquíta, f. the name of the turkes tem­
ple.


M I
Mí, Mía, Mío, mine.

Miár, to crie as a cat.

Miça, f. a speech to call a cat with, as wee
say, pusse.

* Mica, a female monkey. Also vsed for a
dronken woman.

* Míco, m.a he munkie, a dronken man.

* Microcósmo, a little world. Also vsed
for a man.

* Míde, Mído, vide Medír. 

Miédo, m.feare, dread.

Miél, f. hony.

Miélga, f. a kinde of fishe.

Miélga para arastrár pája, a rake.

Miélgas, an herbe called Spanish trefoile
or three leafed grasse.

Miémbro, m.a member, a part of the
bodie.

* Miénta, vide Miéntra. 

Miénte, Miénto, vide Mentír, to lie, to
tell a false tale.

* Miéntra, among, betweene, whilest.

Miéntras, whilest, as long as, among, be­
tweene.

Miéra, f. oile of iuniper.

Miércoles, m.wednesday.

* Miércoles de ceníza, ash wednesday.

Miérda, vide Mérda, f. a turd, dung, or­
dure.

Miérla, f. a blacke bird, a blacke thrush.

* Miérlo, vide Miérla. 

Miérra, Márria, or rástra, a rake.

Miés, f. haruest.

Miésse, idem. 

* Miesgádo, vide Miezgádo. 

Miezgado, vide Mayvéte, a strawe­
berry.

Míga, f. a crum.

Migája, f. a little peece, a crum.

* Mígas, crums. also a meate made among
the countrie folkes in Spaine, of oile,
water, salt and garlicke, with crums of
bread altogither, and so sod ouer the
fire, and made thereof a kinde of hodge­
potch.

* Migráne, a paine in the temples of the
head called the megrim.

Míjo, m.a kinde of graine called Millet.

* Míjo del sol, an herbe called gromell.

Míl, or Millár, a thousand.

Míl vézes, a thousand fold.





Milágro, m.a miracle, a woonder.

Milagrosaménte, miraculously, wonder­
fully.

Milagróso, wonderfull, miraculous.

* Milán, the citie Milan in Italie.

Miláno, or Milán, a puttock, glead or kite

* Milheíro, a bird called the little tit­
mouse.

Milhója, or Mil-en-ráma, an herbe cal­
led milfoile, yarrowe, or nosebleede,
which mingled with oile healeth
wounds made with iron.

Milicia, f. warfare, the arte of war.

* Milite, vide Soldádo, a soldier, a man
at armes.

* Militánte, warring, fighting, militant.

* Militár, to serue as a soldier, to goe one
warfare.

† Mílla, f. a mile, or a thousand paces.

Milladéres, millions of thousands.

* Milládo, m.reckoned by thousands.

Millár, or Mil, a thousand.

* Millefólia, yarrow, nosebleede.

Millón, a milion, a thousand thousand.

* Milócho, vide Gavilán. 

* Milza, f. the milt or spleene.

Mimár, to flatter, to play the cogging pa­
rasite.

Mímbre, m.willowes, osiars, rods.

* Mimbréra, f. the stocke of osiars, twigs, r
such greene rods, vpon which the osiars
growe.

* Mimo, a iester, a vice.

* Mína, f. a mine, whereby to winne a
castle, &c. a caue in the ground.

Minádo, m.mined, digged vnder ground.

Minadór, m.a miner, a digger vnder
ground, a deceiuer.

* Minadúra, f. mining, digging vnder
ground, deceit.

Minándo, mining, coosening by deceit.

Minár, to vndermine, to digge vnder
ground, to beguile.

* Mincio, m.a certaine riuer in Italy so
called.

* Minción, f. mention, speaking of.

* Minerál, minerall, containing mettals.

Minéro, the veine of mettall where the
mettall is found in the mine. Also a
miner.

* Miniadór, a limner.

* Minimo, the least, verie small, faint
harted, cowardly.

* Ministério, m.seruice, discharge of any
office or dutie, doing of worke.

Ministril, a minstrell.

Ministro, m.a minister, a wayting man,
an officer.

* Minotáuro, a minotaure, halfe a man
halfe a bull.

* Mintír, vide Mentír, to lye or speake
false.

* Mintróso, vide Mentiróso. 

Minúto, m.a minute, small, little, cutted,
and short.

Mío, mine.

Míra, f. looking on, a view, a sight.

Miraboláno, Mirabolanes.

* Mirád, looke, behold.

Miráda, f. a looking on, an aspect.

Miradéro, m.a watch-tower, a loope­
hole.

Mirádo, m.looked on, beheld, respected.

* Miradór, m.a looker on, a beholder. Al­
so a watch-tower, a viewing place.

Mirár, to looke, to see, to behold, to re­
gard.

* Mirár al través, to looke crookedly on
one.

* Mirár en híto, to looke earnestly on.

Mírla, vide Miérla, f. a blacke thrush, a
blacke birde.

* Mirládo, m.a man standing or going
without looking one way or another,
very demure or precise as an Hypo­
crite.

Mírra, f. Myrrhe, an incense.

* Mirránstre, a kind of meate or confecti­
on made by sweete meate makers or
poticaries, to be serued in banquets.

Mirtho, m. a Mirtle tree.

* Mirto, idem. 

Miruédanos, m.Strawberries.

* Misa, vide Missa, the masse.

Miseráble, miserable, wretched, a cay­
tife.

Miserableménte, wretchedly, misera­
bly.

Miséria, miserie, wretchednes.

Misericórdia, f. mercie, pitie, compassi­
on.

Misericordióso, m.pitifull, mercifull, full
of compassion.

Misericoriosaménte, mercifully, piti­
fully.

Misero, m.miserable, wretched, woefull,
sillie, poore, distressed, in a pitifull case.

* Misión, f. cost, charge, expence.

Mismo, or Mésmo, the same.

Míssa, f. the masse.

* Missa de gállo, masse before day, when
the cockes crow.

* Missa de álua, masse at the dawning of
the day.

* Missa de alguilándo, masse nine daies
togither before Christmas.

* Missál, m.a masse booke.

* Mísse, greene corne or sedge.

Mistério, m.a mysterie, a matter hard to
be vnderstood.

* Mistico, misticall.

* Mistión, f. a mixture, or mingling togi­
ther.

* Mistúra, f. idem. 

* Misturádo, f. mixed, mingled togi­
ther.

* Misturár, to mixe or mingle togi­
ther.

* Míta, f. the tribute the Indies pay to the
Caciques.

Mitád, or Metád, the halfe, the moitie.

* Mitigádo, m.a pacifier, an asswager, a
mitigater.

Mitigadór, m.a pacifier, an asswager, a
mitigater.

Mitigár, Præs. yo Mitigo, 1. Præt. yo
Mitigué, to mitigate, to appease, to pa­
cifie, to asswage.

* Mitigue, vide Mitigár. 

Mitra, f. a miter such as bishops vsed to
weare on their heads.

Mitridático, m.a soueraigne preserua­
tiue against infection called Mithri­
date, so named of Mithridates king of
Pontus, the inuenter thereof.

* Mixto, m.mingled.


M O
* Mobíl, mooueable. Also Primum mo­
bile in the heauens.

* Móble, vide Movible. 

Móça, f. a yoong maid, a wench, a woman
seruant.

* Moçamiéntes, vide Mocedád. 

Mocedád, f. youth, the age betweene
childhood and mans estate, sometime
childhood.

Mocetóna, a big wench, a growen
maide.

Mócha, without hornes, notted.

* Mochácha, or Muchácha, a girle.

* Mochácho, or Muchácho, a boy, a
lad.

Mochár, to maime, to cut off the hornes.

* Móche, as atróche Móche, vpon a
head, without aduise, headlong, hurling
togither without consideration.

† Mochíla, f. a wallet, a scrip, a budget,
a false couer of a saddle, a portman­
teaw.

* Mochíla, or Mochílla de gráno, the
huske of a graine that is in grapes or
pomegranates.

* Mócho, notted, without hornes.

† Mochuélo, m.a horne owle.

* Mocíta, m.a little yoong girle.

* Mocíto, vide Moçuélo, a little yoong
boy or lad.

Móço, m.a boy, a seruant.

* Móço de stála, a horse keeper, an
hostler.

Móço de espuélas, a lackie, a footeman
or footeboy.

† Móco, m.snot, sniuell.

† Mocóso, snottie.

Moçuéla, f. a little girle.

Moçuélo, m.a little lad, a boy.

Modélo, or Modéllo, a patterne, a mo­





dule or plot of a house or other thing to
be made.

Moderación, f. moderation, rule, orde­
ring.

Moderádo, m.moderate, measurable,
temperate.

Moderár, to moderate, to order.

Moderataménte, moderately, tempe­
rately.

Modérno, of this time, of this age.

Modestaménte, modestly, soberly, thrif­
tily, comely.

Modéstia, f. modestie, comelinesse, sober­
nesse.

Modésto, m.modest, sober.

* Modificación, bringing into measure, 
measuring.

* Modificár, Præs. yo Modifico, 1.
Præt. yo Modifiqué, to measure, to
bring into measure.

* Modifique, vide Modificár. 

* Módio, a bushell.

Módo, or Medida, the meane, the mea­
sure, the manner.

Modorílla, f. a little second watch. Also
the lethargie.

Modórra, the drowsie sicknes, the lethar­
gie, sleepe in the dead of the night.

Modórra, or Modorílla, f. the second
watch in the night, a stiffe disease, the
watch in the dead of the night.

* Modorreár, to be foolish, or dull hea­
ded.

Modorrílla, the third watch.

Modórro, m.a foole, one sicke of the le­
thargy, or drowsie sicknes.

* Mófa, f. mockery, foolery, a bob, a iest.

Mofadór, m.a mocker, a vice in a play.

Mofár, to mocke, to scoffe, to laugh at, to
play the foole.

Mófo, m.mockery, iarring, scoffing.

* Mogilón Mongíl, a mourning gar­
ment for a woman.

* Mogronár vídes, to prune or cut vines.

* Moháda, f. a thing that is mssie or
mouldy.

Mohorráche, m.a vizard, a maske.

* Moháta, vide bárcta. 

* Mohátra, a taking vp mony on vsury.

Mohatrár, to borrow of one for to pay
another, to take vp mony vpon vsury.

* Mohatréros, deceiuers, cooseners, cog­
gers, shifters.

* Mohecér, to waxe mossie, to become
mouldy.

Mohéda, f. a wood.

* Mohina, a shee mule that hath all the
face & muzle black, which hath al­
waies  iadish tricks. Also anger, passion,
disquietnes, churlishenes.

* Mohinas, f. angers, griefs, passions, dis­
quietnes, tediousnes, churlishnes.

Mohíno, offended, displeased. Also mouse
dun, a mule colt begotten of a horse and
of a shee asse with a black muzle.

Móho, m.mosse, mouldines, snot. Also rust
of iron, copper or of other mettals, &c.
Mohóso, m.mossie, mouldy. Also rusty
as of iron, copper, &c.

Mojádo, m.wet, moist.

Mojadúra, moisture, wetnes.

* Mojadúra de pimiénto, sauce, dipping,
broath with pepper.

Mojár, to wet, to moisten.

Mojón, a bound, a bound stone, a mark­
stone.

Mojonár, to bound, to appoint the limits.

Móla, f. sacrifice, the growing of vnkinde
flesh in a womans wombe making hir
seeme with childe.

Moladór, a sacrificer.

Moladúra, f. sacrificing.

* Molatrár, to borrow mony vpon vsury,
for to pay debts with.

* Moldadúra, f. a thing made or cast in a
mould.

Mólde, m.a mattris to cast letters in, a
moulde, a patterne.

* Líbros de mólde, printed bookes.

* Móle, a lump, a masse, a chaos, or confu­
sed heape of any thing.

* Molebóut, a fish called a lump.

Moledór, m.a grinder, a miller. Also vsed
for a wearisome or ykresome fellow.

* Molér, yo Muélo, to grinde.

* Moléro, m.a fish almost like a pearch
that spawneth alwaies vpon the sea­
weedes.

Molestadór, m. a troubler, a molester.

Molestaménte, troublesomly, grieuou­
slie.

Molestár, to trouble, to molest, to grieue.

Moléstia, f. trouble, griefe, disquiet­
nes.

Molésto, m.troublesome, grieuous.

Molído, m. ground with a mill.

Molidúra, f. grinding.

Moliénda, f. a griste, corne to be ground,
a grinding.

* Molimiénto, m.a grinding.

Molinéro, m.a miller.

Molíno, m.a mill.

* Molíno de viénto, a winde-mill.

* Molír, to compasse, to goe about.

Molléja, f. the tender inner part of any
birde, which in a goose is called the
soule.

Mollentár, to make soft.

Molléra de cabéça, the crowne of the
head, the pate.

Molléte, soft bread.

Mollído, made soft.

Mollidór, m.one that maketh soft.

Mollidúra, f. making soft, making of a
bed.

Mollínas, f. soft showers, Scottish mists.

Mollír, to make soft, to make vp a bed.

* Molondrón, one naught worth.

* Momentaneaménte, without ceasing,
euery moment.

* Momentáneo, m.that which endureth
but a while, that which is done in a
moment.

Moménto, m.a moment, a very short
space, the twinkling of an eie.

Momeria, f. mummerie, the vse of mas­
kers or mummers.

Mómia, f. mummie, the liquor that run­
neth out of the Cedar trees.

* Mómio, a iester, a vice in a play.

* hazér Mómios, to make mops and
mowes with the month, to make visa­
gers and foolish faces.

Mómo, a vice in a play, a iester. Also
Momus the god of reprehension.

Móna, a shee ape.

* Mónaco, m.a monke.

* Monacillo, m.a nouice, a boy monke, a
little priest.

Monacórdio, m.an instrument with one
string.

* Monagíco, a little monke, a boy monke.

* Monárca, m.a monarch, an absolute
prince that raigneth alone in authoritie
soueraigne.

Monarchia, f. a monarchie, a kingdome
or land subiect but to one prince.

Monazíllo, a little monke, a little priest.

Mondadúras, f. cleansings, parings.

Mondár, to make cleane, to purge, to
cleanse.

Monda-diéntes, a tooth picker.

Monda-oréjas, an eare picker.

* Mondádo, m.cleansed.

* Mondégo, a riuer of Portingale.

* Mondóngo, tripes, chitterlings, &c.

* Mondonguéro, or Tripéro, a tripe­
man or seller of tripes, chitterlings, and
such like, &c.

* Mondoñédo, a citie of Galizia in
Spaine, whereof Gueuera was bishop.

Monéda, money. Also a kinde of money
in Spaine, whereof there were diuers
kindes, the single of three blankes an
English farthing the Monéda of Plá­
ta some of the a reall, some of two
reals, some of fower, others of eight re­
als of plate.

* cien Monédas, an hundred peeces of
money.

* Monéda de óro, about a ducket of En­
glish, fiue shillings ten pence halfpenny.

* Monedeár, to make or coine money.

* Monedéro, m.a coiner of money.

* Monestélio, vide Monestério. 

Monestério, m.a monasterie, a religious
house.

* † Monfiés, robbers on the hils or moun­





taines.

Mónge, or Mónje, m.a monke.

Mongia, f. monkerie.

* Mongibél, mount Aetna.

* Mongibello, a mountaine in Sicilie
called in Latine Aetna.

Mongil, m.a monks garment, a mourning
garment for women.

* Mongilón, a mourning garment for a
woman.

* Móngo, vide Mónge, a monke.

Mónja, f. a nunne.

* Monición, vide Munición. 

* Mónje, or Mónge, a monke.

* Monicórdio, m.an instrument of one
string.

Monipódio, m.conspiracie.

* Moñáco, a rude rusticall fellow.

* Monilla, f. a little shee ape.

* Monillo, m.a little hee ape.

* Monita, a little shee ape.

* Monito, m.a little he ape, a little mon­
kie.

Móno, an hee ape.

* Monóculo, one that hath but one eie.

* Monodia, a mournfull song where one
alone singeth.

* Monosilaba, hauing but one sillable.

* Mónstro, m.a monster.

* Mónstruo, idem. 

Monstruóso, m.monstrous, vgly, huge.

Montáña, f. a mountaine, a wood.

Montañéro, m.vide Montanés. 

Montanés, pertaining to a mountaine, a
man of the mountaine.

Montáñas, f. mountaines, woods.

* Montanera, f. a little hill.

* Montánte, a two handed sword.

Montár, to amount in reckoning.

* Montaráz, a forlorne fellow that liueth
on the mountaines.

* Montázgo, m.mountaine tributes to
the king.

Mónte, m.a hill, a mountaine, a wood.

Monteár, to hunt.

* Montéra, f. a hunters hat.

Monteria, f. hunting.

Montéro, m.a huntsman, or a hunters
hat.

Montesíno, m.of or belonging to the
wood.

Montesíllo, or Montezillo, a little
hill.

* Montezíto, idem. 

* Montezíllo, idem. m. 

Montón, m. a heape, a pile.

* Montón de pán, a heape of corne.

Montón, or Hacina de léña, a woode­
pile.

* Montón de héno, a stacke of hey.

Montóso, m.hilly.

Montuóso, m.full of mountaines.

* Monviédro, a towne in the Prouince
Rjoxa in Spaine, where the wine called
vino de Monviédro, is made: it is
white.

Monuménto, m.a monument, a thing
kept for a remembrance, a matter of
antiquitie.

* Moquíto, a little snot or sniuell.

Móra, f. a Mulbery. Also a woman black­
Moore. Also an herbe.

* Mora yérva, an herbe called Night­
shade, or Deaths-herbe.

* Móra de la montáña, a strawberrie or
blacke-berrie growing on briers.

Moráda, f. a lodging, a dwelling, a place.

* Moradilla, f. an herbe.

Morádo colór, murrey or yron colour,
darke colour.

Moradór, m.a dweller, an inhabitant.

Moral, a Mulberrie tree.

* Moralidád, f. moralnes.

* Moralménte, morally.

Morár, to dwell, to inhabit.

Mórbo cadúco, the falling sicknes.

Morcélla, f. a sparke of fire.

Morciélago, or Murciélago, a bat, or
flittermouse, or reeremouse.

Mórcilla, f. a hogs pudding, a pudding.

* Morcilléro, m.a pudding maker, or sel­
ler.

* Mordáce, taunting, sharpe biting.

* Mordáz, biting, taunting, sharpe.

Mordáza, f. the bit of a bridle, vsed in
Spaine by the inquisition to put in the
mouthes of those that shall speake a­
gainst their religion, for a punishment
for them.

Mordedór, m.a biter.

Mordedúra, f. biting.

* Mordélla, Mordélle, id est, Mordér
la, Mordér le, to bite her or it, to bite
him or it.

Mordér, yo Muérdo, to bite, to gnawe.

Mordido, m.bitten.

* Mordiscár, to bite or nibble as fish doe
at a baite, &c.

* Móre, vide Móro, a blacke Moore.

* Moréa, a prouince called Morea.

* Moréja, f. a lamprey.

* Morél, browne duskish colour.

Morélla, f. an herbe called nightshade,
garden nightshade.

Moréna, a lamprey.

* Moréno colór, murrie colour, browne,
darke, duskish.

* hómbre Moréno, a man of swartish
hue.

* Moréno pán, browne bread.

* Moréra, a mulberrie tree (vt opinor.)

* Moreria, f. moorish, of the moores.

Morezillos, m.the muscles of the body.

* Morillas, f. andirons, cobirons.

Moríllo, m.browne, a little black Moore.
Also cobirons to support the fire.

* Morión, a certaine headpeece so called,
a murrion.

Morír, yo Muéro, to die.

* Morisca, f. a woman Moore that is be­
come a Christian.

* Morisco, m.a blacke Moore made of
become a Christian.

* Morísma, f. Moorisme, Moorish, reli­
gion.

* Morísmo, vide Morísma. 

* Morillo, m.a little high rocke in the
sea, a little promontorie, the poll of a
fish.

Mormóllo, m.a murmuring, a mutte­
ring.

* Móro, m.a blacke Moore of Barberie,
or a Neager that followeth the Tur­
kish religion.

* Moronéz, f. a blackish swartie colour.

* Moróydes, the hemorrhoides.

* Morrión, a headpeece called a mur­
rion.

Mórro, m.a great high rocke in the sea.
Also the poll of the head.

* baxó el Mórro, he held downe his head,
or he bethought himselfe.

Mortája, f. a winding sheete.

Mortajadór, m.he that shrowdeth, he
that maketh graues.

Mortajár, to shrowd, to burie.

Mortál, deadly, mortall.

Mortalidád, f. mortalitie, subiection to
death.

Mortandád, f. a great death, or dying
of people.

* Morteréte, m.a kinde of artillerie in
war, or iron, a murdering peece.

Mortéro, a morter to stampe spice in, a
mrter for masons.

Morteruéla, f. greene sauce.

* Morteruélo, m.idem. 

Mortesíno, m.carrion, a dead carcase.

Mortuório, m.a buriall, a funerall.

* Morzilla, f. a hogs pudding.

* Morzilléro, a pudding maker.

* Morzíllo cavállo, a flea-bitten gray
horse.

* Mosáyaca óbra, f. a curious worke­
manship in stone, so painted that it see­
meth grauen.

* Mosáyco, m.of or pertaining to Moses.
Also as Mosáyca.

Mósca, f. a flie.

Moscáda, f. a nutmeg.

Moscadéro, m.a fan to make winde, a
flie-flap, an herbe called horsetaile.

Moscadór, m.idem. 

Moscárda, f. a breeze, a gadbee, a horse
flie.

* Moscarél, vide Moscatél. 

Moscatél, wine muscadell.

Moscatéles úvas, muske grapes.

Moscón, m.a great flie.





Mosillónes, a shellfish called Muscles.

Mosqueadór, m.hee that driueth away
flies.

Mosqueár, to driue awaie flies.

* Mosquéta, f. a muskie flower.

* Mosquetádas clavellinas, muske gil­
loflowers.

* Mosquetázo, m.a shot or blowe with a
musket.

* Mosquéte, m.a musket.

Mosquetéro, m.a muskettier, one that
vseth a musket.

Mosquílla, f. a little gnat.

* Mosquitillo, a little flie, a gnat.

Mosquito, m.a gnat.

Mostájo, m.a little tree like a lawrell.

* Mostálla, vide Mostáza. 

† Mostáza, f. Mustard seed.

* † Mostázo, m.the tree that beareth
mustard seed.

Mósto, m.newe wine.

* Mósto torcído, newe wine from the
presse.

* Mósto de Tíntin, wine that runneth
first before the presse forceth much.

* Mostóso, mustie, of sweete wine.

Mostradór, m.a shewer.

* Mostrádo, m. shewed.

Mostrár, yo Muéstro, to shew.

Mostrénco, m.a straier, a bill signed: be­
longing to the sheepeheards faires.

Móta, f. a mote, or small mote, a heape.

Móte, or Motéte, m.a worde, a motto, a
saying, a quip, a nippe.

Motejádo, m.quipped, taunted, nipped.

Motejádor, m.a quipper, a taunter, a
scoffer.

Motejár, to quip, to taunt.

* Motelastimero, m.a cauill, a brabling,
a quarrelling quippe.

Motiládo, m.shorne neere, polled neere, notted.

* Motilón, m.a lay frier which serueth
the others.

Motín, m.a mutinie, an vprore, a rebelli­
on.

Motívo, m.a motiue, a purpose, a perswa­
sion.

* Motón, a certaine coard in a ship.

* Motório, m.full of motion.

* Motóso, full of motes or small haires.

Movedíza, f. birth, vntimely borne.

* Movedízo, moouing, wauering.

Movedór, m.a moouer, a stirrer.

Movedúra, f. bringing foorth before the
time.

Movér, yo Muévo, to mooue, to stirre, to
remooue.

Movér la mugér, a woman to bring forth
childe before her time.

Movíble, mooueable, that may be remoo­
ued or stirred.

Movído, m.mooued.

Movimiénto, m.a motion, moouing, stir­
ring.

* Móvito, m.the bringing foorth child be­
fore due time.

* Mouróne, a kinde of Lamprey.

† Moxáma, f. salt fish.

* Moxár, vide Mojár, to wette, to moy­
sten.

* † Moxí, a buffet or blow on the head.

* Moxiconázos, m.great bobs or blowes
on the nose.

* Moxiconár, to bobbe on the nose.

Moxicónes, bobs on the nose.

* Moxillónes, shelfish called muscles.

* Moxquéta, vide Mosquéta, f. a muske
rose.

* Moxquetáço, or Moxquetázo, vide Mosquetázo, a blow or shot of a mus­
ket.

* Moxquíto, m.a gnat.

* Mozonería, the boundes, the limits.


M V
* Múbles, moueables or goods moueables.

Mucéta de obíspo, a bishops pall or ha­
bite.

Muchácha, or Mochácha, a girle.

Muchácho, or Mochácho, a boy.

Múchas vézes, many times, often.

Muchedúmbre, f. multitude, manifold­
nes.

Múcho, m.much.

Mudáble, mutable, changeable.

Mudableménte, changeably.

Mudádo, m.changed.

Mudamiénto, m.changing.

Mudánça, f. change.

* Mudánças de dánça, dauncing tricks.

Mudár, to change.

Múdas, or Ceríllas, painting for womens
faces.

Mudecér, or Mudescér, to be dum, to be
slow of speech.

* Mudéjar, one that is descended of the
Moores.

* Mudéxar, idem. 

* Mudín, vide Almudín, a measure a­
bout a quarter of a pecke.

Múdo, m.dumbe.

* Múdo siléncio, mute, or still silence.

Muéble, mooueable.

Muéla, f. a great tooth, a grinding tooth, a
mill-stone, a smithes or cutlers grind­
stone.

* Muéla de máno, a handmill, quernes.

* Muéla de baxo, the lower chocke tooth.

* Muéla de encíma, the vpper chocke­
tooth.

* Muéle, Muélo, vide Molér. 

Muélle, soft, a heape, a harbor for ships.

Muélle dónde puéden surgír navíos, a
harborough or hauen for ships.

Muelleménte, softly.

Muérdago, a greene shrub growing on ap­
ple trees, crabtrees, &c. called Missle­
toe.

* Muerde, Muérdo, vide Mordér. 

* Muere, Muéro, vide Morir. 

* Muérgo, or Longuerón, a shell fish li­
uing in the sand of the sea, of the length
and bignes of a mans finger.

Muérmo, m.a disease of a horse called the
glanders.

* Muermól, idem. 

Muermóso, troubled with the glanders.

Muérte, f. death.

Muérto, m.dead.

* Muérto de amóres, mad in loue.

* Muésca, a notch, dent, cutting in, or
scotch in any thing.

Muéstra, f. a shew, a muster of men. Also
a patterne.

* Pérro de muéstra, a dog that winding
by sent the game, as Partridges, &c. so
after finding and seeing it, maketh a
stand and looketh on his master, ma­
king a shew where it is, that with a
peece he may kill it.

* Muestre, Muéstro, vide Mostrár. 

* Mueve, Muévo, vide Movér. 

Mugér, f. a woman.

* Mugér de su cása, a huswife, a good
huswife.

* Mugér de púnto, a woman of chiefe or
high account, a woman of honour and
credit.

Mugercílla, or Mugerzilla, f. a little
woman, a sillie poore woman.

* Muguiérgo, m.hanting of women. Also
womens matters.

Mugeríl, pertayning to a woman.

Mugeríl hómbre, an effeminate person.

Mugerilménte, womanlike.

* Mugír, to loow like a cow.

† Múgre, m.grease, sweate.

† Mugrón, the sprowting of a vine.

* † Mugróso, m.full of sweate or grease.

Múla, f. a shee mule.

* Múlas de Madéra, f. carriages for
great ordinance.

Muladár, m.a dunghill. Also a hauen in
Spaine so called betweene newe Castile
and Andaluzía, where the greatest
battell that euer, was fought betweene
the Moores with Spaniards and other
Christians, where were slaine in one
day, 50. or 60. thousand Moores.

* Muladór, m.vide Muladár. 

* Muladrál, vide Muladár. 

Mulár, pertaining to a mule.

* Múlas, high soaled shooes, or pantofles.
Also mules.

* Muláta, f. the daughter of a blackmoore,
and one of another nation.

* Muláto, m.the sonne of a black Moore,





and one of another nation.

* Muléta róma, a shee colt of an asse and
a horse.

* Muletáda, a herd of Mules.

* Mulétas, croutches or stilts to go on.

Muletéro, m.a keeper of mules or of asses,
a driuer of mules.

* Muléto rómo, a he colt of an horse and
an asse.

* Mulo, m.a he mule, the male of a mule.

Mullidór, vide Mollidór. 

Múlta, f. an amercement, a fine set on a
man.

* Multádo, fined, amerced.

* Multadór, m.one that setteth an
amercement or fine on ones head.

Multár, to amerce, to fine.

Multiplicación, f. multiplying increa­
sing in number.

Multiplicado, m.multiplied, growen to a
number.

Multiplicár, Præs. yo Multiplíco, 1.
Præt. yo Multipliqué, to multiply,
to bring to a number.

* Multitúo, f. a multitude, a great com­
panie, great number.

* Múmia, or Múmmia, a drugge made of
dead mens flesh called Mummie: some
saie it to bee the liquor that commeth
of of the cedar tree.

* Múnchas vézes, vide Múchas vézes, often, many times.

* Munchedúmbre, vide Muchedúm­
bre, multitude, greatnes.

Múncho, vide Mucho, much.

* Mundadúra, f. clensing, purging, ma­
king cleane.

Mundáno, m.worldly, of the world.

* Mundificár, to clense, to mundifie.

Múndo, m.the world.

Muñéca de níños, a puppet, a babie.

Muñéca del bráço, the handwrest,
sometime vsed for a bracelet.

* Muñéco de níños, a babie, a puppet
for children.

* Mungil péce, a kind of fish.

Munición, f. necessarie furniture, muni­
tion.

* Municipál, touching freedoms, fran­
chises, or priuileges.

Muñidór, m.a stirrer, a warner.

* Muñóz, a proper name of a man so cal­
led.

Múr, m.a mouse.

Múra, f. a rope or coard in a ship called the
great tacke or sheate.

* Muradál, vide Muladár. 

* Muradór, or Muréro, a mason that
maketh or rough casteth wals.

Murálla, f. a wall of a citie.

* Murámos, let vs die, vide Morír.

* Murángho, m.a fielde mouse called a
shrew.

* Murár, to make wals.

* Múrcia, a citie in Spaine where much
silke is made and many silke wormes
liue.

† Murciélago, m.a Batte, or Flitter­
mouse.

Murecillo, Murezíllo, or Morezíllo, 
the sinewes of the arme, the muscles.

* Muréza, f. clownishnes, countrie fa­
shion.

Murgáña, f. a rat.

* Muriéndo, dying.

* Muriéra, or Muriésse, should die, vide 
Morír.

Murmúllo de génte, a murmuring, a
muttering. Also a commotion or vp­
rore, a mutinie.

Murmuración, f. murmuring, a making
of a muttering noise, a repining, or a
gainsaying of one.

Murmuradór, m.a murmurer, a repiner,
a mutterer against one.

Murmurár, to murmur, to repine, to mut­
ter or grudge at any body.

* Murmúrio, murmuring, grudging, the
noise of water running.

* Murmuro, vide Murmúllo, a murmur­
ring noise, a humming.

Múro, m.a wall of a citie.

Múrta, f. priuet with which they make
bowres and borders in gardens.

Murúges, an herbe called pimpernel, some
say white pimpernell, or male pim­
pernell.

* Músa, f. a muse, a song, musicke.

Musáico, anticke works, or works so cu­
riously painted that they seeme im­
bossed.

* Músculo, m.a muscle in the bodie.

* Muséo, the name of a famous poet sonne
to Orpheus. Also the place about O­
lympus dedicated to the muses.

Musgáño, m.a field mouse called a shrew.

Músgo, m.mosse of the trees, &c.

Música, f. musicke.

* Música de respónso, singing of friers
or priestes at a dead mans buriall.

Músico, m.a musicion, belonging to mu­
sicke.

* Musiquí, a part of the head-peece or
sallet.

Múslo, m.the thigh, the flanke.

* Múslos de Cálças, the cannians of ho­
sen.

* Musóle, a kinde of hound fish or dog
fish.

Mústio, m.withered, pined, fallen away.

* Mústos de cálças, vide Múslos de 
cálças. 

Muy, as Muy buéno, the best, very
good.

Muy, as Muy dóto, most learned, very
learned.


M Y
* Mystério, m.a mysterie or darke se­
cret.

* Mytád, or Metád, f. the moitie or halfe.



N

* NÁba, a rising and falling in a
field, as the going vp and downe
of a ship at sea.

* Nabál, a place where turneps growe.
Also a battell at sea. Also a proper
name Nabal. Also a kinde of linnen
cloth in Spaine so called.

* Nabecilla, vide Navecilla. 

* Nabegación, vide Navegación. 

* Nabica, f. a long, slender turnep.

* Nabichuélo, or Navichuélo, a little
ship.

* Nabidád, vide Navidád, Christmas.

* Nabigáble, vide Navigáble. 

Nábo, m.a turnep.

Nácar, the mother of pearle.

* Nacarón, vide Macarón. 

* Nacéncia, f. an Ancome in the bodie, a
rising or bunch in the flesh, a blister, a
bile.

Nacér, or Nascér, to be borne, to spring
vp.

Nacída, f. a bile, a blister.

Nacído, or Nascído, borne, sprung vp.

Nacimiénto, or Nascimiénto, birth, 
springing vp.

Naçóra, vide Náta. 

Nación, f. a nation, countrie, people of a
land.

Náda, nothing.

* no Náda, nothing at all.

* bolvér en Náda, to come to nought.

* servír de Náda, to be to no purpose.

Nadadéro, m.a swimming place.

Nadadór, m.a swimmer.

Nadadúra, f. swimming.

Nadár, to swim.

* Nadár, Nadár y ahogár en la oríl­
la, to swim well, and to be drowned on
the shore side, to go through great mat­
ters, and to sticke at a small thing.

Nádie, no man, no bodie.

* a Nádo, by swimming.

* † Naguéla, a poore thatched cottage.

† Naípes, or Naýpes, playing cardes.

Nálga, f. the buttocks.

* Nálga de tocíno, a gammon of bacon.

Nalgáda, f. a blowe on the buttocks.

Nalgueár, to beat the buttockes.

* ñámes, a kinde of fruit in the kingdome
of China.

Náo, or Náve, f. a ship.





* Náps, an herbe called nauew gentle, or
french nauew.

† Naránja, f. an orenge.

* Naranjáda, orenge colour, pertaining
to orenges.

* Naranjádo, spotted with orenges, pel­
ted with orenges, as in Spain on shroue­
tuesday they go casting of orenges, al­
monds and comfits.

* Naranjál, an orchard of orenges.

† Naránjo, m.an orenge tree.

Narcíso, an herbe or flower called daf­
fodill.

Nárdo, m.spikenard.

Narigúdo, m.long nosed.

* Naríces, vide Nariz, f. the nostrils.

Naríz, f. a nose.

* Nariz síma, a flat nose.

* Naríz róma, a nose turned vpwarde
with the end.

Nárra, f. a tale.

* Narración, f. a declaration, a recoun­
ting of a matter, a telling or expressing
of a matter.

Narrár, to tell, to recount.

Nárria, Miérra, or Rástra, a rake.

* Nascér, or Nacér, to be borne, to
spring vp.

* Nascimiénto, or Nacimiénto, birth,
springing vp.

* Nascído, or Nacído, m.borne, sprung
vp.

Nasción, vide Nación, f. a people, a
countrie.

* Náso, a towne of Sicilie neere mount
Aetna.

Nássa, or Nása, a bow-net, a weele of
wickers to catch fish with.

* Nastúrcio, or Malpíca, cresses.

* Nastúrcio montése, wilde cresses.

* Náta, f. creame.

Nátas, f. creame.

* Natío, vide Nascimiénto. 

Natividád, f. birth, natiuitie.

* Natívo, m.natiue, naturally engen­
dred.

Natúra, f. nature.

* Natúra, vide Cóño. 

Naturál, disposition, naturall.

Naturál de tal lugár, such a countrie­
man borne.

Naturaléza, f. a mans naturall disposi­
tion or condition or his natiue coun­
trey.

Naturalménte, naturally, according to
nature.

Náva, f. a rising and falling vp and down
in a field, as a ship goeth vp and downe
at sea.

Navája, f. a rasor.

Navál, pertaining to a ship, a place where
turneps growe. Also a battell at sea.

* batálla Navál, war by sea.

Navarísco, m.a man of Nauarre, per­
taining to Nauarre.

* Navárra, Nauarre.

Navárro, vide Navarísco. 

Nauchél, a master of a ship, a pilot.

Náve, or Náo, f. a ship.

* Navecílla, f. a small barke, a boate.

* Navecílla de encénsio, a box to keepe
incense in, a censor.

Navegación, f. sailing, nauigation.

Navegánte, he that saileth, a mariner.

Navegár, to saile, to passe by sea.

Navéta, f. a little ship. Also a censor.

* Navezíca, or Navechíca, a boate, a
small barke.

* Navezílla, vide Navecílla, a small
barke.

* Naufrágio, m.shipwracke.

* Navichuélo, m.a little ship.

Navidád, f. Christmas.

* Navigáble, nauigable, that may bee
sayled ouer.

* Navigánte, one that sayleth, a sea
man.

Navío, m.Náve, or Náo, f. a ship.

Navizílla de encénsios, a censor.

* Naupácto, a towne in Achaia, called
Lepantum.

* Nauséa, a desire to vomit.

Naýpes, or Naípes, m.playing cards.


N E
Nebéda, an herb called Calamint or Nep.

* Nébla, vide Niébla, a cloud.

Neblí, m.a hawke.

Neblína, f. a miste.

* Neceadór, m.a foolish speaker, one that
playeth the foole.

Neceár, to play the foole.

Necedád, f. foolerie.

Necessariaménte, necessarily, of necessi­
tie.

Necessário, m.necessarie.

* Necessicída, vide Necessidád. 

Necessidád, f. necessitie, neede.

Necessitádo, m.that is in necessitie or
need.

* Necezuélo, m.a little foole.

Neciaménte, foolishly.

Nécio, m.a foole.

* Nefandaménte, heinously, horribly,
abominably, detestably.

* Nefándo, m.heinous, horrible, mischie­
uous, not to be named.

* Nefariaménte, wickedly, abomina­
bly.

* Nefário, m.wicked, abominable.

Negación, deniall.

* Negádo, m.denied.

Negadór, m.a denier.

Negár, yo Niégo, to denie.

* Negatívo, negatiue.

Negijón, vide Neguijón, m.the worme
in the teeth.

Negligéncia, f. negligence, carelesnes.

Negligénte, carelesse, negligent.

Negligenteménte, carelesly.

Negociación, f. dealing in busines.

Negociádo, m.a dealer, a dooer.

Negociánte, a trades-man.

Negociar, to deale in busines, to follow a
trade.

Negócio, m.busines, trade.

* Négra hija, a disgraced, vnfortunate,
and vnluckie daughter.

* Negregueádo, blacked, made blacke.

Negregueár, to waxe blacke.

Negregúra, f. blacknes.

Negréta, a kinde of ducke.

Negríllo, m.a little blacke Moore, some­
what blacke.

* Negríto, idem. 

* Négro, m.blacke. Also a blacke Moore
of Ethiopa.

Negromancía, f. negromancie.

Negromántico, a worker by negromancy.

Negrór, m.blacknes.

* Negrúra, f. blacknes.

Neguílla, vide Axéuz. 

Neguijón de diéntes, the worme in the
teeth.

Néma, f. a quire of paper.

Nenufár, or Hígo del río, or Escudéte
del río, or Gálpha, or Gélfano, the
water lillie.

* Nervadéra yérva, a kinde of herbe.

* Nervár, vide Nerviár. 

* Nervezíco, m.a little sinewe.

Nerviár, to worke by sinewes.

Nérvio, m.a sinewe.

* Nervióso, vide Nervóso, full of si­
newes.

Nervosidád, f. fulnes of sinewes.

Nervóso, m.full of sinewes.

Nervúdo, m.that hath great sinewes.

* Nésgas, f. welts, gardes, or cuts in a
garment. Also small skirts.

* Néspera, vide Níspola, a medlar.

* Néspola, vide Níspola. 


* Néto, m.neate, cleere, pure.

* Neváda, f. a drift of snowe.

Nevádo, m.full of snow, snowie.

Nevár, yo Niévo, to snow.

* Nevéda, vide Nebéda, Calamint.

* Neurínas, Iuniper berries.

* Neutrál, a neuter, neither on one side,
nor on another.

* Neutralidád, f. neutralitie, holding of
neither side.

* Néutro, neither of both.


N I
Ní, neither.

* Nibél, vide Nivél. 





* Nibelár, vide Nivelár. 

* Nidáda, f. a nestfull.

Nidál, that which is put in the nest.

Nído, m.a nest.

Niébla, f. a miste.

* Niega, Niegue, Niégo, vide Negár, 
to denie.

Niérvo, vide Nérvio, a sinewe.

Niéspra, f. a medlar.

Niéspro, m.a medlar tree.

Niéta, f. a neece, a brothers or sisters
daughter.

Niéto, m.a nephew, a brothers sonne.

* Niéto víno, the third wine from the
grape.

* Nieve, Niévo, vide Nevár. 

Niéve, f. snow.

* Nigrétta, a waterfoule called a coote.

Nigromancía, f. nigromancie, coniura­
tion.

Nigromántico, m.a coniurer, a worker
by the blacke arte.

Nímfa, f. a nymph.

* Ninación, id est Ni Nación, nei­
ther any nation.

Ningún, or Ningúno, no body, none.

* Niña, f. a girle, childe, or Infant.

Niña del ójo, the apple of the eie.

Niñeár, to play the childe.

* Ninhito, m.a little childe.

* Ninha, vide Niña. 

* Ninho, vide Niño. 

Niñerías, childish toyes.

* Niñero, m.one that loueth children.

Niñéz, f. infancie, childhood.

Niñéta de los ójos, the apples of the
eies.

Niñilla de los ójos, idem. 

Niño, m.a childe, an infant.

* Nispola, a fruit called a medlar.

Nispero, vide Niéspero, a medlar
tree.

Nivél, a plumline, a carpenters rule.

Niveladór, m.one that maketh leuell, or
ruleth.

Nivelár, to rule out, to leuell.


N O
No, No.

No náda, nothing at all.

* No ménos, no lesse.

No sólo, not onely.

* Nobeléro, vide Noveléro. 

* Nobélo, vide Novélo. 

* Nobílla, vide Novílla. 

* Nóbia, a married woman of one day, a
bride.

* Nóbio, m.a married man of one daie, a
bridegroome.

Nóble, noble.

Noblecér, or Noblescér, to make noble,
to waxe noble.

* Noblecído, m.made noble, made of
fame or renowme, become noble.

* Nobleménte, noblie.

Nobléza, f. nobilitie.

* Nocélla, vide Nozélla. 

Nóche, f. night.

* Nochecído, m.waxed night.

* Nochér, or Contramaéstro, a boate­
swaine in a ship.

* Nochér, the wardrobe in a ship.

Nocherniéga, pertaining to the night.

* Nochecér, to waxe night.

* Nocíble, hurtfull.

* Nocívo, noisome.

* Noctulúpa, a disease in the eies.

Noctúrno, vide Notúrno, belonging to
the night.

Nogáda sálsa, a gallimawfrie of nuts.

Nogál, m.a walnut.

* Noguéra, or Noguéyra, a nut called
a walnut.

Nolíto, feriage or passage money by ship,
or by boate.

* Nombradaménte, namely, by name.

Nombradía, f. naming by name.

* Nombrádo, m.named, renowned,
famous.

* Nombradór, m.a namer, one that gi­
ueth a name to a thing.

Nombrár, to name.

Nómbre, m.a name.

* Dár el Nómbre, to giue the watch
worde.

* Tomár el nómbre, to take the worde.

* Nomenclatór, one that knoweth the
names of things and persons, and calleth
them thereby.

* úna Nómina, a catalog of names. Also
a little purse with some relickes of the
Saints hanging about ones necke in
deuotion.

Nónes, od, vneuen, as 3.5.7.9.11.13.
15.17.19. contrarie to this is Pares,
which is euen, as 2.4.6.8.10.12.14.
16.18.20.

* páres o Nónes, euen or od.

Nóno, m.the ninth.

* Nóra buéna, or mála, id est, en óra
buéna or mála, in a good hower or in
a bad.

* Nordesteár, to coast northeast.

* Nórma, a rule, a leuell, a line, a dire­
ction.

* Nórte, or Tramontána, the northeast
winde.

* Nose, id est, No sé, I cannot tell.

Nosótros, we.

Nóta, f. a marke, a note.

Notáble, notable, excellent, woorth the
marking.

Notableménte, notably.

Notación, f. noting.

Notádo, marked, noted.

Notár, to note, to marke.

* Notár cártas, to endite letters.

* Notaría, the office of a notarie, a clark­
ship.

Notário, a notarie, a clarke that writeth,
or keepeth an office.

Notezílla, a little note.

Noticia, knowledge, notice.

Notificación, giuing notice, doing to
vnderstand.

* Notificádo, m.notified, made to haue
knowledge of.

* Notificadór, m.he that giueth no­
tice.

Notificár, Præs. yo Notifíco, 1. Præt.
yo Notifiqué, to giue notice, to doe to
weet, to giue to vnderstand.

* Notifiqué, vide Notificár. 

* Nóto, vide Vendevál, the south wind.

Notório, knowen, notorious.

Notúrno, m.belonging to the night, of
the night.

Noveciéntos, nine hundreds.

Novedád, f. newnesse, strangenesse.

* Novéla, f. newes.

Noveléro, m.a carrier of newes.

* Novélo, m.a bragger of his owne ver­
tues, a new comer, an vpstart.

* Novénas, certaine praiers and oray­
sons called the ninthes in imitation of
the nine festiuall daies.

* Novéno, m.the ninth.

* Novençána mugér, a yoong woman
proper and well attired.

* Novér, id est, No vér, not to see.

Nóvia, f. a bride.

* Novícia, a new thing.

* Noviciádo año, the first yeere that
any religious bodie doth enter into the
monasterie.

Noviciár, to make new things, to doe
anewe.

* Noviciéntos, nine hundred.

Novício, m.a nouice, one newly entered
religion.

Noviémbre, Nouember.

Novílla, a heifer, a yoong cow.

Novíllo, a steere, a yoong oxe.

Nóvio, m.a bridegroome, a new married
man.

* Nozélla, wilde flower deluce.

* ñro, id est, nuestro, ours.


N V
* Núbe, or ñúve, a cloud.

ñubládo, cloudie, ouercast.

ñublárse, to be ouercast with clouds.

ñublóso, cloudie.

* ñúblo del pán, blasting of corne.

ñublo en el trígo, blasting of wheat.

Núca de la cabéça, of the poll or nape
the head.





ñúdo, m.a knot.

* ñúdo de la máno, a knuckle.

* ñudóso, m.full of knots, knottie.

* Nuébe, vide Nuéve. 

Nuéra, f. a daughter in lawe, a sonnes
wife.

Nuéstro, ours.

Nuéva, f. newes, strangenes.

* Hazér de nuévas, to make himselfe
strange of that hee knoweth well e­
nough.

Nuevaménte, newly, lately.

Nuéve, nine.

Nuévo, m.new, yoong.

Nuéz, f. a nut.

* Nuéz de la gargánta, the weesill or
little toong at the entrance of the
throate.

* Nuéz de espécie, nutmegs.

* Nuéza blánca, an herbe called white
Brionie.

Nuéza négra, blacke Brionie.

* Numerádo, m.numbred, reckoned,
counted, tolde, paied.

* Numerár, to number, to tell, to reckon,
to count, to pay.

* Numeráto, m.told, reckoned, counted.

* Numeráto de dezenáres y cente­
náres, reckoned by tens and by hun­
dreds.

Número, m.a number.

Numeróso, m.in great number.

Núnca, neuer.

* Núncio, a messenger or Embassador
from the Pope.

Núsco, or Con Núsco, with vs.

† Nútria, f. a little beast called an Otter.

* Nutrimiénto, m.nourishment.

* Nutrír, to nourish, to maintaine, to vp­
hold.

ñuváda, f. a storme.

ñúve, f. a cloude.

ñúve de ójo, the white skin ouer the eie
hindering the sight.

* Núz, the nocke of a bowe to hold on the
string.

* Nuziénte, vide Provechóso. 




O
O, or, either, or a voice of woon­
dring.



* Obál, a thing round as an egge.

Obedecér, or Obedescér, to obey.

* Obedecído, or Obedescído, m.
obeyed.

Obediéncia, f. obedience.

Obediénte, obedient, diligent to please,
humble.

* Obéja, vide Ovéja, a sheepe.

Obejerúgo, vide Abejarúco, m.

Obelísco, m.a kings tombe.

Obélo, m.a chapter of a booke.

* Obencadúra, the shrouds in a ship.

Obgéto, vide Objéto, m.an obiect, that
which is before ones eies.

* Objéto, or Obgéto, idem. 

* Objeción, an obiection. Also a repro­
ching or casting in the teeth.

Objetúra, f. an obiecting, a setting before
the eies, an alleaging of some cauill by
the way.

Obispádo, m.a Bishopricke.

Obispál, belonging to a Bishop.

* Obispillo, m.a Bishop made in iest at
Shrouetide among students and schol­
lers, which they hold vp for a weeke, do­
ing him all honour, as though he were
truely a bishop indeed.

Obispíllo de puérco, a haggas, a hogs
haslet, a chitterling.

Obispíllo de áve, the rumpe of a bird.

Obíspo, a Bishop, a Prelate.

* Oblación, a sacrifice, an oblation.

Obláda, f. an offering.

Obléa, f. an offering, a round offering
cake.

Obligación, f. a bond, an obligation.

Obligádo, m.bound by couenant or
duetie.

Obligár, Præs. yo Oblígo, 1. Præt. yo
Obligué, to binde by couenant or
duetie.

* Obligue, vide Obligár. 

Óbra, f. worke.

* Obráda, f. a daies worke, an acre of
land.

* Obradór, m.a workeman, a worker.

* Obráje, worke, trade, working, ma­
king.

Obrár, to worke.

* Obrecíta, or Obrezíta, a little worke.

* Obrecílla, or Obrezílla, vide Obre­
cíta. 

Obréro, m.a workman.

Obretícia, a thing done against iust and
right, wrong.

* Obrezílla, vide Obrecíta. 

* Obrezíllo, vide Obrezílla. 

* Obrezíta, vide Obrecíta, f. a small
little worke.

* Obrójos, vide Abrójos, a certaine
kinde of thistle, a bramble, caltrops in
warre.

* bscuraménte, vide Escuraménte, darkely.

* Obscúro, vide Escúro, m.darke.

Obséquias, f. funerall rites.

Observáncia, f. obseruance, reuerence,
honor, good behauiour, obseruing or cu­
stome.

* Observánte, one that marketh or ob­
serueth, one that reuerenceth.

* Obstáculo, m.a let, a hinderance.

Obstánte, as Nonobstánte, that stan­
deth not against, that withstandeth
not, or withstanding.

* Obstár, to stand against.

* Obstinación, f. obstinatenes, stubborn­
nes, peeuishnes.

* Obstinádo, m.obstinate, stubborne,
peruerse, peeuish.

* Obténga, Obténgo, vide Obtenír. 

* obTenír, Præs. obTéngo, obTié­
nes, obTiéne. 1. Præt. obTúve, ob­
Tuvíste, obTúvo. Fut. obTendré,
or obTerné, ás, á. Sub. Præs. ob­
Ténga. Imperfect. obTernía, ob­
Tuviéra, or obTuviésse. Fut. obTu­
viére, to obtaine, to get, to compasse.

* obTernía, vide obTenír. 

* obTuviéra, obTuviére, obTuviésse, 
vide obTenír. 

* Obtúso, m.blunt, dull.

* Obviár, to meete with.


O C
Ocasión, f. occasion, cause, opportunitie.

* Ocasionár, to cause, to giue occasion, to
procure.

Ocasionádo, m.occasioned, caused, excu­
sed.

* Ocasionadór, m.one that giueth occa­
sion, or cause.

* Occurído, happened, chanced.

* Occurír, to happen, to chance.

* Océano, as Már océano, the Ocean
sea.

* Ocháva, or Dráma, a dram in weight.

* Ochavádo, m.made eight square.

Ochavário, the eight part.

Ochávas, the eight.

Ochavéro, m.a diuider into eight parts.

Ochávo, m.a peece of coine woorth two
Maravedies.

Ochénta, eightie, fower score.

Ócho, eight in number.

Ocho ciéntos, eight hundred.

Ocidentál, westerly.

Ocidénte, the west.

Ócio, m.idlenesse, leisure, rest from
worke or businesse.

Ociosaménte, idlely, leisurely, at lei­
sure.

Ociosidád, f. idlenesse.

* Ocióso, m.idle, at leisure.

* Octavário, the eight part.

* Octóbre, vide Octúbre, the moneth
October.

* Ocultaménte, priuily, secretly.

* Ocultár, to hide, to keepe secret.

* Ocúlto, m.secret, priuie, hidden.

Ocupación, f. occupation, taking into his
hands, holding or possessing of things.

Ocupádo, m.busie, taken in hand, let
with busines, troubled.





Ocupár, to occupie, to get or take, to pos­
sesse, to trouble.

Occurrír, to chance vpon, to happen on.

* Occurrido, chanced, happened.


O D
* Odiádo, m.hated, despited.

* Odiár, to hate, to despite.

Ódio, m.hatred, spite.

Odióso, m.bent to hatred, spitefull.

* Odirífero, m.that bringeth a sauour.

* Odirifico, m.that causeth smell.

Ódre, m.a water budget, a bottle for
wine, oile, &c. made and dressed with
the haire inward, with rosin and pitch,
they are great ones, to carrie on a mule
or asse from place to place.

* hinchár, or ynchár ódre, to puffe an
ódre full of breath, to see if he will
hold, or vent out any winde.

Odrería, f. a bottle-makers shop.

* Odréro, a maker of odres.

Odrezillo, m.a little bottle, a small
budget.

Odrína, or ódre de buéy, a budget of
an oxe hide.

Odrizíllo, vide Odrezíllo. 


O E
* Oeconomía, the guiding and ordering
of things belonging to the house.

* Oeconómico, one that doth order or
gouerne the house.

* Oéstre, or Poniénte, the west, the west
winde, the west part.


O F
Ofendér, or Offendér, yo ofiéndo, to
offend, to hurt, to displease.

* Ofendído, or Offendído, offended,
hurt.

* Offendiéndo, or Ofendiéndo, offen­
ding, hurting.

Offénsa, or Ofénsa, an offence, a hurt, a
dammage, a stumbling blocke.

Offensión, or Ofensión, a small offence
or dammage, some cause of dislike.

* Offensívo, or Ofensívo, offensiue,
hurtfull.

Offérta, or Oférta, an offer, a thing
profered.

* Offertório, or Ofertório, m.the offer­
torie.

Officiál, Oficiál, a handycrafts man,
a man of occupation.

* Officína, or Oficína, a shop.

Officio, or Oficio, an office, a trade, an
occupation.

Offiénde, Offiéndo, vide Ofendér, to
offend.

Offrecér, or Ofrescér, yo Offrésco, to
offer or profer, to offer sacrifice.

* Ofrénda, an offering.

* Offrésca, Offrésco, vide Ofrecér. 

Offrecído, or Ofrecído, offered, pro­
fered.

Offrecimiénto, m.or Ofrecimiénto,
an offering, a making profer, a sacrifice.

Offrénda, or Ofrénda, an offer, a sa­
crifice.

* Offuscádo, or Ofuscádo, darkened,
dimmed, dulled.

* Offuscadór, or Ofuscadór, one that
maketh dim or dull, an obscurer.

Offuscár, or Ofuscár, Præs. yo Offús­
co, 1. Præt. yo Offusqué, to make
dim, to make dull, to darken.

* Offusque, vide Offuscár. 


O G
Ogáño, m. that of this yeere.

* Ogeár, or Ojeár, to winke, to cast an
eie at, to eie, to looke at, to driue away
birds or such like.

* Ogeatár, vide Ojeatár. 

Ogibúndo, m.gaping like a sluggard, one
that careth for nothing but sleepe.



* Ohír, or Ohýr, vide Oýr. 


O I
* Oí, vide Oy, to day, at this present
time.

Oído, vide Oýdo, heard, the hearing,
the eares.

Oidór, vide Oydór, m.a hearer, a iu­
stice of the peace and coram.

* Oiga, Oigo, vide Oýr, to heare, to
grant.

* Oygámonos, no more of this: let vs
heare some other matters.

Oír, vide Oýr. 

* Ója, or Hója, a leafe of a tree, a leafe
of paper, a sword blade.

* Ója de Milán, a leafe of lattin mettal.

* Ojáço, m.a great eie.

* Ojáco, m.a iacke of maile.

* Ojál, a button hole.

* Ojalár, to make button holes.

* Ojáles, button holes.

Ojeár, or Ogeár, to winke, to cast an
eie, to haue an eie vnto.

Ojéras hundídas, eies sunke into the
head.

* Ojeatádo, vide Ojeteádo. 

* Ojeatár, vide Ojeteár. 

* Ojéte, m.an aiglet hole for points.

* Ojeteádo, made with aiglet holes.

* Ojeteár, to make with aiglet holes for
the points.

* Ojétes, m.aiglet holes for to put in
points at.

Ójo, m.an eie, witching with the eie, the
meish of a net, a needles eie.

Ójo de buéy, an herbe called Oxe-eie, or
May-weed.

* Ójo de agúja, the eie of a needle.

* Ójo, or Aojamiénto, an eying or be­
witching with the eie.

* Ójos vérdes y rasgádos, great blac­
kish grey eies: that is, great and goodly
faire eies.

* Ojúdo, m.great eyed.


O L
Óla, or Ónda, f. a waue of the sea.

* Olánda, or Holánda, Holland, a Pro­
uince in the low countries, or Holland
cloath.

* Olandézes, or Holandézes, people of
Holland.

* Oláta, f. the name of a comet.

* Oléa, Oyle.

Oleádo, oyled, annointed with oyle.

Oledór, m.a smeller.

Oledóra cósa, a thing that smelleth.

Olér, as Dár Olór, yo Huélo, to
sauour.

Olér, recibiéndo Olór, yo Huélo, to smell.

* Oleróso, m.smelling well.

* Olfácto, vide Olfáto. 

* Olfáro, vide Olfáto. 

Olfáto, the sence of smelling.

* Olído, m.smelled, sauored.

* Oliénte, smelling.

* Olífero, m.a place of Oliue trees. That
which bringeth of foorth Oliues. Also vi­
de Odorífero.

* Olímpiada, or Olýmpiada, f. a cer­
taine time of sporting, solemnized a­
mong the Greekes euerie fower yeeres.

Ólio, vide Azéite. 

Olíva, f. an Oliue berrie, an Oliue tree.

* Olivádo, vnleauened.

Olivár, a garden of Oliues.

* Olívo, the Oliue tree.

Ólla, f. an earthen pot, a pot to boile with.
Also the ordinarie prouision, diet and
fare that one vseth in the house euerie
day.

* Ólla podrída, a hotchpotch made of
diuers meates put in one pot, as beefe,
veale, mutton, kid, goate, hens, birdes,
&c.

* Ólla de cóbre, a brasse pot.

* Olláza, a great pot, or a stroke with a
pot.

* Olléjo, vide Holléjo. 

* Olléra, a woman that selleth or maketh
pots.

Olléro, or Holléro, a potter.

* Olléro de vedriádo, a maker of glasse
pots or cruses.





Olléta, f. a pipkin, a little pot.

* Ollín, or Hollín, soote of a chimney,
fornace, &c.

* Ollinár, or Hollinár, to beraie with
soote.

Olmédo, a groue of elmes. Also a towne
in old Castile in Spaine so called.

Ólmo, m.an elme.

* Ólmo silvéstre, a witchelme.

Olór, m.a smell, a stench.

Ólta, vide Óla. 

Olvidadízo, m.forgetfull.

Olvidádo, m.forgotten.

* Olvidánça, f. vide Olvído, forget­
fulnes.

Olvidár, to forget.

Olvído, obliuion, forgetfulnes.

* Olympíada, or Olimpíada, f. pa­
stimes vsed among the Greekes euerie
fourth yeere.


O M
Omblígo, m.a nauell.

Omblígo de Venus, an herbe called
Penswoort.

Ómbre, or Hómbre, a man.

Ombrecíllo, Ombrezíllo, or Hom­
brecíllo, a little man, a poore silly fel­
low.

Ombrezíllos, or Hombrezíllos, hoppes
to brew with.

Ómbro, or Hómbro, a shoulder.

* Ómbros, the shoulders.

* Ombrúdo, m.great shouldered.

Omecída, or Homecída, m.a man­
slear, a murtherer.

* Oméje, vide Omenáje. 

* Omenáge, Omenáje, or Homenáje, 
fealtie, swearing to be true man to his
Lord of whom he holdeth lands.

* Omezíllo, vide Omizíllo. 

* Omicída, a man killer.

Omicídio, or Homicídio, manslaugh­
ter.

Omilládo, vide Vmilládo, humbled.

Omiciáno, Omiziáno, or Homiziá­
no, a manslear, a murtherer.

Omizíllo, m.manslaughter.


O N
* Onágre, a kinde of weapon of warre
vsed in old time.

† Ónça, f. an ounce in waight, a beast
called a Panther or Ownce.

* Óncia, f. an ounce waight.

Ónda, or Óla, f. a waue of the sea.

Ondeár, to tosse as waues do, to flowe.

Ondóso, m.full of waues.

Onestád, vide Onestidád, f. honestie,
dignitie, credit.

Onestaménte, honestly, crediblie.

Onestár, to adorne, to beautifie, to re­
ward with honor and crédite.

Onestidád, or Honestidád, honestie, 
worship, credit.

Onésto, honest, worshipfull, credible.

* Óngo, vide Hóngo. 

* Óña, f. a double furrow. Also the name
of a citie in Spaine.

Onór, or Honór, m.honour, nobilitie,
worship, dignitie, promotion, credit.

Onoráble, or Honoráble, honorable, 
worshipfull, credible.

Ónra, or Hónra, f. vide Onór, honor.

Onradaménte, vide Honradaménte, 
honorablie, worshipfully.

Onrádo, or Honrádo, honored, wor­
shipped.

Onrár, or Honrár, to honor, to worship,
to hold in reputation, to reuerence.

Onrosaménte, honorably, worshipfully,
credibly.

Onróso, or Honróso, honorable, worship­
full.

* Onsário, vide Honsário. 

* Ontanáles, vide Hontanáles. 

* ónza, or ónça, f. an ounce weight, or a
beast called an Ounce.

ónze, eleuen in number.

Onzéno, m.the eleuenth in order.


O P
* Opacidád, f. shadow.

* Opederádo, m.vide Apoderádo. 

Operación, f. working, operation.

* Opilación, f. stopping of the liuer, &c.
obstruction.

Opiládo, m.stopped, troubled with ob­
struction.

* Opilár, to stop with obstruction.

Opináble, that may be thought or sup­
posed.

Opiniático, m.opinionatiue, selfe willed,
one that will not be drawen from his
opinions.

Opinión, f. opinion, that which one thin­
keth and holdeth to be so.

ópio, m.iuice of poppie.

oPonér, Præs. oPóngo, oPónes, oPó­
ne, 1. Præt. oPúse, oPusíste, oPúso,
Fut. oPondré, or oPorné, ás, á, Sub.
Præs. oPónga, Imperfect. oPusiéra,
oPondría, oPornía, or oPusiésse,
Fut. oPusiére, to oppose, to set against,
to gainsay, to hold a contrarie argu­
ment, to lay a wager.

* oPónga, oPóngo, vide oPonér. 

* oPóndra, oPóndre, vide oPonér. 

* oPórna, oPórne, oPornía, vide o­
Ponér. 

Oportunaménte, fitly, conueniently, in
very good time.

Oportunidád, f. fitnes, conuenientnes,
meetnes of time and place.

Oportúno, m.fit, meete, conuenient, as a
man would wish.

Oposición, f. setting against, taking the
aduerse part, holding a contrarie argu­
ment.

* Opositór, an opposer, or one that trieth
the learning of other.

* Ópra, vide Óbra. 

Oppremír, or Opremír, to oppresse, to
ouerbeare, to weigh downe, to stop, to
ouercharge, to come vpon suddenly.

Oppressión, vide Opressión. 

Opremído, m.oppressed, ouerborne, ouer­
charged.

Opremír, vide Oppremír. 

Opressión, f. oppression, ouerbearing,
ouerweighing.

* Oprimído, vide Opremído, m.

* Oprimidór, m.one that oppresseth or
ouerweigheth.

* Opróbrio, m.an opprobrie, a checke, a
taunt, an vpbraiding.

* Opthalmía, a disease of the eies
when the vttermost skin of the eie is
inflamed, proceeding of too much ful­
nesse, or of biting choler, or of windi­
nesse.

Opuésto, m.set against, opposite, cleane
contrarie.

* Opuléncia, f. riches, plentie, abun­
dance.

* Opulénto, rich, plentifull, abounding,
wealthie.

* Opúse, Opusiéra, Opusiésse, vide 
oPonér. 

* Opúso, vide oPonér. 



Oquedád, f. hollownesse, concauitie.


O R
Óra, now, whether of two, now this, now
that.

Óra, an howre.

* Oráculo, an oracle.

* Orár, vide Rezár. 

* Óras, a praier boke, beades said ouer,
howres spent in deuotion.

Oración, f. a praier, an oration or long
persuasiue speech.

Oráculo, m.an oracle, an answere from
God, a notable saying or sentence, a
matter of counsell.

* † Oraçúz, licorice.

Oradór, m.an orator, one that praieth
or intreateth.

* Orán, a citie in Barbarie which the
king of Spaine holdeth.

Orár, to pray, to intreate, to perswade by
oration or speech.

* Orátes, fooles.

Oratória, f. rhetoricke, the art of perswa­
ding.





* Oratório, pertaining to a rhetorician.

Órça, f. a pitcher or pot for oile.

* órça, as ýr a órça, to saile with a side
winde, to go aside.

Orchilla, a  certaine herbe comming from
the Canaries.

† orçuélo, or orçuzélo, a trap for beasts,
a pitfold, spring, or grin to catch birds
or beasts with.

Orçuélo de ójo, a pin & webbe in the
eye.

* Ordeáte, a confection made of barley,
barley water, ptisan water.

órden, f. order, a methode, a row, a ranke,
a course, a calling or dignitie of men.

Ordenádo, m.ordered, appointed, ordei­
ned.

Ordenadaménte, orderly, ordinarily.

Ordenamiénto, m.ordering, an ordi­
nance or decree.

Ordenánça, f. an ordinance, a decree.

Ordenár, to ordaine, to institute, to or­
der, to appoint.

* † Ordeñár, to milke.

Ordeñáda azeytúna, an oliue berry
pressed.

* Ordiáta, f. barley water, or ptisan wa­
ter to drinke, for those that are sicke of
the burning feauer, or of the ptisicke.

Ordiáte, barley water, ptisane drinke.

* Ordído, warped as weauers doe their
webs, complotted, contriued, deuised.

Ordidúra, f. a warping, a weauing, a de­
uise, a complotting, a contriuing.

† Ordiémbre, the warpe of a webbe put
into the loome to be wouen, the webbe.

* Ordinário, m.ordinarie, vsuall.

Ordír, to begin to put a webbe into the
loome, to warpe a cloath as weauers call
it, to laie as weauers do their webs be­
fore it be wouen: to plot, to complot, to
deuise.

Ordír téla, to lay the yarne on the loome
to begin in their weauing withall.

* Oréadas, Venus nymphes, or waiting
women.

Oreár, to lay abroad in the aire, to
bleach as they bleach clothes, to drie.

Orégano, an herbe called Origanie, or
wilde Marierom.

Oréja, f. an eare.

Oréja de ratón, an herbe called Mouse­
eare.

Orejár, to wagge the eares, to shake the
eares.

* Oréjas, flap-eared, loll-eared.

* Oréja de Abád, an herbe like Iuie
growing in mudwals.

Oréjas de abád, a pancake.

* Orejón, one that hath large eares.

* Orejón de balvárte, a corner of a bul­
warke in round forme like an eare.

Orejúdo, m.one that hath great long
eares.

Orfandád, f. wanting of parents.

* Organéro, one that maketh or selleth
organs.

Organísta, m.a player on the organes.

* Organizádo, m.organized, drawen
into parts and members of the bodie,
well proportioned.

* Organízo, m.the organizing or dra­
wing the body into his partes and mem­
bers.

Órgano, m.an instrument, the organes.
Also the organes or parts of the bodie.

Orgúllo, m.loftines, pride, wrath, haugh­
tines, disdaine.

Orgullosaménte, proudly, loftilie, dis­
dainfully, hautilie.

Orgullóso, loftie, high minded, proude,
disdainfull.

Orientál, easterly, belonging to the east,
borne, or bred in the east, bright, as
the easterly sun-rising.

Oriénte, the east, orient, shining.

* Orificio, the mouth, brim, or orifice of
any thing.

Origen, f. the beginning, the birth.

Originál, the originall.

Orílla, f. the shore, the brinke, the border, or
outside of a thing, a beds side.

Orílla de rópa, the skirte of a gowne, the
hemme of a garment.

Orína, f. vrine, pisse.

Orín, m.rust.

Orinál, m.an vrinall.

Orinár, to make water, to pisse.

* Orinecér, or Orinescér, to become ru­
stie.

Oriniénto, m.rustie.

Orizónte, or Horizónte, the Horizon, 
that part round about of the heauens
which wee may discerne within our
sight.

Órla, f. a skirt, a border, a hem.

Orladór, m.one that maketh hems, bor­
ders, or the out parts of a garment.

Orlár, to make a border, hem, or welt of a
garment, or such like.

* Órma, vide Hórma, also a tracke, a
footing, a trace.

* Ormár, to tracke, trace or follow by the
footing. Also to set shooes on the laste, or
other things on the mould or blocke.

* Ormíga, or Hormíga, f. an Emmet or
Ant.

* Ornádo, m.adorned, decked, trimmed.

* Ornadór, m.a decker, a trimmer, an
adorner.

Ornaménto, m.decking, trimming, gar­
nishing.

Ornár, to garnish, to decke, to trim.

Óro, m.gold.

* Óro hiládo, gold thread.

* Oromúsico, a kinde of golde which
painters vse to paint withall.

* Óro tirádo, gold drawen into threads.

Oroguañín, Amber.

* Orón, vide Orónes. 

Orónes, bankes of earth.

Oropél, gilt leather, painters gold, Or­
pin or base gold for painters.

Oropéndola áve, f. a bird called a Wit­
wall, a Woodpecker.

Oropimiénto, m.a colour like gold called
Arsnike Orpin.

† Orosúz, m.Licorice.

Orrible, horrible, terrible, dreadfull, vn­
pleasant.

Orribleménte, horribly, terribly.

Orrór, m.horror, dread, terror, feare.

Orrúras, f. dregs.

Ortalíza, f. herbes vsed to be eaten.

Orteláno, m.a gardiner.

* Ortéra, a trey or great bowle of wood.

* Orthografia, vide Ortographia. 

* Orthográfo, vide Ortográfo. 

* Ortholáno, vide Ortelano. 

* Ortíga, vide Hortíga, f. a nettle. Also
a kind of fish pricking like a nettle.

* Ortigár, vide Hortigár, to pricke, to
sting like a nettle.

* Ortiguílla, vide Hortiguílla. 

* Ortografia, or Ortographía, the arte
of true writing, Orthographie.

* Ortográfo, or Orthógrapho, an Or­
thographer, or one that can teach Or­
thographie, or the arte of true wri­
ting.

* Orúga, an herbe called Rocket. Also a­
Caterpiller or Palmer-worme.

Orújo, vide Borújo. 

Órza, or Órça, a pitcher of earth. Also
the name of a coard in a ship. Also a
side, side-waies.

* navigár a Órza, to saile with a side
winde.


O S
* Os, or Vós, you.

Osadaménte, boldly, hardily.

Osadía, f. boldnes, hardines.

Osádo, m.hardie, bold, venturous.

Osár, to dare, to be bold, to hazard.

Ósca, f. an herbe wherewith the Indians
annoint themselues when they offer sa­
crifice to their Gods.

Oscurecér, or Escurecér, to darken, to
obscure, to make darke.

Oscurecído, or Escurecído, m.darke­
ned, obscured, dimmed.

Oscúro, or Escúro, m.darke, obscure.

Osdiembál, vide Ordiémbre, the woofe
of a web.

Osi, would to God, O if.

* Óso, vide Ósso, m.a beare.

Ospedáble, that doth lodge, that may





be lodged.

Ospedableménte, curteously, friendly,
like a good housekeeper.

Ospedadór, m.one that keepeth hospita­
litie.

Ospedáge, or Ospedáje, lodging.

Ospedamiénto, or Hospedería, a lod­
ging place, harborough, an inne.

Ospedár, to lodge, to host, to ly as a ghest.

Ospitál, an hospitall for the poore, a
spittle.

Ospitaléro, m.the master or keeper of an
hospitall.

* Óssa, f. a shee beare.

* Ossaménta, the bones in a bodie, the
whole compacting of the bones in any
bodie.

Ossário, m.a place to keepe bones in, a
charnell.

Osséro, m.a beare-heard.

Óssia, f. vide Óstra, an oister.

Ósso, m.a beare.

Ossúdo, m.one that hath great bones.

Ostáy, a coarde that goeth from the bolt­
sprit to the saile of the foremast.

Óstia, f. an ost or offering, a wafer cake
made to offer. Also an oister.

Ostiário, m.an oister bed. Also a place
where they keepe the wafer cake or ost.

Ostiéro, vide Ostiário. 

Ostigádo, vide Hostigádo. 

* Ostigár, vide Hostigár. 

Ostinadaménte, obsinately, stubborn­
ly, peruersly, wilfully.

Ostinádo, m.obstinate, crooked, wilfull,
peruerse.

Ostinár, to be obstinate.

* Ostión, m.an oister.

Óstra, or Óstria, f. an oister.


O T
* Oteadór, m.a spie, a looker about from
on high.

Oteár, to looke about, to spie from a high
place.

Otéro, an high hill or watch tower to
stand vpon for to ouerlooke the country
euery way.

* Otéro del réy, a place in Castile in
Spaine so called.

* Óto, vide Hóto. 

Otoñáda, haruest time, haruest, au­
tumne tide.

* Otoñál, belonging to haruest.

Otoñár, to apply haruest, to reape and
get in the corne.

Otóño, haruest season, autumne.

* Otorgádo, m.bestowed vpon, freely
giuen.

Otorgamiénto, m.a free grant, bestow­
ing vpon.

* Otorgánte, a bestower vpon, a free
giuer.

Otorgár, Præs. yo Otórgo, 1. Præt. yo
Otorgué, to grant freely, to bestowe
vpon.

* torgue, vide Otorgár. 

Otravéz, another time, againe.

* Ótrie, another, either of two.

Ótro, idem. 

* Otrosi, also.

Ótros tántos, as many.

Otro tánto, as much.

Otúbre, m.the moneth of October.


O V
Óva, sea weedes, reeke, sea grasse, ducke
weede.

* Ovál, vide Obál. 

* O vála me Díos, O God helpe me, God
haue mercie on me.

* Ovándo, in laying of egs.

Ovár las aves, to lay egs.

* Ovegíca, f. a little sheepe.

Ovéja, f. a sheepe, an ewe.

Ovejéro, m.a shepheard.

Ovejuéla, f. a little sheepe.

Ovejúno, m.pertaining to sheepe.

* Ovélo, vide Obélo, a chapter.

* Ovencadúra, vide Obencadúra, the
shroudes in a ship.

Ovéra, f. a hens nest.

* Oviédo, a place in Spaine so called.

* Oviéra, Oviésse, vide  Avér. 

* Ovímos, or uvímos, we had, vide Avér.

* Ovilládo, m.made vp, wounde vp as a
threed is on a clue or bottome.

* Ovillár, to wind vp threed.

* Ovíllo de hílo, a bottome of yarne.

* Óvo, or úvo, vide Avér. 


O X
* Ox, Ox, Ox, a voice to feare away
birds or such like, as in English, shue,
shue, shue.

† Oxalá, would to God.

* Oxaldádo, vide Hojaldádo. 

* † Oxáldre, or Oxálde, vide Hojáldre, 
a custard.

* Oxeadór, m.a driuer away, as men
driue birds or fowles with crying, shue.
Also one that eieth or marketh with the
eies.

* Oxeádo, driuen away with shue. Also
eyed or marked with the eies.

* Oxeár, to driue away with crying
shue, as men vse in driuing away birds
and fowles. Also to eie or marke with
the eies.

Oxéo, driuing away, or chasing away
with the voice.

* Oxíco, m.the snout of a beast.

Oxizácre, Oximell, honie and vinegar to­
gither.


O Y
Oy, to day.

* Oy dia, now a daies, now at this pre­
sent.

Oydo, or Oído, m.heard.

Oydór, m.a hearer, a iustice.

* Óyga, Óygo, vide Oýr. 

* Oýgo lo, I heare say so.

* Oýr, Præs. Oýgo, Oýes, Oýe. 1. Præt.
Oý, Oiste, Oyó. Sub. Præs. Oýga
to heare.



P

PAcedúra, f. feeding, pasture.

Pacér, yo Pásco, to feed, to keepe at
pasture.

* Páces, f. peace, truce, league, agree­
ment.

* Pachocháda, f. vide Patocháda, a
foolerie, a folly, an asses tricke.

Pacído, or Pascído, m.fed, kept at pa­
sture.

Paciéncia, f. patience, sufferance.

Paciénte, patient.

Pacienteménte, patiently.

Pacificación, pacification.

Pacificádo, pacified.

Pacificadór, m.a pacifier.

Pacificaménte, peaceably, quietly.

Pacificár, Præs. yo Pacifico, 1. Præt. 
yo Pacifiqué, to pacifie, to appease.

Pacífico, peaceable, a peace-maker.

* Pacifique, vide Pacificár. 

* Pació, he fed, grased, or eate as a beast,
vide Pacér.

* Páco, m.a kinde of wilde beast in the
Indies of the bignes of a great goat.

* Pactión, a bargaine or couenant.

Pácto, Páto, or Conciérto, an agree­
ment, a concord, a match, a bargaine.

Padecér, yo Padésco, to suffer, to en­
dure, to abide.

Padecído, or Padescído, suffered, en­
dured.

Padecimiénto, or Padescimiénto, m.a
suffering, an enduring.

Padescér, or Padecér, to endure, to suf­
fer.

Padílla, f. a frying pan.

Padrásto, m.a stepfather. The pilling of
the skin about the nailes. Als a place
where one may batter with the canon
at a castle, fortresse or wall.

Padrásto del dédo, the pilling of the skin
about the nailes of the fingers.





Pádre, m.a father.

Padríno, m.a godfather, a iudge, or stic­
kler in any countrouersie.

* Padríno en desafio, one that bringeth
the chalenger into the listes or field.

Padríno de bóda, one that beareth sway
at a wedding, one that giueth the bride
at Church.

* Padrón, a patron, a register, an owner.

* Paes, vide Paýs, a countrey, a land.

Pága, or Suéldo, pay, wages or hire for
souldiers.

Pagádo, m.payed, contented, pleased.

Pagadór, m.a paymaister, the treasurer
of a campe.

* Pagadór de la artillería, the treasu­
rer, or paymaister of the ordinance.

* Pagamiénto, m.payment.

* Paganésmo, Paganísmo, or Paga­
nia, Paganisme, the professing of hea­
thens & Pagans.

Pagáno, m.a pagan, a heathen man.

Pagár, Præs. yo Págo, 1. Præt. yo pa­
gué, to pay, to please, to content, to be
punished.

Páge, or Páje, a page, a seruant next hand
that waiteth next his lord or maister,
one that waiteth at an ynche.

* Pagél, a rotchet fish.

* Pagéllo, a sea breame.

* Pagezíco, vide Pajezíco. 

Pagezíllo, a lakey, a footeboy, or a little
page.

* Pagína, a page or side of a leafe in a
booke.

Pagíza cása, f. a small thatched cot­
tage.

* Pagízo, or Pajízo lugár, any place or
village thatched.

* Págo, m.a paye, payment or reward.

Págo de víñas, or viñédo, a vinyard.

* Págo de níñas, vide Págo de víñas. 

* Págo, I pay, vide Pagár.

* Págose múcho de vérle, he was very
glad to see him.

* Pague, vide Pagár. 

Pája, f. chaffe, straw, litter.

Pajár, a place to keepe chaffe or straw in.

* Páje, or Páge, a page, one that waiteth
next hand to his lord or maister.

* Pajezíco, or Pagezíco, a little page.

* Pajezillo, or Pagezillo, idem. 

* Pajiza cása, or Pagíza cása, a that­
ched cottage.

* Pajízo, or Pagízo lugár, a strawy
place, a thatched place.

* País, or Paýs, a country, a lande, a pro­
uince.

Pajuéla, f. small straw, short- straw.

* Pajuélas de çúfre, matches of brim­
stone to light a candle with.

Pála, a spade, a shouel, a peele, a pickax, a
scoope, a peele to set bread into the ouen.

* Pála de açadón, the broad ende of a
shouell or mattocke.

* Pála de rémo, the broad ende of an
oare.

* Pála de hiérro, a fire shouell, a peele.

Pála de grandes diéntes, a rowe of
great broad teeth in ones head, like
horse teeth.

Palábra, f. a word.

* Palabrimugér, one giuen to tatling like
a woman.

Palabréro, m.a talker.

Palabrílla, f. a little worde, a short word.

* Palaciáno, m.a courtier.

Palácio, m.a pallace, a princes court.

Paladár, the roofe of the mouth, the pallet.

Paladeár, to gaspe for breath.

* Paladíno, a valiant man at armes, a
warrier, a Paladine.

Palafrén, m.a palfrey, an ambling
nagge.

* Palatrenéro, m.a hackeney man.

* Palaménta, the oares in a galley.

Palánca, f. a leauer, a cowlestaffe.

Palanciáno, m.a courtier.

* Palánco, or Palánque, a leauer, a 
cowlestaffe.

Palanguéro, a maker of leauers, or one
that lifteth, or beareth with a leauer
or cowlestaffe.

Palanguin, m.vide Palanquín, a porter
to carrie burthens.

* Palánque, vide Palánco. 

* Palanquín, a porter, or properly one
that carrieth a burden, or vessels as
brewers doe betweene two with a Pa­
lánque, id est a cowlestaffe or leauer.

Palázo, m.a blow with a cudgell.

* Palénco, vide Palénque. 

Palénque, or Palénco, liftes to figth in.

* Paléstra, vide Lúcha, f. wrasting.

* Palérmo, m.a hauen towne in Sicilie so
called.

* Paléta, f. a trapsticke.

* Paléta, or Palétta de estómago, the
mouth of the stomacke.

* Paletílla, f. the shoulder bone. Also a
little trapsticke.

* Paletóque, m.a ierkin with short
skirtes.

* Palliádo, m.cloked or clothed with a
long robe. Also muffled or hidden.

* Paliçáda, vide Palizáda. 

* Pálido, vide Amaríllo, pale coloured.

Palillo, m.a little sticke, a little cudgell, a
small forke to eate with; stubble.

* Palillo ençufrádo, a match or little
splinter hauing brimstone on it to kin­
dle a candle with.

Pálio, a goale at running, a canopie to
beare ouer a prince.

* corrér el Pálio, to run a race.

Palizáda, or Palliçáda, a bulwarke or
rampire made of wood. Also listes to
fight in.

* Pálla, an Indian word signifying Lady:
but none obtaine this name, except she
come of a noble house, and be very rich
and haue many subiects.

* Palléja, vide Pelleja de gáma, a
deeres skin.

* Palléta de la espálda, the shoulder
blade.

Pálma, the palme of the hand, a palme
tree, a hand breadth. Also victorie, a
prize, a goale, glorie, honor, signe of re­
ward for a victorie.

Pálma, or Palméra, a date tree.

Pálma, vide Pála de rémo, the broade
end of an oare.

* jugár a la Pálma, to play at tennis.

* Palmáda, a clap with the palme of the
hand.

* Palmadátil, the palme tree that bea­
reth dates.

Palmár, a groue of palme trees.

Palmatória, or Cañahéja, a ferula, such
as they clap schoole boies on the hands
with.

* Palmeár, to clap with the hands.

* Palmílla, f. a kinde of cloth in Spaine
of small price, course cloth.

Palmíto, m.a leafe or branch of the wilde
date.

Pálmo, m.a hand breadth.

Pálo, timber, wood, a sticke, a cudgell, the
pillorie, a staffe.

* Pálo de sóto, a stake.

Palóma, f. a female doue.

* Palóma torcáz, a ringdoue.

Palomár, m.a douehouse.

Palomaréja, f. a little poore pigeon.

Palomariega, a little poore pigeon.

* Paloméra, f. a douehouse.

* Palomía, vide Palomína, an herbe
called fumitorie.

Palomilla, vide Palomína. Also a little
doue.

Palomína, f. an herbe called fumitorie.

* Palomíno, a little pigeon, a yoong
pigeon.

* Palómo, m.the male doue. Also a wood
culuer, a ringdoue.

* Palotáda de atambór, the striking vp
the drum.

* Paloteár, to crosse with pikes, to giue a
dash aslope.

Palpár, to grope, to feele.

* Palpitánte, leaping as flesh new killed,
panting or beating as the heart or
brain doth sometimes.

Palpitár, to pant, to beate vp and downe
as the pulse, or veines and sinewes on
the wrest of a sicke man, to beate, pant,





or throb, as ones hart doth.

* Palúde, f. a moore or marrish ground.

* Pamguéso, an herbe called wilde seene.

Pámpano, m.a vine branch.

* Pámpano, a kinde of fish.

Pampanóso, full of vine branches.

* Pamplóna, f. the name of the chiefe
cittie in the kingdome of Nauarre.

Pán, m.corne, bread, wheate.

* vn Pán, or Hogaça, a loafe of bread.

* Pán de offrécho, bread made of bran.

Pán porcíno, an herbe called Sowes­
bread.

* Pán grançóso, vnranged bread, breads
full of bran.

Pán y quéso, an herbe called Sheepherds
pouch. Also bread and cheese.

* Pán levádo, or de levadízo, leauened 
bread.

* Pán báço, household bread.

Pan cencéno, vnleauened bread.

* Pán de acemíte, sodden bread, or sim­
nell bread.

* Pán moliénto, or Mohóso, mouldie
bread.

* Pán de Boróna, bread made of a seede
like mustard seede, which groweth in
Galizia, and the poore eate it.

* Pán sponjóso, light bread.

* Pán de especias, spiced bread.

* Panáda, f. vide Empanáda. Also
great store of bread.

* Panadería, f. bakers trade.

Panadéro, m.a baker.

Panál, m.vide Panár, a honie combe.

Pañál, or Pañáles, swathing cloutes for
children.

* Panár, or Panál, a honie combe.

Panarízo, a fellon the breedeth betwixt
the naile and the flesh.

Panarízo de la vña, idem. 

Pánça, f. the paunch.

Pançúdo, m.gorbellied.

* Pánda, f. a certaine place within the
cittie of Antwerpe.

* Pandéra, a taber, a rattle or such like
toie for children to play with.

Pandéro, Adúse, or Atabál, a drum, a
tabor.

Panderetéro, m.a drumplaier, a tabo­
rer. Also one that selleth or maketh
them.

Pandílla, f. a packe made in playing at
the cards.

Pándo, m.one that goeth doubling, bo­
wing or stowping.

* Panegírico, that containeth commen­
dations and praise. Also a kinde of
glosing and flattering oration in the
commendations of kings, wherein lies
are ioyned with flatteries.

* Panéra, f. a binne, a basket for to keepe
bread, or to cary bread in, a tub to keepe
corne or meale in, a granier for corne.

* Panéro, idem. 

Panezíllo, m.a little loafe, a little round
ball.

Pañezuélo, m.a towell, a table-napkin,
handkerchiefe.

Panfarrón, vide Fanfarrón. 

Paniaguádos, houshold folkes.

* Paníça, vide Paníza. 

* Paníço, vide Panízo. 

* Panículo, or Pericráneo, the skin
ouer the skull.

* Paniéga tiérra, a ground fit or good to
bring foorth bread corne.

* Panificár, to fructifie or bring foorth
bread corne.

* Panílla, a quarter weight.

Paníza, a graine called Pannike, a place
where corne is sowed.

* Panízo, idem. 

* Pañizuélo, vide Pañezuélo. 

Páño, m.cloth.

Páño báxo, or gruésso, course cloth.

* Páños négros, mourning garments.

* Pañójo, hauing a skin before the eies or
impediment in the sight.

* Pañól, a place where the victuals are
kept in a ship or gallie.

Pañóso, m.ragged, ill apparelled. Also
full of corne.

* Pantamímo, vide Pantomímo, a ie­
ster or plaier, a common iester, a di­
zard that moouing his bodie can coun­
terfeit the gesture of any man.

Pantáno, m.a bog, a moorish ground.

* Pantanóso, m.full of bogges or quag­
mires.

* Pantárba, or Pantárva, a pretious stone
called the stone of the Sun, which with
the heat of it, hath the force to draw the
Loadstone to it, or any other.

Pantéra, f. a beast called a panther.

Pantorílla de piérna, the calfe of the
legge.

* Pantomímo, a iester or plaier, a com­
mon iester that moouing his bodie
counterfeiteth gestures of any man.

Pantúfles, m.pantofles, slippers.

* Pantúfos, or Pantúflos, idem. 

Panuélo, m.a hand-kerchiefe.

* Panzúdo, vide Pançúdo. 

Pápa, m.the pope.

* Pápa, f. pap, the gorge.

Papál, belonging to the pope.

Pápa arríba, lying on his backe wide open
with his face vpward, the gorge vp­
ward.

Papáda de buéy, the dewlap of a bul­
locke.

Papáda de puérco, the kernel or buttons
vnder a hogs iaw.

Papádgo, m.the popedome.

* Papádo, idem. 

* Papagayádo, m.of the colour of a par­
ret or popingeay.

Papagáyo, m.a parret or popingeay.

Papahígo, the saile of the foremast. Also
the beauer of a hat to pull downe in cold
weather and set vp againe, as one li­
steth.

* Papáigo, or Papáygo, the forecourse
of a saile neare the middle next about
the bonnet. Also the beauer of a hat for
cold weather.

Papál, pertaining to the pope.

Papár, to gorge vp, to fill the gorge.

* Paparesólla, m.a hobgoblin, robin good
fellow or such like, wherwith they feare
children.

* Páparo, a clowne, a rusticall fellow.

Papél, m.paper.

* Papél grandáso, royall paper.

* Papél de stráça, browne paper.

* Papelíco, small paper.

Papelón, m.a paper to put comfits in.

Papéra, f. the swelling in the cheekes.

Paperóte, vide Papiróte. 

* Papílla, pap for children.

* Papiróte, m.a fillip.

Pápo, m.the throte, the gorge.

Papón, m.a kinde of Melon, a great
large throte, a great eater.

* Papoúlla, f. wilde poppie, cornerose.

Papúdo, m.one with a great throat.

Pár, a paire, a couple, a yoake.

* Pár, a Par de úna cósa, iust, euen
with any thing.

Pára, to, for.

* Para que, for that.

Pára con, toward.

* Pára bién, let it be for his good, much
good may it doe him.

* Parábola, a parable, a similitude, re­
semblance or comparison.

* Paráda, f. a staying or stopping. Also a
standing, or staying place where hunters
staie for to shoote at a Deere, &c.

* Para dár, id est Paradár, to giue.

* Paradéro, m.a staying place, a stoppe,
the end whereat we stay.

Paradíllas, staies, stops, delaies.

Parádo, m.staied, letted, stopped.

Párafo, m.a paragrafe, whatsoeuer is
comprehended in one sentence.

* Paragón, vide Parángon. 

* Paragráfa, a marke in the margent.

* Paragráfo, a paragrafe, a parafe,
whatsoeuer is contained in one sen­
tence.

Paráje, ouer against.

* Paralítico, m.one troubled with the
palsey.

* Paralogísmo, a deceitfull conclusion, or
captious reasoning, or arguing.

Paramentádo, m.hanged, trapped.

Paramentár, to hang with tapistrie.





* Paraménto, vide Paraméntos. 

Paraméntos, hangings for a chamber,
curtaines, coparisons, trappings for a
horse.

* Paramiéntes, marke well, obserue and
take heede well.

Páramo, m.a desart, a downe, a plaine
countrey not inhabited.

* Parangón, or Parágon, an equall, a fit
man to match him, one comparable
with.

* Parangonár, to compare, to equall, to
conferre togither.

* Parapéto, m.battlements of a wall, to
defend from small shot, and which sha­
doweth the souldiers from the sight &
anniance of the enimie, a parapet or
wall brest high. Also a brestplate or
defence for the brest. Also a kinde of
bulwarke and defence.

* Paraphrasís, f. an exposition of one and
the same thing by other words.

Parár, to stop, to staie, to rest, to ende, to
be at a non plus, to pause.

Parár miéntes, to marke, to looke vnto.

* Parár, a kinde of play.

* Paraýso, paradice, a place of pleasure.

* Parcas, f. the destinies of life, Clotho,
Lachesis, and Atropos.

* Párche, a patch, or peece set vpon any
thing.

* Párchie, vide Párche. 

Parciál, partiall, that affecteth one more
than another.

* Parcialidád, f. partialitie, leaning to
one side more than to another.

Parcionóso, m.a partaker, a partner.

* Párco, a parke or warren.

* Párda, a grey colour.

* Pardál, or Gorríon, m.a sparrow.

* Pardél, equall with one, iust euen a­
gainst one.

* Pardiez, a manner of swearing, as it
were by ten, as the ten commandements.

* Pardísco, m.somewhat grayish or du­
skie colour.

Pardillo, vide Pardísco. 

Párdo, or Pardíllo, gray of colour.

Párdo, m.a leopard.

Páres, as dóze Páres, equals, matches,
such as bee like the twelue Peeres of
Fraunce.

Pareádo, coupled, fitted, made equall.

Parecér, yo Parésco, vide Parescér, to
seeme, to be like, to appeere.

* Parecér, a substantiue, as mi Parecér,
tu Parecér, su Parecér, opinion,
iudgement, aduise, my opinion, thy opi­
nion, his opinion or iudgement.

* Parecído, m.seeming like, appearing.

* Parecióme bien, I thinke well, it see­
med well to me.

Paréd, f. a wall of a house.

* Paréd de çárço, or de emprénta, a
wall of hurdles.

* Paréd y médio, onely a wall betweene,
the next wall to.

* Paredádo, m.walled as a house.

Paredón, m.a wall.

Parejaménte, equally, alike.

Paréjas, as Bevér a paréjas, to drinke
hand to hand, euery man alike.

Paréjo, equall, euen.

Parejúra, f. equalitie.

Parentéla, f. kinred, consanguinitie, affi­
nitie.

* Parentéro, m.a friend, or of kinred.

Parentésco, m.kinred.

* Parentesí, a parenthesis, or interposition
of words within a sentence, or a clause
comprehended within an other sen­
tence, which may be left out, and yet
the sence perfect.

Páres euen, paires.

Páres de mugér, the secondine or after­
birth.

* Parescér, yo Parésco, or yo Parézco,
to seeme, to appeere, to be likely.

* Parescér, or Parecér, Subst. opinion,
aduise, iudgement.

* Parescído, or Parecído, appeared, see­
med.

* Parézca, or Parézco, or Parésco, vi­
de Parescér. 

Pargamíno, m.parchment.

* Paría, an Iland from whence Marble is
brought.

Párias, tribute that one king payeth after
he hath beene taken by another king.


* Pariáda, a parricide, a murtherer of his
father, mother, or neere kinred. Also he
that killeth his equall, he that witting­
ly and willingly hath slaine a freeman:
any heynous murtherer.

Parída, a woman deliuered of childe, or a
woman lying in childbed.

* Paridád, f. equality, euennes.

* Pariénta, f. a kinswoman.

Pariénte, a kinsman, an allie.

* Pariente consagrado, a godfather.

Parietería yérua, f. an herbe called Pel­
litorie.

Parición, vide Párta. 

* Parilla, f. a gridiron.

* Parizión, vide Párto. 

Parír, to bring foorth yoong.

Párla, or Parlería, speech, prating, prat­
ling.

Parlamentár, to parley or speake togi­
ther of graue matters.

Parlaménto, m.speech, a parley, a confe­
rence.

Parlár, to speake.

* Parleria, or Párla, f. pratling, prating.

Parléro, m.a talker, a pratler, a prating
fellow.

* Parlético, vide Paralético. 

* Parmesáno, m.a cheese of Parma in
Italy. Also a man borne in Parma.

* Paróchia, f. a parish.

* Parochiáno, m.a parishioner.

* Parocísmo, the fit of an ague, the com­
ming againe of an ague.

* Paróla, f. a speech, a woord, a saying.

* Parópa, f. a kinde of serpent.

* Paroxísmo, m.a kinde of disease that
commeth on one like a vehement sha­
king ague.

Parpadeár, to twinkle the eies.

Parpádo de ójo, m.the eie lid.

Parpúja, f. an herbe good for sallets.

Párra, f. a vine.

* Parral, the whole raile whereupon the
vine runneth.

* Párras, vines that spred and growe to
a stemme.

Parrilla, f. a gridiron.

Parróchia, or Paróchia, a parish.

Parrochiáno, or Parochiáno, m.a pa­
rishioner.

* Parsemáno, vide Passamáno, lace.

Párte, f. part, some.

Partéra, f. a midwife.

Parteria, f. a midwiues skill.

* Partezilla, f. a little part, a small part.

* Participación, f. taking part.

Participár, to take part.

Partícipe, a partaker.

* Participio, a participle.

Particulár, particular, seuerall.

* Particularidád, f. seueralnesse.

Particularménte, particularly, seue­
rally.

Partída, f. a departing, a conditino, a vo­
lume of a booke, a part or parcell.

* léyes de Partida, lawes that king A­
lonso of Spaine made and diuided into
seuen parts.

Partída, as en tóda ésta partída, in all
this coast or region.

Partidaménte, by parts.

Partído, m.departed, diuided, gone.

Partído, m.a condition, wages, salarie, re­
ward for seruice done.

Partidór, m.a diuider or partner. Also the
diuisor in arithmeticke. Also a dealer
or one that dealeth the cardes.

* Partidór de las náypes, the dealer at
cardes.

* Partíja, f. a part of any thing diuided
to be distributed euery one his part.

Partimiénto, m.parting, diuision.

Partír, to diuide, to seuer, to depart, to goe
away.

Párto, m.a birth.

* estár de Párto, to be readie to be deli­
uered of childe birth.

* Pasadízo, or Passadízo, a place to
passe from one place to another, as a





gallerie, a cloister, or such like.

* Pasádo, vide Passádo, passed, striken
through.

* Pasáje, passage, transporting.

* Pasár, vide Passár. 

* Pasatiémpo, vide Passatiémpo, pas­
time.

* Pascér, or Pacér, to feede, to eate, to
graze, to nourish.

* Pascido, vide Pacído. 

Páscua, f. a festiuall time, Easter.

* Páscua de Navidád, Christmas.

* Páscua florída, Easter.

* Páscua del Espíritu sánto, Whitson­
tide.

* Páscua de Pentecóste, idem. 

Pascuál, belonging to Easter.

Pasmádo, m.swouning, in a swoune.

* Pasmadúra, f. a swouning.

Pasmárse, to be in a swoune.

Pásmo, a disease benumming the bodie, a
traunce or swoune.

* Pasmóse, he fell into a swoune or trance.

* Páso, vide Pásso. 

* Pásqua, vide Páscua. 

* Pásqua de Navidád, vide Páscua de
Navidád. 

* Pásqua florída, Easter.

* Pásqua del Espíritu sánto, Whitson­
tide.

Pasquínes, m.libels in defamation of
men.

* Pasquíno, a statue or image in Rome,
vpon whom all libels, detractions, rai­
lings, and satyricall inuectiues are fa­
thered.

Pássa, f. a raisin.

* Pássa de medído, more then halfe.

Pássa, as juégo de Pássa, iuglers playing
passe and repasse.

Passáda, f. a pace.

Passadéra, f. a passage.

Passadízo, a place to passe along, as a
gallerie cloister, or such like.

Passádo, m.passed.

* Passádo de un arcabuzázo, shot
through with a harguebus.

Passadór, m.a quarrell of a crossebowe.

Passáge, or Passáje, m.passage, transpor­
ting.

Passagéro, or Passajéro, a passenger, one
that carrieth ouer.

* Passáje, or Passáge, passage, transpor­
ting.

* Passajéro, or Passagéro, a passenger.

* Passállas, Passállos, id est Passár las,
Passár los, to passe them, to passe
those.

Passamáno, m.lace.

Passamáno de óro, a broad gold lace.

* Passamáno de séda, any kinde of silke
lace.

Passamiénto de muérte, the point of
death.

* Passamúro, m.a peece of ordinance cal­
led a sling.

* Passánte, one that passeth or goeth by.
Also at Primero at cardes they call
him that hath aboue 60. Passante.

* Passapórto, a pasport.

Passár, to pass ouer sea, to passe by, to
strike through, to make grapes drie.

* Passár por el pensamiénto, to enter
into his thought.

* Passár por la memória, to come into
his remembrance.

* Passár a un hómbre de párte a párte, 
to run a man quite thorow.

* Passár a nádo, to swim ouer.

* no es de Passár éntre Renglónes, it
is not to be ouerslipt or let vnwritten.

* Pássas, f. raisons.

Passatiémpo, pastime, sport.

Passeadéro, m.a walke, a walking place.

* Passeadízo, vide Passadízo, a gal­
lerie.

Passeadór, m.a walking place, a walke, or
one that walketh much.

* Passeándose, walking.

Passeár, to walke.

Passéo, m.a walking place or a walking
that one maketh.

Passión, f. passion, griefe.

* Passionádo, or Enférmo, grieued, sicke.

* Passívo, passiue, passiuely, importing
passion, that which signifieth or causeth
passion, trouble or griefe.

Pásso, m.a step, a pace in going or stri­
ding, the measure of two foote and a
halfe.

* Pásso ante Pásso, one step now another
anon, soft and faire.

* Pásso de ásino, the herbe called horse­
foote.

Pásta, f. paste.

Pastél, m.a little pie made of smal meate.
Also an herbe with which they die a
blew colour, called woade.

* Pasteléra, f. a woman that maketh pies
or pastes.

* Pastelería, f. the pastrie, a pie- house.

Pasteléro, m.a man that maketh pies or
pasties.

* Pastíllas, kindes of mixtures or pastes
for to perfume withall.

Pásto, m.pasture, feeding, foode.

Pastór, m.a shepherd, a heardsman.

Pastóra, f. a shepherdesse, a woman that
keepeth sheepe.

* Pastorál, rurall, pastorall, pertaining to
swaines or shepherds.

* Pastorcíco, m.a little shepherd, a sillie
swaine.

Pastorcíllo, a little shepherd, a boy that
keepeth sheepe.

Pastoríl, belonging to a shepherd.

Páta, f. a goose.

Páta, a pawe or foote, a hoofe, the sole of
the foote.

Páta de ósso, the pawe of a Beare.

* Pátas apartádas, clouen footed.

Patáche, m.a pinnasse, a small swift ship.

* Patáco, a clownish fellow, a pesant.

Patáda, a steppe.

* Patáge, or Patáje, a pinnasse, a swift
ship.

* Patáje, or Patáge, idem. 

* Patán, or Páparo, m.a clowne, a pe­
sant.

* Patáta, f. Potatoe rootes.

* Patatál, a place where Potatoes growe.

* Patatéro, m.one that eateth Potatoes,
or one that selleth Potatoe rootes.

* Pateádo, trampled on with the feete.

Pateár, to make a noise with the feete, to
bargaine, to trample or tread vnder­
foote.

Paténa, f. a little dish.

Paténte, open, letters patients.

Paternál, fatherly.

Patérno, m.of or pertaining to a father,
fatherly.

Patíco, m.a goseling.

Patihendído, clouen footed.

Patílla, f. a little fote, a little goose.

* Patín, a goseling: Also the foote of the
stocking.

Patín de la cása, a square court.

* Patíno, a patten.

Pátio, m.a square court by a house, a
vaulted place, a penthouse, a place to
saue raine water in.

Patituérto, m.club-footed.

Páto, m. a gander, a drake.

Páto, Pácto, or Partído, a bargaine, a
couenant.

* Patócha, vide Patocháda. 

* Patocháda, f. foolerie, follie.

Patráñas, f. olde fables or stories, olde
wiues tales, leafings, lies.

Pátria, f. a mans owne countrey, or natu­
rall soile, where he was borne.

Patriárca, a patriarch, a chiefe bishop, a
religious father.

Patriárcha, idem. 

Patrício, m.a senators sonne of Rome.

Patrimoniál beneficio, a benefice im­
propriate.

Patrimoniál, belonging to the patrimo­
nie or inheritance of his father or aun­
cestors.

Património, inheritance or goods that
come by the father.

* Pátrio, m.of ones countrey.

Patronázgo, a patronship to giue bene­
fices or other ecclesiasticall promoti­
ons.

* Patronádgo reál, a princes preroga­





tiue to giue bishoprikes, abbies, &c.

Patrón, a pilot of a ship, a patron or de­
fender, a patterne.

* Páva, f. a Peahen.

* Pavána, or Pabána, a daunce called a
pauin, playing.

* Pavelión, a butterflie. Also vide Pa­
vellón.

Pavellón, m.a tent for to lodge in, in the
fielde: a canapie, a sheete, a blanket to
hang about the bed.

Pavés, or Escúdo, m.a shield, a target,
a bucklar.

Pavésa, f. the snuffe of a candle when it
is dead: also dead sparks of fire.

Pavesáda, f. a battell of targettiers, or a
battell at sea with some defence, that
they be not seene of their enimie.

* Pavesón, vide Pavés. 

* Pávido, timorous, fearefull.

Pavílo, the snuffe of a candle, the weeke of
the candle.

Pavimiénto, m.a pauement.

Pavióta, f. a sea foule called a gull.

* Pávo, Páva, or Pavón, a peacocke, a
peahen.

Pávo, a peacocke.

Pávo reál, the kingly peacocke, or chiefe
large and great peacocke with fairer
plumes than the other.

Pavón, vide Pávo. 

Pavonádo, made of a sanguine colour, as
they vse to sangnine sword hilts.

Pavoneár, to sanguine, to vernish.

Pavór, m.feare, dread.

Pavorosaménte, fearefully, timorous­
lie.

Pavoróso, m.fearefull, timorous.

* Paupérimo, m.most poore.

* Paurosaménte, vide Pavorosamén­
te. 

* Pauróso, vide Pavoróso. 

Páusa, f. a pause, a stop, a stay, a rest.

* Pausáda, f. a pausing, resting, stopping,
staying, taking leysure, tarying vpon
some thing.

* Pausadaménte, by pauses, by stops, by
stayes, resting or staying now and then.

Pausár, to pause, to stop, to stay, to rest.

* Páxa, f. vide Pája, straw.

Paxaréro, m.a birder, a catcher of birds.

* Paxaréto, m.a little birde.

* Paxaréta yérva, a certaine herbe.

* Paxaríco, m. a little bird.

Paxaríllo, m. a little birde.

Paxarítos, little birds, or such toies made
or bread, &c. for children to play with.

Páxaro, a bird.

* Páya, as Páya de méqua, the sweete
rush.

* Páya de camélos, idem. 

* Páyla, a paile, a bucket.

* Paýs, or País, m.a countrey.

* Paýs báxo, the low countries.

* Paysáno, vide Aldeáno, a countrey­
man.

Páz, f. peace.

* Pázo, vide Pásso. 


P E
Peáge, or Peáje, toll money, custome, rent,
renenues.

* Peagéro, or Peajéro, a customer, a toll
gatherer.

* Peáje, vide Peáge. 

* Peajéro, vide Peagéro. 

Peál, a woollen socke, a socke to weare on
the foote.

* Peapá, the spelling of letters, as Pe, a,
Pa.

* Pebétes, m.a kinde of small perfume.

Pebrádo, m.peppered.

Pébre, vide Pimiénto, m.Pepper.

* Pébre, or Pimiénto de Hespána, Spa­
nish pepper, Pepperwoort, Dittander.

Péca, f. a specke or spot on the face, a pim­
ple on the face.

Pecádo, m.sinne, offence, any thing done
amisse.

Pecadór, m.a sinner, an offender, one
that doth amisse, a wicked or lewd fellow

* Pecadorcíta, a woman sinner, or some­
what a sinner, or a small sinner.

* Pecadoríco, m.a man sinner, or a smal
sinner, or somewhat a sinner.

Pecár, Præs. yo Péco, 1. Præt. yo Pe­
qué, to sinne, to offend, to do amisse.

Péce, m.fish.

* Péces en escabéche, fish in pickle, or
in sowsing drinke.

* Pecezíco, m.a little fish.

Pécha, f. tribute, taxe, subsidie, payment
of mony.

* Pechár, to pay taxe or subsidy.

Pechéro, m.he that paieth tribute, taxe,
or subsidie.

Pécho, m.the breast. Also the dugge of a
woman.

* Pécho, tribute, or taske.

Pechúga, f. the breast of a bird.

Pechugár, Præs. yo Pechúgo, 1. Præt. 
yo Pechugué, to set the breast, against
any thing with all his force and
strength, to withstand or resist with the
breast.

* Pechugue, vide Pechugár. 

Pechuguéra, the whole bulke of the
breast, a paine of the breaste.

* Pecigueról, m.a fishmonger.

Pecilgár, Præs. yo Pecílgo, 1. Præt. yo
Pecilgué, to pinche, to pluck by the
eares, &c.

Pecílgo, m.a pinche.

* Pecilgue, vide Pecilgár. 

Pecína, f. a fishe poole.

* Probática Pecína, the poole that cured
the diseased that first coulde get in af­
ter the angel had stirred the water.

* Péco, m.the breast bone.

* Peçoláda, the thrumme left of cloath
weauing.

Peçón, a nipple, a small stalke or stem, a
stalk, wheron the fruit or leafe groweth.

Peçón de la téta, the teat or nipple or a
dug.

Pecóso, m.full of spots.

* Pedaceria, f. a patch or peece of any
thing, full of peeces.

Pedacico, m.a little peece.

* Pedacíto, m.a little patch or peece, a
thong of leather.

Pedáço, m.a peece, a patch, a gobbet, a
shiue.

* Pedaçuélo, a little peece, a small patch,
a morsell.

* Pedazíco, vide Pedacíco. 

* Pedazíto, or Pedacíto, idem. 

* Pedazuélo, vide Pedaçuélo. 

Pedernál, a flint stone.

Pedestál, the base or foote of a pillar, the
ground-worke or foundation to support
any thing, a plate or trencher layde vn­
der a dish on the table.

Pedído, m.required, requested, asked, de­
maunded.

* Pedidór, m.an asker, one that reque­
steth or demandeth any thing.

Pediguéño, one that demaundeth often
and much, wanton, froward, an earnest
suter or wooer.

Pedimiénto, m.asking, request, demaun­
ding.

Pedír, yo Pído, to aske, to request, to de­
maund, to require.

Pédo, m.a fart.

Pedócio, vide Pedórro. 

Pedórro, m.one that farteth.

Pedráda, f. a blow with a stone.

* Pedrádo, m.stoned, beaten with stones.

* Pedrecíca, vide Pedrezíca, a little
stone.

* Pedrecíta, vide Pedrezíta, idem. 

* Pedrega, vide Pedregál. 

Pedregál, a stonie place.

Pedregóso, m.stonie, full of stones.

* Pedreñál, m.a petronell, a large pistoll
vsed in warre.

Pedréra, f. a quarrie whence stones are digged.

Pedréro, a murthering peece vsed in
warres, to shoote chaine shot or stones
from.

* Pedresuéla, vide Pedrezuéla. 

* Pedrezíca, f. a little stone.

Pedrezíta, idem. 

* Pedrezuéla, f. idem. 





* Pedríl, a place where much stone is.

Pedrísco, or Granízo, great haile.

Péer, to fart.

Péga, vide Picáça, a birde called a Pie.

* Pegadíso, or Pegadízo, sticking to, or
cleauing to, sticking or cleauing fast
to.

* Pegádo, pitched with pitch, or stucke to
with other things.

Pegadúra, f. soldering, cleauing to, glu­
ing.

Pegajóso, sticking, cleauing to, gluing.

Pegajóso mal. an infectious disease, a
disease that sticketh fast to one.

Pegamiénto, m.sticking, cleauing fast
to, &c. pitching with pitch.

Pegár, Præs. yo Pégo, 1. Præt. yo Pe­
gué, to pitch with pitch, to sticke, to
cleaue to, to cling vnto, to solder, to
kerne as fruite do, to infect, to glue.

* Pegár fuégo, to set on fire, to set fire to.

* Pégno, m.a pledge, a gage, a pawne.
Also a suretie, baile, or assurance.

Pegónes para véllo, round bals to pull
off the haire.

* Pegue, vide Pegár. 

† Pegujál, a stock of goods or of cattell, or
substance giuen to a mans sonne or ser­
uant to occupie for themselues, or goods
gotten by ones owne labour or indu­
strie.

* Peíxe voadór, or voladór, a fish cal­
led a sea swallow.

Peládo, m.pilled, bald.

Peladór, m.one that pilleth, maketh bald,
or bare.

Peladúra, f. pilling.

† Pelámbre, m.the pilling of the chin or
beard, pilling of hides.

† Pelambréra, f. a tanners or glouers
lime pit, wherein skins are laid to make
the haire come off.

Pelár, to pill, to make bald, to make bare.

* Peláyo, a proper name.

* Peláyre, m.one that teazeth cloath with
cardes of teazell, a cloathsworker, also
a fuller.

Peléa, f. fight, battle, skirmish.

Peleadór, a fighter, a warrier.

Peleár, to fight, to skirmish, to striue.

Pelécano, vide Pelicano, m.a pellicane,
a fowle that is saide to feede hir yoong
ones with her bloude, some saie a
shouelar.

Pelechár el áve, to plucke off the fea­
thers.

* Pelér, vide Pelár. 

Pelícano, vide Pelécano. 

* Pelicráneo, the skin ouer the skull.

Peligrár, to be in perill, or in danger.

* Pelígro, m.perrill or danger.

Peligrosaménte, dangerously.

Peligróso, dangerous, perilous.

Pelíllo, m.a little haire.

* Peliquéro, or Pelliquéro, a skinner, a
tanner, a glouer, a leather dresser, a
leather seller.

Pelitre, an herbe called wilde Pelitorie,
pelitorie of Spaine.

Pélla, a ball, a pellet, a bullet.

* Pelláda, f. a throwing snowbals or such
like.

* Pélle, vide Pélla. 

* Pellegería, vide Pellejería. 

* Pellegéro, vide Pellejéro. 

* Pelléja, a skin, a hide.

* Pellejería, the place where skinnes or
hides be solde, store of skins.

Pellejéro, or Pellizéro, a skinner, a tan­
ner, a glouer, a leather dresser, a lea­
ther seller.

Pelléjo, a skin, a hide.

* Pelletería, vide Pellejería. 

Pelliço, or Pellíco, a leather ierkin, a
quip, a taunt.

Pellíco, idem. 

Pelliscár, Præs. yo Pellísco, 1. Præt. yo
Pellisqué, to pinch.

* Pellíscos, pinches.

* Pellísque, vide Pelliscár. 

* Pellizéro, vide Pellejéro. 

* Pellóte, vide Pelliquéro. 

Pélo, m.haire, the haire of the beard,
horse haire, or mules haire.

* Pélo málo, bad, or naughtie haire, as
that of beastes when they cast their old
coates or haires, to haue newe haire,
euill estate, poore fortune, base and ab­
iect condition.

* Pélo de camélo, grograine.

* Pélo arríba, against haire.

Pélo abáxo, downe the haire.

Pelón, m.a pild palterie fellow, a poore
wretch.

Pelóso, hairie, full of haire.

Pelóta, f. a pellet, a ball, a bullet to shoote
in a gun with.

Pelóta, a bottome of yarne.

Pelóta, or ovílla de Hílo, a ball of
yarne.

* Pelóta, as jugár a la Pelóta, to plaie
at tennys.

* Pelotílla, f. a little pellet, ball, bullet, or
little bottome of yarne.

Péltre, m.pewter.

Peltréchos, vide Pertréchos, furni­
ture, prouision.

* Pelúdo, m.hairie, rough.

Péna, f. paine, punishment, a fine, or
amercement.

* aPénas, hardly, with much adoe.

Péña, or Penásco, a rocke.

Penácho, m.the crest of the helmet, a
great plume of feathers.

* Penádo, m.pained, greeued.

Penál, penall, subiect to punishment, or to
forfeyture.

Penár, to punish, to be punished, to fine, or
amerce.

* Peñascál, a place where manie rockes
are.

* yértos Peñáscos, steepe rockes.

Penáscola, an iland, a little rocke.

* Peñascóso, rockie, full of rockes.

* Peñátas, foules on rockes.

* Penátes, idols worshipped of the hea­
then, calling them their houshold gods.

Pénca, f. the stalke of a lettuce or cole­
woort.

Pendéjo, m. haire about the priuie parts.

Pendéncia, f. a sute in lawe, a quarrell
or matter in controuersie.

* Pendencías Públicas, publike contro­
uersies or quarrels.

* Pendenciéro, m.one full of quarrels.

* Pendér, to hang, to slip, to go sloping.

* Pendido, m.hanged, going sloping.

Pendiénte, hanging, depending, sloping.

Péndola, or Péñola, a pen. Also a pain­
ters pensill.

Pendón, m.a cornet, an ensigne of horse­
men, a signe of a tauerne, a streamer of
a ship, a standerd.

Penetrár, to pearce, to enter in or tho­
rough.

* Peniscola, almost compassed with wa­
ter.

Peniténcia, f. repentance, penance.

Penitenciál, vide Peniténte. 

Peniténte, one that is penitent, one that
doth penance.

* Peñón, or Peñásco, a rocke.

* Penól, the end of a ship-yard.

* Penosaménte, painfully, greeuously.

Penóso, painfull, greeuous.

* Pensadaménte, heedfully.

Pensamiénto, m.thought, esteeming.

Pensár, yo Piénso, to thinke, to meditate,
to dresse cattell.

Pensatívo, m.pensiue, full of thought, or
of care.

Pensión, f. a pension, a pay allowed.

* Penzílla, f. vide Renzílla. 

* Peójo, vide Piójo, a louse.

Peón, m.a footeman, a pawne at chesse, a
pioner, a labourer.

Peonáda, f. a daies worke.

Peonadúra, f. working of pioners.

Peónça, or Trómpo, a top or gigge for
boyes to play with.

* Peonéro, m.a pioner that worketh vn­
der ground.

Peonia, f. an herbe called piony.

* Peonia, or Trímpo, a toppe that boyes
winde a packetbreed about, & after
throw him to the ground to set him vp.

* Peonías, medicinable herbes, so named
of Peon a famous phisitian.





* Peónza, vide Peónça. 

Peór, worse, more euill.

Peoria, f. decaying, growing worse.

Peormente, worse than before.

* Peorár, to become worse.

Pepíno, m.a cucumber.

Pepíta, f. the pip of a hen, the kernell of an
apple.

Pepitória, f. the giblets of a goose, or of
any other fowle or bird.

* Pepón, or Melón, a melon, a pumpion.

* Peque, vide Pecár. 

* Pequeñéza, f. smallnes, littlenes.

Pequeñíco, m.very little.

* Pequeñíto, m.idem. 

Pequéño, little, small.

* Pequeñuélo, very little.

* Pequiñito, vide Pequeñíto, very
little.

* Pequíto, vide Poquíto. 

Péra, f. a peare.

Perál, a peare tree.

Peráyle, or Peraýre, a fuller. Also a
clothworker.

* Perca, f. a peach.

* Percebír, yo Percíbo, to perceiue.

* Percevír, yo Percívo, idem. 

Pércha, f. a rafter of a house, a pearch or
pole to measure with, a prop of a vine.

* Percíba, Percibo, vide Percebír. 

* Percíva, Percívo, vide Percevír. 

Perdición, f. losse, destruction.

Perdída, f. losse, dammage.

* Perdidaménte, desperately.

Perdido, m.lost, destroyed, cast away.

Perdidolóso, a traitor, a trecherous fel­
low.

Perdidóso, he that hath lost, one subiect
to losses.

Perdigár, to broile partridges, to lay par­
tridges on coales.

Perdigón, m.a yoong partridge, a male
partridge.

* Perdiguáro, vide Perdiguéro. 

Perdiguéro pérro, a land spaniell.

* Perdimiénto, m.losse.

Perdíz, f. a partridge.

Perdón, m.pardon.

* Perdonádo, m.pardoned, forgiuen.

* Perdonadór, m.a forgiuer, one readie
to pardon.

Perdonánça, f. pardon, forgiuenes.

Perdonár, to forgiue, to pardon.

Perduráble, lasting, continuing.

Perdurableménte, continuallie, long la­
sting.

Perecér, yo Perésco, or Perézco, to pe­
rish, to die, to come to naught.

Perecído, or Perescído, perished, come
to naught.

Perecimiénto, or Perescimiénto, peri­
shing, death, destruction.

* † Peregíl, vide Perexíl, parsley.

Peregrinación, trauelling into strange
countries.

* Peregrináge, or Peregrináje, pilgri­
mage, going into strange countries.

Peregrinár, to go on pilgrimage, to tra­
uell into strange countries.

Peregríno, m.a pilgrim, one that trauel­
leth into strange countries.

* Peremptório, peremptorie.

Perenál, continuall.

Perenalménte, continually.

† Perexíl, or Perrexíl, parsley.

* Perexíl Macedónico, an herbe called
Alisanders.

* † Perexíl de la mar, sampier.

Peréza, f. sloth, lazines, idlenes.

* Perézca, Perézco, vide Perecér. 

Perezosaménte, slowly, idlely, slackly.

Perezóso, slothfull, idle, lazie.

* Perfectaménte, vide Perfetaménte, 
perfectly, absolutely, fully.

* Perfectión, vide Perfición. 

* Perfécto, vide Perféto. 

Perfetaménte, perfectly, fully.

Perféto, perfect.

Perfición, f. perfection.

* Perficionár, to bring to perfection.

* Perfidia, disloyaltie, treacherie, fal­
shood, against promise and trust.

* Pérfido, m.vnfaithfull, disloyall, tray­
terous.

* Perfidióso, idem. 

Perfil, drawing out of a picture.

Perfiladúra, f. the drawing out of a pic­
ture.

Perfilár, to draw a picture.

Perfumádo, perfumed.

Perfumár, to perfume, to make a sweete
smell.

* Perfuméro, m.a perfumer.

Perfúmes, m.perfumes, sweete smelles
made.

* Pérgama, the pallace or kings house of
Troy.

Pergamíno, parchment.

* Pérgolo, or Púlpito, a pulpet, a place
+for orators, or readers of lectures.

* Perícia, f. knowledge, skilfulnes.

* Períco, Perríco, or Períllo, a little
dogge, a whelpe.

* Perílla, or Perizílla, a little peare, a
little dogge.

* Períllo, vide Perizíllo, a little dogge, 
a whelpe.

* Perinóla, f. a thing of bone or woode
made for to plaie with.

* Período, m.a full point.

* Peripatético, m.or Peripathético, a
peripatetike, a philosopher that vsed to
dispute walking.

* Períto, skilfull, hauing knowledge.

Perjudicár, yo Perjudíco, 1. Præt. yo
Perjudiqué, to preiudicate, to giue
sentence before, to conceiue opinion be­
fore, to iudge hardly of before hand.

* Perjuiziál, hurtfull.

* Perjudique, vide Perjudicár. 

* Perjúra, f. forswearing, periurie.

* Perjurádo, forsworne.

* Perjurár, to forsweare.

* Perjúro, forsworne, periured. Also per­
iurie or forswearing.

Perjuyzio, m.preiudice, hurt, harde
iudgement or opinion.

* Perizílla, vide Perílla. 

* Perizillo, Perillo, or Períco, a whelp,
a little dogge.

Pérla, f. a pearle.

Perládo, or Preládo, a prelate, a chiefe
churchman, as bishop, deane, &c.

Perlático, m.sicke of the palsey.

Perlesía, f. the palsey.

* Perlíca, f. a little pearle.

Permanecér, or Permanescér, to re­
maine, to continue.

Permissión, f. sufferance.

* Permísso, m.suffered.

Permitír, to suffer, to permit.

* Permitído, m.suffered, permited,
graunted, licenced.

* Permudación, vide Permutación, f. 
change.

Permudár, to change.

Permutación, change.

Permutár, to change.

* Pernál, vide Perenál, continuall.

* Pernalménte, vide Perenalménte, 
continually.

* Perneçuéla, or Pernezuéla, f. a little
legge.

* Pernicióso, pernicious, noysome, hurt­
full, deadly, execrable.

Perníl de tocino, a gamon of bakon.

* Pérnos, m.the greatest nailes to naile
the principall timber of a ship or house.

Peró, but, yet, therefore.

Péro, m.a peare tree.

* Péro silvéstre, a wilde peare tree.

* Péro, vide Pédro, Peter.

* Perozóso, very slothfull.

Perpetuár, to continue, to make perpe­
tuall.

* Perpetuidád, f. continuance, perpetu­
itie.

Perpétuo, m.continuall, that lasteth
long.

Perpiáños, the whole stones that goe
through a wall.

* Perplexidád, f. perplexitie, doubtful­
nes, at his wits end, not knowing which
way to bend, much care and vexati­
on.

* Perpléxo, m.one perplexed or at his
wits end, intangled, in a pecke of trou­
bles, full of cares.





Perqué, m.a defamatorie libell.

Pérra, f. a bitch.

Perrázo, m.a curre dogge.

* Perríco, or Perílla, a little dogge, a
whelpe.

* Perríco de fálda, m.a little dogge for
a ladies lappe.

Perríllo, a whelpe, a little dogge.

Perríto, a little dogge, a whelpe, a pup­
pie.

Pérro, m.a dogge.

* Pérro de rástro, a bloudhound, a dogge
quicke of sent.

* Pérro pelúdo, or Velúdo, a water
spaniell.

* Pérro de muéstra, a dogge that sen­
teth out the game, and spying it shew­
eth his master, that he may with his
peece kill it.

* Pérro sabuéso, or Pérro ventór, a
hound.

Perrúno, belonging to a dogge.

Persecución, persecution, pursuing of one,
troubling of a man.

Perseguír, yo Persigo, to persecute, to
pursue.

Perseguído, m.persecuted.

Perseguimiénto, m. persecuting, pursu­
ing.

Perseueración, perseuering, continuance.

Perseueráncia, f. idem. 

Perseuerár, to continue, to abide, to per­
seuere.

Pérsego, m.a peach.

* Persíga, Persígo, vide Perseguír. 

Persíles, the laying on of colours in pain­
ting.

Persóna, f. a person.

Personál, pertayning to a person.

Personalménte, personally, himselfe in
person.

* Personéro, m.one that representeth the
person of another, ones atturney.

* Persuadído, m.perswaded.

* Persuadidór, a perswader.

Persuación, f. a perswasion.

Persuadír, to perswade.

Pertinácia, f. stubbornnesse.

Pertenecér, yo Pertenésco, or Perte­
nézco, to belong, to pertaine.

Perteneciénte, or Pertenesciénte, be­
longing, pertaining.

Pertenéncia, f. belonging, pertaining.

* Pertenescér, vide Pertenecér, yo
Pertenésco, or Pertenézco, to be­
long, to pertaine.

* Pertenézca, Pertenésco, vide Per­
tenecér. 

Pértiga, f. a pearch or pole to measure
with, a crosse beame a peece of timber
framed crosse the rafters.

Pértiga de carréta, the tonge of a
plough, the end of the plough that is
before betwixt the horses.

Pertiguéro de yglésia, the verger of the
church.

* Pertinás, vide Pertináz. 

Pertináz, stubborne, peruerse, obstinate,
vntoward.

* Pertréas, f. hard bunches or swellings in
the flesh, blaines, biles or poxe.

Pertréchos, m.furniture, prouision.

Perturbación, f. trouble, vexation, dis­
quietnes of minde.

Perturbádo, m.troubled, vexed, dis­
quieted.

Perturbár, to trouble, to bring out of
quiet.

* Pervérso, m.vntoward, ouerthwart,
froward, peruerse.

* Pervertír, to peruert, to turne to the
worse, to deale crossely.

Pervétano, or Guadapéra, a choke
peare, a choke peare tree, or a wilde
peare or wilde peare tree.

* Pervetír, vide Pervertír. 

* Perivínca, an herbe called periwinkle.

* Pés, vide Péz, pitch. Also fish.

Pesadaménte, heauily, sorrowfully.

Pesádo, m.weightie, heauie, sorrowfull.

Pesadór, m.he that weigheth.

Pesadúmbre, f. weight, griefe, displea­
sure.

* Pésame, it greeueth me.

Pesár, to weigh.

Pesár, or Péna, sorrow, greefe, repen­
tance.

* Pésca, f. fishing or catching fish.

* Pescáda Siciál, or Pescádo Siciál, a
kinde of fish.

* Pescáda, vide Merlúza, a whiting.

Pescadería, the fish market.

Pescadéro, m.a fishmonger.

* Pescadillo, m.a little fish.

Pescádo, m.fish.

Pescadór, m.a fisher.

Pescár, Præs. yo Pésco. 1. Præt. yo
Pesqué, to fish, to catch fish.

* Pescár con caña, or Pescár con vá­
ra, to angle, to catch fish with an angle
rod.

* Pésces polídos, fishes smooth without
skales.

Pescoçádo, a buffet on the necke.

Pescoçón, m.a blow on the necke.

Pescúda, f. a question, a demaund.

Pescudár, to search, to sift out a mat­
ter.

Pescuéço, m.the necke.

* Pescuézo, idem. 

* Pése, vide Péce. 

Pesébre, m.a manger.

Pesebréra, the place or ranke of man­
gers.

* Pesia, vide Peñásco. 

Péso, m.weight.

* Péso de pláta, eight rials Spanish,
fower shillings English.

* Péso de óro, sixteene rials Spanish,
eight shillings English.

* contraPéso, a counterpoise.

* Pespuntádo, m.stitched, sowed up.

* Pespuntár, to stitch, to sow vp, that the
stitches may appeare, as they stitch
nightcaps.

* Pespúnte, m.a stitch, a sowing vp.

* Pesque, vide Pescár. 

Pesquéra, f. a fishing place.

Pesquería, or Pesquéra, idem. 

Pesquísa, f. search, examining.

Pesquisár, vide Pescudár, to search, to
examine.

Pesquisidór, a searcher, an examiner, an
inquisitor.

* Pessádo, weighed.

* Pessár, to weigh.

Pestañas, f. the haire on the eie-browes
Also the welts of a garment.

* Péste, f. the pestilence, the plague.

* Pestífero, pestilent, pestiferous, plaguie,
contagious.

* † Pestíllo, a pestle to stampe with.

Pestiléncia, f. pestilence, called the
Plague.

Pestilenciál, belonging to the pestilence.

Pestíllo, m.a doore-bar.

* Pestoréjo, m.the forepart of the head.

Pestoréjo de puérco, a hogs cheeke.

Pesúña, f. a disease of horses called the
fashions.

Petáca, f. a basket, a hamper.

Petáfio, m.an Epitaph to set on a dead
mans graue, in setting forth his praises.

* Petár, a kinde of artillerie to batter,
lately inuented.

Petición, f. a request, a petition.

* Péto, m.a breast-plate.

* Péto volánte, a light breast-plate.

* Petrál, a poitrall for a horse breast.

Petríl, a raile to leane the breast on, as be­
fore some colledges, and before the Innes
of court.

* Petrína, f. a girdle: also vsed for the
girding place about the middle.

* Petróleo, a kinde of slimie and chalkie
ground.

Péxe, the glue of a certaine kinde of fish.

* Péxego, a peach.

* Pexiguéra yérva, water pepper.

Peynádo, combed, carded.

Peynádo cérro, a plaine, steepe hill with­
out trees or bushes.

* Peynadór, m.a comber, a carder of
wooll, a dresser of flaxe, haire, or such
like.

Peynár, to combe, to carde wooll.

Péyne, m.a combe.

Péyne, as Peýne muy sobre Peýne,
briefely.





* Peynéro, a combe maker.

Péz, pitch, a fish.

* Pezón de latéta, the teate of the dug,
the nipple of the dugge.

* Pezpica, a wagtaile.

Pezpita, f. a wagtaile.

* Pezpitalo, a birde called a wagtaile.


P H
* Phágro, a sea Breame.

* Phalánge, a squadron or troup of 8000
men, with which the Persians were
woont to warre.

* Phantásma, f. a vaine vision, a false
imagination.

* Pharmáce, a medicine, a remedie. Also
that part of phisicke that cureth with
drugge.

* Pharól, Faról, or Falól, the great lant­
horne on the poupe or sterne of the
shippe.

* Phebéo, m.pertaining to Pherbus.

* Phébo, m.Apollo, the sunne.

* Philosotar, Philosophár, vide Filo­
sofár, to play the philosopher, to reason
skilfully of morall and naturall mat­
ters.

* Philosophia, Philosofia, vide Filoso­
fia, f. philosophie, skill of morall and
naturall causes.

* Philosófo, Philosópho, vide Filóso­
fo, a philosopher, one learend in morall
and naturall matters.

* Phisíca, vide Fisica. 

* Phisico, vide Fisico. 

* Phisiognomia, vide Fisiognomia. 


P I
Piadosaménte, pittifully.

Piadóso, pittifull.

Piár, to peepe as a chicken doth.

Piára, f. a flocke, a heard.

* Pibétes, vide Pivétes. 

Pica, a pike for a souldier.

* Pica de niño, a childes pricke.

Picáça, or Picáza, f. a birde called a
Pie.

* Picáda, f. a peck that a bird or foule
giueth with the beake.

Picadillo, m.a kind of broath or pottage.

Picádo, m.a pricke, a pecking, mocked,
galled, prouoked, vrged.

Picadúra, f. pricking, galling, a prouo­
king, vrging.

Picaño, m.a lewd fellow, a base fellow.

* Picapléytos, a wrangler, a pettifoggar
at law.

Picár, to picke or pecke, to bite as a fish
doth at a baite, to stinge as a Bee or
such like. Also to pricke or picke as
with a pin or needle.

* Picárse de éllo, to chafe or grieue at it.

* Picarél, a fish almost like a pearch.

* Picaro, m.a simple base fellowe, a poore
labourer, a porter.

Piçártas, peeble stones.

* Picas sécas, with onely pikes without
their corslets on.

Picaviénto, a contrarie winde.

* Picáza, or Picáça, a bird called a pie.

* Pícha, vide Picáça. 

* Pichél, a pot to drinke in.

* Pichelléte, a little pewter pot to drinke
in.

* Pichelillo, vide Pichelléte. 

* Pichón, m.a pigeon.

Pico, the beake or bill of a bird, a hand­
spike, a mattocke, a pike of yron, the
spoute to powre out at, a wounde or
hurt.

Píco de ciguéña, an herbe called Storks­
bill.

* Pico de arróz, a certaine measure of
Rice.

* Pico de járro, the spoute of a pot.

* Píco de óro, a certaine herbe.

Picóta, f. a pillorie.

Picóte, a sackcloth, a souldiers cloake or
cassocke.

* Pida, vide Pedír. 

* Pide, vide Pedír. 

* Pido, vide Pedír. 

Pie, m.a foote.

* Pie de béstia, the hinder foote of a
beast, the Spaniard called the fore­
feete of beasts Mános, id est, hands:
and the hinder feete Pies, id est, feet.

Pie de hébre, a Hares foote, an herbe so
called.

Pie de áñade, an herbe, called Duckes­
foote.

Piéca, f. a peece, a white, a space.

* Piéça, as Estár vna buéna piéça re­
coordándo, to be a pretie while in re­
membring.

* Pieçeçuéla, f. a little peece.

Piedad, f. pitie, mercie.

Piédra, f. a stone.

* Piédra ymán, or Imán, the Load­
stone.

* Piédra poméz, a Pumice-stone.

* Piédra de léche, a stone good for wo­
mens milke.

† Piédra çúfre, Brimstone.

Píedra tóque, the touchstone.

Píedra de mugér, a stone good for wo­
mens milke.

* Piedrecilla, or Piedrezílla, a small
stone.

* Piédra de aguzár, a whet-stone.

Píel, or Pelléja, a skin.

* Piél curtida, tanned leather, leather
curried.

Piélago, m.the broad sea, the maine sea.

* † Pielgo de ódre, a bottle or vessell
to carie wine, made of a beasts skin the
haire inward.

* Piéña, vide Péña. 

* Pie négro, blacke foote.

* Piensa, Piense, Piénso, vide Pensár. 

* Piérda, Piérde, Piérdo, vide Per­
dér. 

Piérna, f. a leg.

* dárse de Piérnas, to run away.

* Piértega herrada, the plough share or
culter.

* Pies de béstias, the hinder feete of
beasts: the Spaniard calleth alwaies the
forefeete of beastes Mános, hands, and
the hinder feete Pies.

Piésgo, the nose of a bottle.

* Piéza, vide Piéça. 

* Pifano, or Pifaro, a fife or flute to
play on.

† Pifaro, vide Pifano. 

* † Pigáça, vide Picaça, f. a bird called
a pie.

Piguélas, or Pihuélas, haukes iesses.

Pihuélas, vide Piguélas. 

* Piissimo, m.most holy, most godly, most
religious.

Pila, f. a font in a church, a water pot, a
pot of water.

Pilár, m.a piller.

* Pilár de água, a great cesterne of stone
to receiue water as it runneth from the
house.

* Piláge, or Pilláge, vide Piláje, pillage,
spoile.

Piláje, Piláge, or Pilláje, idem. 

* Pilatéro, m.one that dresseth or ordereth
the cloth in the fulling mill.

Pildora, f. a pill to purge.

* Píleo, m.a cap.

Pilica, a little pot, a little font.

* Pilo, m.a targettier his dart among the
Romanes.

Pilón, m.a morter, a little trough.

Pilóto, m.a pilot of a ship.

Pimiénta, f. pepper.

Pimpinéla, f. an herbe called Pimper­
nell.

Pimpóllo, m.a sprout that groweth out of
the sides or rootes of trees called a suc­
ker.

Píña, f. the vttermost shell of a Pine
nut.

* Pináça, f. a pinnasse, a small swift ship.

* Pináculo, m.a pinnacle of a tower or
church.

Pinál, or Pinár, a groue of Pines.

Pinár, or Pinál, a groue of Pines.

Pinariégo, belonging to the Pine.

* Pinças, f. pincers.

Pinguéla, f. vide Piguélas. 

Pinjádo, a Bardasso: a Ganimade, one
that suffereth himselfe to be buggered,





vide Bardáxo.

Pinijántes, spangles.

Piníllo, m.an herbe called groundpine.

Piníllo oloróso, wilde Dill.

Piñón, m.the kernell of a pine nut.

Píno, m.a pine tree.

* Píno négro, the pitch tree.

* Pinón, m.vide Piñón. 

Pinsápo, m.a kinde of pine.

Pínta, f. a spot.

* Pintacilgo, m.a birde called a Lin­
net.

Pintádo, m.painted.

Pintár, to paint.

* Píntas, f. spots.

* Pintazílgo, vide Pintacílgo. 

Pintór, m.a painter.

Pintúra, f. painting.

* Pinzas, vide Pinças. 

Pinzél, m.a painters pensill.

* Pío, m.godly.

Piogéra, or Piojéra, f. a place where lice
breed.

* Piogénto, vide Piojénto. 

* Piojénta yérua, stauisagre, or lowse
bane.

Piojénto, Piogénto, or Piojóso, lowsie,
full of lice.

† Piójo, m.a louse.

† Piojóso, or Piojénto, full of lice.

Pípa, f. a vessell called a pipe.

* Píque, m.a fishe called a pike.

* Pique, vide Picár. 

* Piquéro, m.a pikeman, a souldiar.

* Pirámide, f. a pyramid or great speere,
great below and sharpe in the top, a
spire of a steeple.

* Piráta, a robber at sea, a pyrate.

* Pirétra, an herbe called Pellitorie.

* Pirlitéro, m.the hawthorne bush, or
Barberie bush.

Pisáda, f. a step, a footestep, a path.

* Pisádo, m.troden, paued.

Pisár, to tread on, to paue.

* Piscína, a ponde, a lake.

Pisón, m.a rammer to beate in earth or
pauement.

* Pispóte, m.a chamberpot.

* Pistádo, beaten in a morter.

* Pistár, to beate in a morter. Also to
giue the seede Piste to birdes.

* Piste, m.a kind of seed which they giue
canarie birds.

* Pístol, m.vide Pistoléte, a pistoll, a
dagge.

* Pistoléte, a pistoll, a dagge.

* Pitánça, f. a pittance, an allowance of
meate or drinke.

Pitañóso, m.bleare eied, tender eied.

* Pitádo, m.paied in ready money.

Pitár, to paie ready money.

* Pitima, a medicine.

* Pitiróxo, m.a birde called a Robin red­
brest.

Píto, m.a birde called a Woodwall, a cer­
taine herbe wherewith the Woodwall
maketh any woode or iron pegge dri­
uen into the hole of a tree, where his
nest is, for to leape out. Also the whi­
stle of the Boteswaine when he weigh­
eth anchor.

Pivétes, a kinde of perfume.

Píxa, f. a pizell, or yard of a beast or of a
man.

Pixíta, a little pricke, a childes pricke.

* Pizára, Pizátra, f. a pibble stone.

* Pizería, vide Tapicería. 


P L
* Pláca, f. a peece of money woorth a
styuer in Dutch, or a French souse, in
English about peny farthing.

† Pláça, f. a streete, a market place, paie.

* Pláca muérta, dead pay.

Placártes, m.letters patents.

* Placentéro, or Plazentéro, m.a plea­
sant conceited fellow.

* Placentíno, a man of Placencia in
Italy.

* Placér, vide Plazér, to please or plea­
sure.

* Placiégo, m.a man that vseth much
the publike walking place, as in Lon­
don, Paules and the Exchange.

* Placiésto, vide Placiégo. 

* Pláço, vide Plázo, the prefixed day of
appeerance after sommons.

* Plaçuéla, f. a little streete or market
place.

* Plága, a wounde, a plague, a greeuous
thing.

Pláia, vide Pláya, f. a wharfe, a plaine
place by the sea side to lande at.

Plána, f. a side of a sheete of paper, an in­
strument called a plane.

* Pláncha, f. a planke, a boord, a sheet of
metall.

* Pláncha de Plómo, a sheete of lead.

* Planchónes, m.great planks or great
boords.

Planéta, f. a planet, whereof be seuen.

* Plañído, m.bewailed.

* Plañír, to lament, to bewaile.

* Planquín, vide Palanquín. 

Plánta de pie, the sole of the foote.

Plánta, f. a plant.

* Plantádo, m.planted.

Plantár, to plant.

* Plantár estácas, to plant or set stockes
to grasse on.

* Plantilla, f. a little plant, the sole of the
foote.

* Plánto, m.lamentation, bewailing.

* Plásma, f. an emplaister.

* Plasma, as hója plásma, a certain herb.

* Plasmadór, m.one that cureth with 
emplaisters. Also a creator.

* Pláso, or Plázo, a prefixed day of ap­
peerance or performance of a thing.

Plásta, vide Pásta, paste.

Pláta, f. money, siluer.

* Platafórma, a platforme.

Plátano, m.a plane tree.

Plateádo, plated with siluer.

Plateár, to couer with siluer.

* Platería, f. a place where they worke
siluer.

Platéro, m.a siluersmith, a goldsmith.

Platél, m.a platter, a dish.

Plática, f. practice, talke, speech.

Plática génte, f. a practised people.

* Platicár, Præs. yo Platíco, 1. Præt.
yo Platiqué, to talke, to conferre togi­
ther, to practise.

* Pláticos soldádos, practised soldiers,
experienced soldiers.

* Platillo, m.a sawcer.

Pláto, m.a platter, a dish.

* hazér Pláto, to keepe hospitalitie, to
keepe a generall table for all commers.
Also to manifest the secrets of ano­
ther.

* Platón, a great platter. Also Plato, a
proper name.

Pláya, f. a wharfe, a plaine place by the
sea side to land on.

* Pláza, vide Pláça, a market, a streete.

* Plázeme, it pleaseth me, it liketh me.

Plazentéro, or Placentéro, a pleasant
conceited fellow.

* Plazér, pleasure, mirth, delight. Also the
shallow sea.

* Plazér, or Agradár, verbum imperso­
nale, to please.

* Plazéro, vide Plaçéro. 

* Plaziénte, pleasing.

Plázo, m.a prefixed day of appeerance
after sommons, or a prefixed time of
performing or doing any thing.

Plebéyo, m.belonging to the comminal­
tie, vulgar, nothing excellent.

* Pléctro, m.a quill or such like thing to
strike the strings of a harpe, psalterie or
such like instrument.

* Pléga a Dios, would to God.

Plegádo, m.folded, pleited.

Plegadúra, f. folding, pleiting.

Plegár, yo Pliégo, 1. Præt. yo Plegué,
to fold.

Plegária, f. praier.

* Plegue, vide Plegár. 

* Pleiádes, the seuen stars.

* Pleídes, vide Pleiádes. 

* Plenár, vide Llenár. 

Pleyteadór, a pleader, a pettifogger at
law, a wrangler.





Pleyteánte, he that hath a sute in lawe, a
client.

Pleyteár, to go to law.

Pleytesia, f. a sute in lawe. Also to doe
homage for the holding of a castell or
such like.

Pleytista, m.a solliciter.

Pléyto, m.law, sute in law, a plea, an ex­
tract of a recorde in court, a note of
matters passed in the court.

Pléyto omenáge, a publike oath of fe­
altie.

* Plíco de papél, vide Pliégo de papél, a sheete of paper.

Pliéga, f. a pleite or folde in a garment.

* Pliega, Pliégo, vide Plegár. 

Pliégo, m.a sheete of paper, letters pa­
tents. Also a citie in Andaluzia in
Spaine.

* Pliégue, a pleite of a garment.

Plomáda, f. a plummet.

Plomádo, m.leaded.

Plomár, to doe ouer with lead, to set a
leaden seale on a popes bull or pardon.

Plómo, m.lead.

* Plómo de alvañí, the lead or square
of a mason.

* Plúbia, Plúvia, vide Llúvia, f. raine.

* Plúgo, as cáda uno le Plú­
go, as euery man pleased.

* Pluguiéra, or Pluguiésse a Díos, 
would to God.

Plúma, f. a feather, a pen, a quill, a reede.

* Plumáje, m.any thing of feathers,
plumes or feathers in the hat.


P O
* Poblácho, m.a great towne, the multi­
tude.

Población, f. peopling, furnishing with 
people.

* Pobládas plúmas, f. plumes or feathers
very thicke together.

* Pobládo de huéssos, full of dead
bones.

* Pobládos penáchos, thicke or great
plumes of feathers.

Pobladór, m.he that peopleth a coun­
trey.

Poblár, to people, to inhabite.

Poblázo, m.the multitude.

* Poblezuélo, m.a little village where
few folke dwell.

Póbre, poore.

* Pobréto, very poore.

Pobréza, f. pouertie.

Pobrezíllo, a sillie poore wretch.

* Póca sabiduría, little wit or know­
ledge.

Pócas vézes, seldome times.

Pocilga, or çahúrda, a hogs stie.

* Póço, vide Pózo, a well, a pit.

Póco, m.a little.

* Póco ántes, a little before.

Póco mas o ménos, a little more or
lesse.

Póco a Póco, by little and little.

* Póco a Póco hila la viéja la cópa, by
little and little the old wife spinneth vp
her distaffe.

Podaçón, m. pruning time.

Podadéra hóce, a pruning hooke.

Podádo, pruned.

Podadór, a pruner.

Podár, to prune.

Podár vides, to prune vines.

Podénco, m.a blood-hound, a tumbler.

Podér, power, abilitie, wealth.

Podér, Præs. Puédo, puédes, puéde. 1.
Præt. Púde, pudiste, púdo. Fut. Po­
dré, podrás, podrá. Sub. Præs. Puéda.
Imperfect. Pudiéra, podría, or Pudi­
ésse. Fut. Pudiére, to be able, to may or
can.

Poderío, m.power, authoritie.

* Podéro, vide Podadór. 

Poderosaménte, mightily, powerfully.

Poderóso, mightie, powerfull.

* Podído, able, as He podído, I haue
beene able.

* Pódium, a place like a pulpet where pro­
fessors do read to their hearers the arts
or toongs.

Pódre, f. rottennes, filth, corruption. Also
powder, sniuell, thicke flegme, or white
matter.

Podrecimiénto, m.rotting, ranckling.

* Podria, vide Podér. 

* Podrición, rotting.

* Podrida ólla, a pot wherein are sodden
many kinds of meats togither, as mut­
ton, veale, kid, hens, birds: a hotch­
potch.

Podrído, rotten.

Podrimiénto, or Podrición, rottennes,
rotting.

Podriquería, vide Podrición. 

Podrír, to rot, to corrupt.

* Podritión, vide Podrición, f. 

* Poémia, a certaine stone that hath ver­
tue against the falling sicknes.

Poesía, f. Poetrie.

Poéta, m.a Poet.

* Poético, m.belonging to a Poet.

Poiál, vide Poyál, a cloath to lay on a
bench.

Póio, vide Póyo, a bench.

Poláymas, hosen without feete, hande
ruffes.

Poléa, f. a pulley to winde vp things with.
An herbe called Penniroyall.

† Poleáda, f. pap for children, water gru­
ell or thicke pottage.

* Poleadilla, diminut. of Poleáda, thin
pap or water gruell.

* Poléjo, m.the herbe called Penniroy­
all.

* Poléo, vide Poléjo. 

Póliça, f. the charter partie in a ship, a
ticket to lodge. A bill set vp to get a
master.

Policia, f. policie or cunning dealing in
matters, dealing in state matters, fine­
nes, neatnes, trimnes.

Polidaménte, neatly, finely.

Polidéro, m.a polishing toole.

* Polidéz, f. finenes, neatnes.

Polidéza, f. comelines, finenes.

Polido, neate, cleane.

* Poliganóta yérva, a kinde of herbe.

Polílla, a moth.

Polilládo, m.moth-eaten.

Polipódio, m.a small fearne growing
vpon oakes called Polipodie.

Polir, to polish, to trim vp.

* Politico, a politician, of or belonging to
pollicie.

* Politrícho, an herbe called Mayden­
haire.

* Pólla, a female yoong chicken or birde.

Pollazón, bringing vp of chickens.

* Polleria, f. poultery, the place where
pullen, as hens, chickens, geese, duckes,
rabbets, &c. are sold.

Polléro, m.a poulterer, a seller of hens,
chickens, &c.

* Pollíco, a little chicken, or the yoong of
any thing.

Pollíno, m.an asse colt.

* Póllio, the name of a famous citizen of
Rome in great fauour with Augustus
the Emperour.

* Pollíto, m.a chicken, the yoong of anie
thing.

Póllo, m.a chicken, or yoong foule, or
birde.

Pólo, a pole starre.

* Polvillos, m.powder, perfumes.

Polvito, m.small dust.

Pólvo, m.dust.

Pólvora, f. powder, gunpowder, dust.

Polvoramiénto, dusting, raising of dust.

Polvoreár, to beate to dust.

* Polvoréda, f. a raising vp of much dust
with the winde.

* Polvorín, touchpowder, priming pow­
der.

* Polvorizádo, made to powder.

Polvorizár, to make into powder.

Polvoróso, m.dustie.

Póma, f. a pomander.

* Póma de balvárte, a fortification in a
bulwarke rounde in manner of a po­
mander.

* Póma de água, a viall of sweete wa­
ter.

* Pómo, m.the pummell of a rapier.

Pómpa, f. pompe, a glorious and statelie





shewe.

Pompóso, m.pompous, stately, in shewe.

* Ponçár, to pounce, to pricke.

Ponçóña, f. poyson.

Ponçoñár, to poison, to infect.

Ponço}ñóso, venemous, poisoned.

Ponderár, to weigh, to ponder, to consider
with himselfe.

Ponedéra gallina, f. a henne that layeth
egges.

* Pondre, Pondría, vide Ponér. 

* Ponénte, vide Poniénte. 

* Ponentíno, m.of, or pertaining to the
west.

Ponér, Præs. Póngo, Ponés, Póne, 1.
Præt. Púse, Pusiste, Púso, Fut. Pon­
dré or Forné, ás, á, Sub. Præs. Pón­
ga, Imperfect. Pusiéra, Pornía, Pon­
dría, or Pusiésse, Fut. Pusiére, to
put, to set, to lay.

* Ponér la mésa, to couer the table, to
lay the cloth.

Ponér fin, to make an end.

* Ponér la léngua en Algún, to backe­
bite any.

* Ponér cámpo, to pitch a field.

Ponér en depósito, or Tercería, to se­
quester.

* Ponér yérvas, to set herbes, to plant
herbes.

* Ponér los cuérnos, to graffe hornes, to
make a cuckold.

* Ponér los huévos, to lay egs.

Ponér en cóbro, to set safe.

* Ponga, Póngo, vide Ponér. 

Poniénte, m.the west part, a setter
downe.

* Pónta, f. the snoute or beake of a ship.

* Pontezuéla, a little small bridge.

Pontificádo, m.a bishoprike, the estate
of a chiefe bishop.

Pontificál, belonging to a chiefe bishop,
stately, pompous.

* Pontificiál, idem. 

Pontífice, m.a chiefe bishop, a high
priest.

* Pónto, m.the sea betweene Meotis and
Tenedos, so called of Pontus the sonne
of Nereus.

Pontón, a little bridge of a planke, a fer­
rie boate.

Pópa, f. the sterne of a ship.

* Pópa, as Andár en Pópa, to go with a
fore winde.

* Popár, to dallie withall, to make no ac­
count of.

* Popár, as Quien a su enemígo Pó­
pa, a sus manos muére, whosoeuer
dallieth with his enimie, killeth him­
selfe with his owne hands.

Populár, popular, common to all.

* Populénto, m.populous, full of people.

Populóso, m.populous, full of people.

* Populónia, a citie so called, in Lom­
bardie neare to Pisa in Italie.

Poquedád, vide Poquedád. 

Poquedád, f. smalnesse, basenes of minde,
littlenesse of abilitie.

* Poquíllo, m.some very little.

* Poquiríto, idem. 

* Poquíssimo, most little.

Poquíto, m.very little.

Por, by, for, neare.

* Por lo quál, for or by the which.

Poraventúra, peraduenture, perhaps,
what? yea? is it so?

* Porcellána, f. a kinde of earthen vessell
painted, costly fruit dishes of fine earth
painted.

* Porción, a portion, a share.

* Porcúno, m.belonging to swine.

Pordemás, in vaine.

* Pordícha, by chaunce, by fortune, by
hap.

* Pordioséros, m.men that aske for
Gods sake, beggers.

Pordónde, which way?  whereupon.

Porénde, therefore.

* Por tánto, for so much.

Por ventúra, by chaunce, by haphazard.

Por ésso, Por ésto, for this cause, there­
fore.

* Por médio de lo quál, by meanes
whereof.

Porfia, f. contention or earnest labouring
in a matter, standing stoutly to a
thing.

* Porfiadaménte, earnestly labouring,
standing to it stoutly, without taking
naie.

Porfiádo, m.one that contendeth about a
matter, one that will haue his purpose
without any naie.

Porfiándo, standing to it stoutly.

Porfiár, to contende about a matter, to
stande to it.

Pórfido, m.red marble.

* Porgár, vide Purgár. 

Porhijár, to adopt, to take for his sonne,
or daughter.

Poridád, f. a secret matter.

* Por lo, as Por lo qual, for the which.

* Porná, Porné, Pornía, vide Ponér. 

* Porosidád, f. porines.

* Póros, m.the pores of the body, whereby
the haires, sweate, &c. haue the issuing
out.

* Porpujánte, ouerpoising.

Porque, wherefore?  for which cause.

Porquería, f. swinishnes.

* Porquerízo, a hoggeheard.

Porquéro, m.a hoggeheard.

Porquerón, m.a portreeue, a bailiffe.

Porquerónes, m.sergeants, bailiffes,
catchpols.

Pórra, f. a club.

Porráda, f. a blow with a club.

* Porrál, vide Portál. 

* Porrázo, m.a blow with a club.

Porrétas, f. Leeke blades.

Porrilla, f. a little club.

* Porséña, a king of the Hetrurians so
named, who to restore Tarquin the
proude againe to his kingdome, tooke
armes against Rome.

* Porsospécha, id est, Por Sopsécha, f. 
through suspition.

Pórta cartas, a deske to write on. Also
one that carrieth letters.

Portáda, f. the vaulting or cunning
working in stone vpon a dore, orna­
ments or garnishing fastened or nailed
on the iambes or dore postes.

Portádgo, m.tribute, toll, custome.

Portadguéro, m.a toll gatherer.

Portál, m.a prch, a walking place.

* Portamantéo, m.clokebagge, a male,
a portmanteaw, a wallet, &c.

Portanário, the gut that passeth from the
stomacke to the belly.

Portañóla, f. a port-hole.

* Portánte, carrying. Also ambling.

* Andár de portánte, to amble.

* Portár, to carrie, to behaue himselfe.

* Portátil, that which carrieth.

* Portázgo, or Portásgo, m.tribute, cu­
stome or toll.

* Portazguéro, or Portasguéro, m.a
tribute, a custome gatherer.

* Pórte, m.carriage, burthen.

* Pórte, as Nave de mas pórte, a ship
of more or greater burthen.

Pórte de cártas, hire for carriage of let­
ters.

* Porténto, m.a monster, monstrous,
stange, seldome seene, a signe of som­
what to fellow.

* Portentóso, idem. 

Portéro, m.a doore keeper, a porter.

* Portéros de cadéna, porters at the
outgates of a Prince, which gates in
Spaine are ordinarily chained with
chaines, that coches nor horses may not
enter, till the porter take vp the chaine.

Portezuéla, f. a little gate, a wicket.

* Pórtigo, vide Pértiga. 

* Portillo, m.a breach made in a wall by
great ordinance or shot. Also a stile or
gap in a hedge.

Portillo de muro, the battlements of a
wall. Also a breach made by the batte­
rie or ordinance.

* Portugál, m.the kingdome of Portin­
gall.

* Portuguéz, m.a man of Portingall.

* Portúno, an imagined god of the hea­
thens, vnto whom they attributed the
charge of the heauens to belong.

* Porventúra, peraduenture, perhaps.





* Pos, vide Empos. 

Posáda, Posiénto, or Albergería, a lod­
ging, a resting place, a tauerne, an inne,
an ale-house.

Posadéro, m.a seate, a stoole, a resting
place, a thing to leane on, a musket
rest.

* Posádo, m.rested, lodged.

Posár, to sit, to rest, to lodge.

* Poséer, vide Posséer. 

* Posiénto, vide Posáda. 

* Posición, a plea, a matter propounded, a
position.

* Positívo, positiue.

Pospélo, against the haire.

posPonér, Præs. posPóngo, posPónes,
posPóne. 1. Præt. posPuse, posPu­
síste, posPúso. Fut. posPondré, or
posPorné, ás, á. Sub. Præs. posPón­
ga, Imperfect. posPornía, posPon­
dría, posPusiéra, or posPusiésse. Fut.
posPusiére, to set backe, to set be­
hinde.

* posPónga, posPóngo, vide posPo­
nér. 

* posPorna, posPorné, posPornía, vi­
de posPonér. 

* posPuésto, m.set behinde, set backe.

* posPuse, posPusiéra, posPusiésse, vi­
de posPonér. 

* posPúso, vide posPonér. 

Possedór, m.a possessor, an owner.

Posséer, to possesse, to haue and hold.

* Posséher, vide Posséer, to possesse.

Possessión, f. possession, owing, holding as
his owne.

* Posseýdo, m.possessed, held as his owne.

Possibilidád, f. possibilitie, that may be.

Possíble, possible, that which may be ob­
tained.

Possibleménte, possibly.

Pósta, f. a Poste that goeth with letters,
or on messages in haste: a watchman, a
sentinell: Also a slice or peece of flesh,
fish, or such like. Also a place where a
sentinell is set to watch: likewise a place
where soldiers on shipboord, or on land,
are appointed to stand and abide to
fight.

* Póstas de váca, peeces or slices of beefe.

Póste, m.a poste, or pillar.

Postéma, f. an impostume, or corrupt ga­
thering of matter in any part of the bo­
die, rage or furie.

* Postíga, vide Postígo. 

Postígo, m.a wicket or little gate within
a great one.

* Postíguillo, m.a little wicket.

Postilla, f. a push, a wheale, a swelling cal­
led wilde fire, making hot blisters, a
bladder or blistering of heate or cha­
fing.

Postillóso, full of pushes, wheales or bli­
sters.

Postillón, m.a guide for one that rideth
poste.

* Postíza, f. the place where the oares are
layde for to row with.

Postizo, m.counterfaited.

* Postízo níño, a changling, a child that
was foisted in in steed of his owne.

* Postlimínio, a law made for restoring
that which was vnlawfully gotten a­
way. The returne and restoring to his
house of one that was thought to be
dead.

* Postrádo, m.prostrate, lying flat on his
face, ouerthrowen, destroyed.

* Postrárse, to ouerthrowe himselfe, to lie
flat, to prostrate himselfe, to destroy
himselfe.

* Póstre, the last, the last seruice at a ta­
ble, as fruit, &c.

* Póstre, as Para Póstre, for the last
course.

* Postrémo, vide Postréro. 

Postréro, or Postriméro, the latter, the
last, the former.

Postrimeria, f. the latter daies of a man.

Postriméro, vide Postréro. 

Postúra, f. laying downe, laying a wager,
the disposition, the habit, rating the
price of things, lying at a warde in
fence.

* Potación, f. a drinke.

Potáge, or Potáje, pottage, broth made
to eate.

* Potáje, or Potáge, m.idem. 

Poténcia, f. power.

* Potentádo, m.one that hath power, au­
thoritie, puissance, a potentate.

Poténte, mightie, powerfull, able.

Potestád, f. power.

* Potista, m.a tippling drunkard.

† Pótra, f. burstnes.

Potróso, m.a man that is burst.

Potránca, f. a mare colt of three yeeres
olde.

Potríco, m.a horse colt.

† Pótro, m.a colt, a pissepot, a brothel­
house.

* † Pótro polédro, a colt.

* Pótros cerríles, colts neuer backe.

† Poyál, m.a cloth to lay on a bench.

† Póyo, m.a bench.

Pozéro, m.a maker of wels.

† Pózo, m.a well.


P R
* Práctica, vide Prática. 

* Pradecíco, vide Pradezíco. 

* Pradeçuélo, vide Pradzeuélo. 

* Pradéra, f. a meadow.

* Pradería, f. much meadow ground.

* Pradezíco, m.a little meadow.

Pradezuélo, m.idem. 

Pradíllo, a little meadow.

Prádo, m.a meadow.

* Pragmática, vide Pregmática. 

Prática, f. practise.

Praticár, Præs. yo Pratíco, 1. Præt. yo
Pratiqué, to practise.

* Prático, as Hómbre Prático, a man
of experience.

* Pratique, vide Praticár. 

* Pravedád, peruersnesse or vntoward­
nesse.

* Právo, wicked, peruerse, vntoward, cor­
rupt, dishonest.

* Praxarico, m.vide Paxaríco.

Preámbulo, a preamble, a preface, a pro­
heme, an entrance into a matter.

* Prebaricación, vide Prevaricación. 

* Prebénda, a title of office in the church
that containeth vnder it canons, demi­
canons, prebends, &c.

Precedér, to go before.

* Precedéncia, precedencie, senioritie,
eldership.

Precedído, m.going before.

* Precépto, vide Precéto, m.a precept,
a commandement.

* Precéto, m.a commandement, a pre­
cept.

* Preciádo, m.prized, valued, esteemed
of, accounted of.

Preciár, to prize, to esteeme, to account
of, to vaunt.

Précio, m.price, value.

* Precióse, he esteemed himselfe.

Precióso, m.pretious.

* Precipitár, to cast downe headlong.

* Precipitóso, headlong.

* Precipuaménte, chiefely, especially.

* Precípuo, chiefe, principall.

* Precisaménte, precisely, determinate­
lie.

* Preconiál, publishing, as a crier doth.

* Precónio, a glory, a praise, a renowne.
Also a solemne crie, or publishing anie
thing to be sold by the crier.

* Predecessór, m.an auncestor, a prede­
cessor.

* Predestinación, predestination.

* Predestinádo, foreordained, prede­
stinated.

* Predestinár, to fore ordaine, to prede­
stinate.

* Predicáble, that may bee spoken and
published abroad.

Predicación, f. preaching, publishing a­
broad.

* Predicádo, preached, published a­
broad.

Predicadór, a preacher.

Predicár, Præs. yo Predíco, 1. Præt. yo
Prediqué, to preach, to publish abroad.

* Predicatório, m.a pulpit, a preaching





place.

* Predique, vide Predicár. 

* Predominación, f. lordship ouer other.

* Predominár, to beare lordship ouer
other.

* Predomínio, m.lordship about the re­
sidue.

* Preeminéncia, vide Preheminén­
cia, or Preminéncia, f. preheminence,
chiefe sway, chiefe rule or authoritie.

* Preeminénte, bearing chiefe swaie,
rule, or authoritie.

Prefación, f. a preface.

* Preferído, preferred, exalted, set be­
fore.

Preferír, yo Prefiéro,  to prefer, to ad­
uance, to set before.

* Prefiére, Prefiéro, vide Preferír. 

Pregárias, vide Plegárias, praiers.

* Pregmática, the statute lawe, a lawe
made by Act of Parliament.

Pregón, m.a proclamation.

* Pregonádo, proclaimed.

Pregonár, to proclaime.

Pregonéro, m.a crier, one that proclai­
meth a matter, a warner to appeere,
&c.

* Pregún, vide Pregúnta. 

Pregúnta, f. a demand, a question.

Preguntár, to demaund, to aske a questi­
on.

Preheminéncia, or Preeminéncia, f. bearing chiefe sway or authoritie.

Prelacía, f. prelacie, bearing chiefe rule or
office in the church.

Preládo, or Perládo, m.a prelate, a chiefe
church-man.

Premática, f. a law, a statute, a decree
made by Act of Parliament.

Prémia, f. force, compulsion.

Premiadór, m.a rewarder.

Premiár, to reward, to esteeme.

* Prémias, compulsion, force.

Premilla, f. the first fault pardoned.

* Preminéncia, vide Preheminéncia, 
f. preheminence.

Prémio, m.a reward.

Premír, to presse, to thrust.

* Préncipe, vide Principe. 

Prénda, f. a pawne, a gage, a pledge, a
bribe.

* Prendádo, taken as a pawne, bribed.

* Prendádo el luéz, the Iudge being bri­
bed on the one side, sessed for subsidie.

Prendár, to lay to gage, to take in pledge.
Also to bribe.

Prendedéro, m.a siluer bodkin, such as
women vse for their haire.

Prendér, t take hold on.

Prendér la Plánta, to take roote.

Prendimiénto, taking hold.

* Prendido, taken hold.

Preñáda, f. with child, great with yong.

Preñéz, f. child-bearing, being with
yong.

Prénsa, f. a presse with a wrinch to presse
cloathes.

* Prensár, to presse cloathe with a presse
that hath a wrinch.

* Preocupádo, m.preuented, ouerreacht.

* Preocupár, to preuent, to ouerreach.

Preparár, to prouide, to prepare.

* Preparatória, m.a place where any
thing is prepared or made ready.

* Preponér, Præs. Prepóngo, Prepó­
nes, Prepóne, 1. Præt. Prepúse, Pre­
pusiste, Prepúso, Fut. Preporné, or
Prepondré, ás, á, Sub. Præs. Prepón­
ga, Imperfect. Prepusiéra, Prepon­
dria, Prepornía, or Prepusiésse, Fut.
Prepusiére, to put before, to set before.

* Prepónga, Prepóngo, vide Prepo­
nér. 

* Preporna, Prepórne, Prepornia, vide 
Preponér. 

* Prepuésto, m.put, or set before.

* Prepúse, Prepúso, vide Preponér. 

* Prepusiéra, Prepusiésse, vide Prepo­
nér. 

* Prerogatíva, a prerogatiue, a prehemi­
nence, a priuilege.

Présa, f. a pray, a bootie, a handle, a floud­
gate or floudhatch.

* cárne sal-Présa, flesh beginning to take
salt.

Presádo, a presse.

* Preságio, a diuination by tokens, a pre­
sage.

* Preságo, or Divíno, one that prophe­
sieth or telleth of strange things to
come.

* Presbýtero, an elder.

* Presciárse, to value himselfe, to prize
himselfe, to esteeme himselfe.

* Préscio, the price of a thing.

* Prescripción, a limitation, a rule, an
ordinance, an exception, a colour.

* Prescrípto, limited, appointed, ordered.

* Prescrivír, to limit, to order, to except,
to appoint, to shew what to doe.

Preséa, f. a iewell, a pearle, a precious
stone.

Preséncia, f. presence, being at hand.

Presentación, f. presenting or setting be­
fore the eies, making shew of, a present
or gift, preferring to a benefice.

Presentádo, presented, offered, made
shew of. Also a degree among friers
and religious persons, as Licenciádo,
a master of artes.

* Presentadór, an offerer, a presenter, a
setter before his sight.

* Presentánte, a presenter, an offerer.

Presentár, to offer, to present with, to
giue, to make shew of.

Presénte, present or at hand, a present or
gift.

* Preséra, or amór de horteláno, an
herbe called goose grasse, cleauer or cla­
uer grasse.

* Preservación, preseruation, keeping.

* Preservár, to keepe or maintaine, to
preserue.

* Preservatívo, preseruatiue that will
preserue.

Presidéncia, f. presidentship, gouernmente
of a countrie.

Presidénte, a president, a gouernour, a
captaine.

* Presídio, a garrison of soldiers to de­
fend a towne or fort. Also all manner
of aide or defence, a place of refuge or
succour, force of men, a fortification of
a thing, authoritie.

* Presidír, to gouerne any place or people,
to haue authoritie.

Presílla, vallence of a bed.

Préso, taken, fastened, a prisoner.

* Presontuosaménte, presumptuously,
proudly, arrogantly.

* Présos, deuises.

* Présso, vide Préso. 

Prestadíza cósa, any thing lent.

Prestádo, m.lent.

Prestádo tomár, to borrow.

Prestadór, a lender.

Préstamo, m.lone, vsurie.

Prestaménte, quickly.

* Préstamo, a rent and office of the
church.

Prestár, to lend, to suffice.

Prestéza, f. nimblenes, quicknes.

* Prestída, a thing lent.

Prestído, vide Prestádo, lent.

Présto, ready, quicke.

Presumír, to presume, to take prowdlie
vpon him.

* Presumptuosaménte, vide Presun­
tuosamente. 

* Presumptuóso, vide Presuntuóso, 
proud, arrogant.

Prefunción, f. presumption, arrogance,
pride, taking too much vpon him.

* Presuntuosaménte, proudly, arrogantly.

Presuntuóso, presumptuous, arrogant,
proud.

* Presuponér, Præs. yo Presupóngo, 1.
Præt. yo Presupúse, to presuppose, to
thinke before hand.

* Presupónga, Presupóngo, vide Pre­
suponér, to think or imagine be­
fore.

* Presupuésto, m.supposed or imagined
before.

* Presupúse, vide Presuponér. 

* Presuróso, very hastie.

Pretál, a poitrall that is put before a horse
brest to stay the saddle from slipping
backe.





* Pretención, a pretence or meaning be­
fore.

Pretendér, yo Pretiéndo, to pretende a
right, to thinke before.

* Pretensór, one that pretendeth a right.

* Pretíendo, vide Pretendér. 

Pretíl, vide Petríl. 

Pretína, f. a girdle for a man with buc­
kles.

Pretór, m.a mayor, a gouernour, a Lorde
president.

* Pretoriál, of, or belonging to a Pre­
tor.

* Pretório, a place of iudgement, a guild­
gall, the house or pauillion of the pre­
tor, chiefe captaine, mayor, iudge, or
alderman.

Prevalecér, yo Prevalésco, or Preva­
lescér, to preuaile, to get his purpose.

* Prevalér, yo Preválgo, to preuaile,
to get his purpose.

* Prevaricación, preuarication, false
dealing with a man, pretending to
helpe him, and betraieth him to be his eni­
mie, collusion in pleading.

Prevaricadór, one that pretendeth to
helpe a man and betraieth him into his
enimies hands, an ambidexter, a coose­
ning, foisting, cogging gamster at plaie.
a taker of bribes on both sides.

Prevaricár, Præs. yo Prevaríco, 1.
Præt. yo Prevariqué, to leaue that
vnspoken or little toucht that shoulde
bee earnestly stoode on, to pretende to
helpe a man. yet to betray him into his
enimies hande, to play the ambidexter,
to hold with the hare and runne with
the hound.

* Prevarique, vide Prevaricár. 

Prevéer, to foresee, to forecast.

* Prevenciónes, f. preuentions, or
meanes to put him by his purpose, fore­
runners or foregoers.

* Prevendré, Prevendría, vide Pre­
venír. 

* Prevénga, Prevengo, vide Preve­
nír. 

* Prevenído, preuented, put by his pur­
pose.

Prevenír, Præs. Prevéngo, Previénes,
Previéne, 1. Præt. Prevíne, Previ­
níste, Prevíno, Fut. Prevendré, or
Preverné, ás, á. Sub. Præs. Pre­
vénga, Imperfect. Previniéra, Pre­
vernía, Prevendría, or Previniésse, 
Fut. Previniére, to preuent, to come
before, to put by his purpose, to go be­
tweene.

* Preverne, Prevernía, vide Prevenír. 

* Previéne, Previénes, Previéne, vi­
de Prevenír. Duplicate lexemes in form removed.

Previlegiádo, priuileged, allowed by au­
thoritie.

Previlegiár, to priuilege, to grant by au­
thoritie.

Previlégio, m.a priuilege, allowance by
authoritie.

Prevíne, Previniéra, Previniésse, Pre­
víno, vide Prevenír. 

* Previsto, foreseene, preuented, forecast,
seene before.

* Prevóste, a prouost marshall.

Préz, f. price, value.

* Prezentádo, vide Presentádo. 

* Prezentár, vide presentár. 

* Prezídio, vide Presídio, a garrison.

* Priáto, vide Priéto. 

Priéssa, f. haste, speede.

Priéssa dár, to make haste.

Priéto, or négro, blacke, browne.

Príma, f. a she cosen, the minikin or small
string of an instrument.

* Primacia, f. primacie, the chiefe state.

* Primádo, a primate or chiefe in the
clergie, chosen or preferred first. Also
primarie, chiefe place.

Primavéra, the spring time, the beginning
of the spring.

* Priméra, the game called Primero at
cardes.

Primeraménte, chiefly, principally.

* Primeriça, f. a woman that bringeth
forth her first childe.

* Primerilla, vide Priméra. 

Primeríza, f. a woman of the first childe­
birth.

Priméro, the first, the chiefest.

* Primicia, f. vide Primícias. 

Primícias, the first fruits.

* Primitivo, the foremost, the first.

Primo the first, the best, the chiefest, a
coosen german.

* Prímos hermános, brothers or sisters
children, coosen germans of the first de­
gree.

* Prímos segúndos, coosen germans once
remoued.

Primogénito, m.the first begotten.

Primór, m.the excellency of any thing.

Princésa, f. a princesse.

* Principádo, a soueraignitie, a princi­
pality, a dominion, a rule, a prehemi­
nence.

Principál, chief, principall.

Principalménte, chiefly, especially.

Príncipe, m.a prince.

Principiár, to beginne.

Princípio, a beginning.

* Pringáda, f. larde to larde things with.

* Pringádo, m.larded.

Pringár, 1. Præt. yo Pringué, to lard.

* Pringór, m.the lard or basting.

* Pringue, vide Pringár. 

* Príngue, f. the dripping of meat roasted,
or such like, &c.

Príngue de Torrézno, barrows grease,
lard of bakon.

Priór, a prior, the head of a company of
friers.

Priorádo, a priory, a house of Fryers.

Priorázgo, idem. 

* Prísa, Prissa, vide Priéssa. 

Prísco, vide Aprisco. 

* Príscos, vide Aprísco. 

Prisión, f. a prison, a taking captiue.

Prisionéro, m.a prisoner, one that is taken
captiue.

* Príssa, vide Priéssa. 

Privación, f. a depriuing, debarring or
putting by.

Priváda, f. a priuie, an house of office.

Privadéro, a iakes farmer. Also one that
depriueth.

Privádo, depriued, made voide. Also fa­
miliar, a fauorite.

* Privánça, f. familiaritie, neere acquain­
tance with one, inward familiaritie.

Privár, to depriue, to take away. Also to be
familiar, and to be in place of a fauo­
rite.

* Privérno, a citie in Italy so named.

* Privilegiádo, vide Previligiádo. 

* Privilégio, a priuiledge, allowance by
authoritie.

Pro, as Buén Pro os hága, much good
may it do you, a benefit.

* Pro, y contra, for, and against.

Próa, the prow or forecastle of a ship.

* Probáble, vide Prováble, that may be
prooued, likely, probable.

* Probádo, or Provádo, prooued, tried.

* Probánça, Probánza, or Provánça, 
triall, proofe, assaying.

* Probár, or Provár, to trie, to prooue.

* Probática piscina, a poole where sheep
were washed that should be sacrificed:
the poole spoken of in the gospell where
the diseased were healed that next
went in after the angell had stirred the
water.

* Probéer, vide Provéer, to prouide, to
puruey.

* Probérbio, vide Provérbio. 

* Probeýdo, vide Proveýdo. 

* Probléma, f. a darke and hard que­
stion.

* Probocación, vide Provocación. 

* Probocádo, vide Provocádo. 

* Procedér, to proceede, to go forward.

* Procélla, a storme.

* Procellóso, stormie, full of tempestes.

* Processión, a procession, a going for­
ward, a proceeding.

Procésso, a processe, a writ.

* Procónsul, a proconsul.

* Procreación, a begetting.

* Procreár, to ingender or beget.

Procuración, a procuring, looking to a
cause, an atturneyship.





Procuradór, an atturney, a proctor, a
procurer, a follower of a matter.

* Procuradór fiscál, the kings atturney.

Procuradóra cósa, a procuring matter.

Procurár, to procure, to looke to, to play
the atturney.

Prodigál, wastfull, riotous, prodigall.

Prodigalidád, f. wastfulness, riotousnes,
prodigalitie.

* Prodigalménte, prodigally.

* Prodígio, or Porténto, a thing mon­
strous, strange, seldome seene, that sig­
nifieth somewhat.

* Prodigióso, monstrous, strange, signi­
ficant.

Pródigo, vnthriftie, riotous, wastfull,
prodigall.

* Prodúzga, Prodúzgo, vide Produ­
zír. 

Produzír, yo rodúzgo, to bring foorth.

* Proél, the boy in a galley which serueth
the rest.

* Proéles, galley boies.

* Proemiál, of or pertaining to a proeme.

* Proémio, a proeme, a preface.

* Proéza, f. prowesse, valor.

* † Profaçadór, a reuiler, one that out­
rageth another in words, one that euill
intreateth with iniurious termes.

† Profaçár, to reuile, to outrage in words,
to iuiurie with harde speeches, to re­
proch, to cast in the teeth.

Profácio en la míssa, the preamble to the
masse.

Profanár, to profane, to vnhallow, to vse
like a godlesse man.

* Profáno, m.vnholy, profane, godlesse.

Profecia, f. prophecie, foretelling of things
to come.

Proferír, yo Profiéro, to bring foorth, to
vtter, to speake.

Professión, f. profession, that which a
man doth acknowledge.

Profésso, professed.

Proféta, m.a prophet, one that can tell of
strange things to come.

* Profético, of or belonging to a prophet,
propheticall.

Profetizár, to prophecie.

* Proficiénte, helping, profiting.

* Profúnda mesúra, a low curtesie, a low
leg or obeysance.

Profundaménte, deepely, profoundly.

Profundidád, f. depth, profoundnes.

Profúndo, deepe, profound.

* Progressión, a proceeding, a progres­
sion.

* Progrésso, a proceeding, a progresse.

Prohejár, to beare against the winde.

Prohémio, m.a preface, an entrance into
a matter.

* Prohéza, or Proéza, prowesse, valor.

* Prohibición, f. a forbidding, a charge
to the contrarie.

Prohibido, forbidden, charged to the
contrarie.

* Prohibidór, m.a forbidder, one that
giueth otherwise in charge.

Prohibír, to forbid, to charge to the con­
trarie.

* Prohijádo, adopted, taken for his sonne.

* Prohijamiénto, m.adopting, taking for
his sonne.

* Prohijár, to adopt, to take for his childe.

* Proíz, vide Proéza. 

* Próle, f. issue, children.

* Prolifico, m.able to get children.

Prolixaménte, largely, at length.

* Prolixár, to draw at large, to make long,
tedious and prolixe.

Prolixidád, f. largenes, length of course.

Prolíxo, long, large.

Prólogo, a prologue, a speaker afore­
hand.

* Prolongádo, prolonged, driuen foorth
at length.

* Prolongamiénto, a prolonging, a dri­
uing at length, or to the vttermost.

Prolongár, Præs. yo Proluéngo, 1.
Præt. yo Prolongué, to prolong, to
driue off from day to day.

* Proluéngo, vide Prolongár. 

Proméssa, f. promise.

Prometér, yo Prométo, to promise.

Prometedór, one that promiseth.

Prometído, promised.

Prometimiénto, a promising, granting of
a thing.

* Promontón, a promontorie, a cape, or
high place that standeth farre into the
sea.

* Promovér, to promote, to prefer.

* Promptaménte, readily.

Promptitúd, f. readines.

Prómpto, readie, quicke to conceiue.

* Promuctór, vide Promutór. 

* Promulgádo, published abroad, proclia­
med.

* Promulgamiénto, publishing abroad.

Promulgár, 1. Præt. yo Promulgué, to
publish abroad, to proclaime.

* Promulgué, vide Promulgár. 

* Promutór, a promoter, an informer.

* Promutór de iustícia de Rey, the
kings solicitor.

Pronosticár, Præs. yo Pronostíco, 1.
Præt. yo Pronostiqué, to prognosti­
cate, to foreshew, or foretell.

Pronóstico, prognosticating.

* Pronostique, vide Pronosticár. 

* Prontaménte, vide Promptamén­
te. 

* Prontitúd, vide Promptitúd. 

* Prónto, vide Prómpto. 

Pronunciación, pronuntiation, vtte­
rance.

* Pronunciádo, pronounced, vttered.

Pronunciár, to pronounce, to vtter, to de­
liuer foorth in speech.

* Propháno, vide Profáno. 

* Prophéta, vide Proféta, m.

* Prophético, vide Profético. 

* Prophetíza, or Profetíza, a she prophe­
tisse, a prophecying.

* Prophetizár, or Profetizár, to prophe­
sie.

Propiaménte, properly, peculiarly.

* Propicío, m.mercifull, pitifull, fauou­
rable, gentle.

* Propína, f. a right or duetie of custome
paide by Doctors that do commence, to
those that haue alreadie taken de­
gree.

* Propínquo, m.neere.

Própio, or Próprio, proper.

Proponér, Præs. Propóngo, Propónes,
Propóne. 1. Præt. Propúse, Propusi­
ste, Propúso, Fut. Proporné, or Pro­
pondré, ás, á. Sub. Præs. Propónga.
Imperfect. Propusiéra, Propornía, or
Propusiésse. Fut. Propusiére, to pro­
pound, to set foorth, to propose.

* Propónga, Propóngo, vide Propo­
nér. 

Proporción, proportion.

* Proporcionadaménte, proportiona­
bly.

* Proporcionádo, proportionate.

* Proporcionár, to lay out in proporti­
on.

* Proporne, Propornía, vide Propo­
nér. 

Proposición, propounding of a matter.

Propósito, m. a purpose propounded.

* Propriaménte, properly.

Propriedád, a propertie.

Proprietário, hee that hath the proper­
tie.

* Próprio, proper, peculiar.

Propuésta, f. purpose.

* Propuésto, m.propounded.

* Propúse, Propusiéra, Propusiésse,
Propúso, vide Proponér. 

* Próra, or Próa, f. the forecastle or fore­
part of a ship.

* Prorogación, a driuing off of a mat­
ter.

* Prorogár, to prorogue or driue off.

Prósa, prose, plaine speech, speech not in
verse.

* Proscrevír, yo Proscrívo, to outlawe,
to banish, to sell openly.

* Proscriptión, outlawing, banishment,
open sale.

* Proscrípto, or Proscríto, proclaimed to
be sold, proscribed or banished.

* Proseguído, prosecuted, followed on to
the vttermost.

* Proseguimiénto, following on of a





matter.

* Proseguír, Præs. yo Prosígo, Sub.
Præs. yo Prosíga, to prosecute, to fol­
lowe on.

* Prosérpina, f. the daughter of Ceres
whom Pluto stole away, and kept as his
wife.

* Prosíga, Prosígo, vide Proseguír. 

Prosperaménte, prosperously.

* Prosopopéia, a feining anie person to
speake, a representing of persons.

* Prosperár, to prosperar, to haue good suc­
cesse, to speede well.

Prosperidád, prosperitie, good successe,
good lucke.

Prospéro, prosperous, happy, fortunate.

* Prospício, vide Propício. 

* Prostrár, to prostrate, to fall downe flat.

* Prosupuésto, presupposed.

* Protectóra, a shee defendresse.

* Protectór, m.a protector.

* Protérvia, f. frowardnes, vntowardnes,
peruersenes, sawcinesse, pride, follie,
malapertnes, waiwardnes, snappishnes.

* Protérvo, frowarde, peruerse, vnto­
ward, snappish, wayward, malapert,
sawcie, proud.

* Protestár, to protest, to affirme solemnly
and earnestly.

Protésto, a protestation.

* Protocólo, a Scriueners or Notaries
note booke or register booke, in which
he in a briefe manner noteth, registreth
and setteth downe for a memoriall all
bargaines, sales, contracts, & dealings,
or any other maner of writings he ma­
keth betweene partie and partie.

* Protomédico, m.a principall phisi­
cion.

Protonotário, m.a chiefe Notarie, a
principall Secretarie, a chiefe scribe.

Prováble, that which may bee prooued,
probable, that is able or likely to make
proofe.

Provableménte, probably, by due proofe.

* Provación, f. proouing, triall.

Provánça, or Probánça, triall, proofe,
assaying.

Provádo, tried, prooued, assaied, tasted.

Provadór, a proouer, a trier.

Provár, yo Pruévo, to trie, to prooue, to
assaie, to taste.

* Provéa, vide Provéer. 

Provechár, to profite, to gaine, to get or
obtaine.

Provécho, m.profite, gaine, good.

* Buén Provécho os hága, much good
may it do you.

Provechosaménte, profitablie.

* Provedidór, a prouider, a purueyor.

* Proveedór, a muster-master in a
campe, an ouerseer, a purueyor.

Provéer, to prouide, to take heede, to fore­
see, to puruey.

Proveidaménte, prouidently, with due
foresight.

Proveido, furnished, prouided, foreseene,
or taken heed vnto.

Proveimiénto, prouiding, foreseeing, loo­
king well vnto, furnishing.

Provéna, or Mugrón de vid, a sprout or
yoong branch of the vine.

Provérbio, vide Refrán, a prouerbe,
adage, or common saying.

* Provérvjo, vide Provérbio. 

* Providéncia, prouidence, taking heede
to, taking care of.

Provincia, a prouince, a countrey lying
far off and ruled by a lieutenant, la­
bour, busines, a matter hard to be ef­
fected.

Provinciál, pertaining to a prouince, a
gouernor of a prouince.

Provisión, f. prouision, store, victuals or
other things aforehand, a prouiso.

Provisór, a prouider, an ouerseer, a deane,
a prouost.

* Provisoría, f. the office of a deane, pro­
uost or prouider.

Provocación, f. prouoking, vrging to a
matter.

* Provocádo, prouoked, vrged, exhorted,
challenged.

* Provocadór, a prouoker, an vrger, a
procurer.

Provocár, 1. Præt. yo Provoqué, to pro­
uoke, to vrge to a matter, to call foorth,
to exhort, to challenge.

* Provoque, vide Provocár. 

* Próximo, m.a neighbor.

Prudéncia, f. wisedome, prudence, skill to
discerne matters.

Prudénte, wise, prudent, that can dis­
cerne well of matters.

Prudenteménte, wisely, prudently.

Pruéva, f. proofe triall, taste, a searching
instrument.

* Pruéve, Pruévo, vide Provár. 

* Pruévo, I prooue, vide Provár.

* Prúna, f. a plum, a prune.

* Prúno, a sloe tree or plum tree.


P V
Púa, f. a stocke to grasse on, a prickle, a
thorne, the toothe of a combe, any naile
or such like sticking or gaggin out
that may pricke, scratch, teare or hurt
one.

* Púas de puérco- espín, pricks or sharpe
quils that growe on the porcupine.

* Púas de rastríllo, the long iron teeth
n the hatchell with which they hatchel
hempe.

Puágre, m.the goute in the feete.

Publicaménte, publikely, openly, com­
monly.

Publicación, publishing, setting abroad,
making common.

Publicádo, published abroad, set foorth
commonly.

Publicár, Præs. yo Publico, 1. Præt. yo
Publiqué, to publish, to set foorth.

* Publicidád, f. publikenesse, common­
nesse.

Público, m.publike, common, knowen a­
broad.

Publique, vide Publicár. 

† Púcha, or Púchas, pulse, a kinde of pap,
water gruell, thicke pottage.

* Púche de pán en vinágre, et azéite, 
a kinde of pap or pottage.

* Pucherias, f. vide Pucherícos. 

* Puchericos, m.the face and gesture
children make when they begin to crie.

Puchéro, m.a porredge pot.

* Pude, vide Podér. 

* Pudiéndo, the gerund of Podér, hauing
power, being able.

* Pudiéra, Pudiésse, Púdo, vide Po­
dér. 

* Pueblár, to furnish with people.

Pueblezuélo, a small sort of people. Also
a little towne or village.

Puéblo, m.people. Also a towne, a vil­
lage.

* Puéde, Puédo, vide Podér. 

Puénte, f. a bridge, a halfe decke on ship­
boord.

* Puentezuéla, or Puenteçuéla, f. a lit­
tle bridge, a little decke of a ship.

Puérca, f. a sow, a hog-louse.

Puérca de husillo, a spindle of a di­
staffe.

Puercaménte, swinishly, filthilie.

* Puércas, or Lamparónes, kernels,
swelling in the armepits or necke.

Puérco, m.a hogge.

* Puérco cevádo, a fatte hogge.

Puérco espina, a Porcupine.

Puérco montés, vide Javalí, a wilde
boare.

* Puerquéro, m.a swinheard.

Puérro, m.a leeke.

Puérro silvéstre, a wilde leeke.

Puérta, f. a dore, a gate.

* Puertezuéla, a little dore.

Puérto, m.a kay, a hauen, a harborough
for ships.

Pues, then.

Puésta, f. a peece, a slice, a portion, an al­
lowance.

* Puésta de váca, a peece or a slice of
beefe.

Puésto, put, placed, a standing.

Puésto que, although, notwithstanding,
albeit.

* Pugnál, m.a dagger.

* Pugnár, to fight.





† Púja, f. setting sale, an outbidding
of another in price.

* Pujádo, outbidden in price.

† Pujamiénto, buying or selling by the
great, renting of a commodity, an out­
bidding another in price.

* Pujamiénto de sángre, a fresh in­
crease or comming of bloude at the
spring of the yeere.

† Pujánça, f. or Puzánça, puissance,
might, power.

* † Pujánte, puissant, mightie, power­
full.

Pujár, to rent a subsidie, to cheapen, to
bid money, to outbid another in price.

† Pujavánte, a smithes buttrice, where­
with he pareth the horse hoofes.

Pujéshiga, holding out the middle finger,
or boring the nose with the finger in
scorne of another man.

* Pujétes, vide Puñétes. 

† Púlga, f. a flea.

* Pulgád, vide Pulgáda. 

Pulgáda, f. the breadth of a thumbe, an
ynch.

† Pulgár, m.the thumbe, the great toe.

† Pulgarádas, f. brusing with the thomb.

Pulgón, m.a worme that eateth vines.

† Pulgóso, full of fleas.

* Pulicía, f. a making of neate, fine, tricke
or trim.

* Pulír, to polish, to make fine or neate.

Púllas, mockes, scoffes, brables, brals. Also
wanton lasciuious speeches.

Pulmón, m.the lungs.

Pulmón maríno, a froath in the sea that
giueth light.

Pulmónes, the lungs.

Púlpa, soft or fat flesh without bones.

Púlpa, a pudding.

* Cárne de púlpa, flesh that hath no
bones in it, soft flesh.

* Púlpe, a fish with many feete called a
poore Cuttle.

Pulpéjo, the soft flesh of the handes or
armes.

Púlpito, m.a pulpet.

Púlpo, a fish called a cuttle.

Púlso, f. the pulse at the veines in the
bodie.

Punçáda, f. a pricke.

Punçadúra, pricking, a marke with a hot
iron, a foyning.

† Punçár, to pricke, to pounce, to foyne.

† Punçón, m.a bodkin, a pouncing iron, a
punchion.

† Punçoncíco, m.a little bodkin.

* Púndo, a point, a particle.

* Pundonór, id est, Púnto de honór, a
point of honor.

* Pungído, pricked.

* Pungidór, a pricker.

* Pungimiénto, pricking.

Pungír, yo Púnjo, Sub. Præs. Pónja, to
pricke, to foyne, to sting, to nettle, to
vexe.

* Pónja, Pónjo, vide Pongír. 

* Púnica, of Carthage.

Punición, f. punishment.

* Punído, punished.

Punír, to punish, to chastise, to correct, to
take vengeance of.

* Puñáda, f. a blowe with the fist, a
handfull.

Puñádo, m.a handfull, a gripe, as much
as once can take in the fist at one time.

Puñál, m.a dagger, a poynado.

Puñaláda, a stab with a dagger.

* Puñéte, m.a blow with the fist.

* Puñétes, m.ruffes at the hand wrests.

Púño, m.a fist, a coard in a ship called the
clue, the handle of a sword, dagger, &c.

Púños, m.ruffes or cuffes for the hande
wrests.

Púnta, f. the point of a rapier or other
thing.

Puntáda, f. a stitch with a needle or such
like, a pricking or stitching in with a
needle.

Puntádo, pointed.

Puntál, a post to vnderprop a house, the
post which beareth vp the hatches n
ship-boord.

Puntapíe, or Puntillázo, spurning with
the feete.

Puntár, to point, to sharpen, to spurne, to
kicke, to foyne, to pricke.

* Puntería, directly, by due point.

Puntéro, a marking iron. Also one that
pointeth.

 Puntillázo, or Puntapíe, spurning with
the feete.

* Puntíllo, m.a little point of a weapon.

Púnto, a point, a moment, the sise of a
shoo, a stitch in sowing. Also an ace at
cardes.

* Púnto, as Curár de Púnto, to cure
with stitching vp.

* Púntos, the sise of shooes, stitches of a
needle, any other points.

* Puntuál, direct, certaine, pointing.

* Puntualidád, certaintie, pointing to a
matter.

* Puntualménte, from point to point.

* Puntúra, pointing, pricking.

Pupílo, m.a pupill, one that is vnder tui­
tion and guiding of another.

Puraménte, purely, cleerely, sincerely.

Puréza, f. puritie, cleannesse, sinceritie.

Púrga, f. a purgation.

Purgación, cleansing, purging, acqui­
ting.

Purgár, 1. Præt. Purgué, to purge, to
cleanse, to discharge, to make amends
for, to abide.

Purgatívo, that which purgeth.

* Purgatório, purgatorie, a place of clean­
sing.

* Púrgo, vide Púrga. 

* Purgue, vide Purgár. 

* Puridád, f. puritie, cleannes.

* Purificación, a cleansing, a making
pure.

* la Purificación de nuéstra Señóra, 
the Purification of our Ladie, or Can­
delmas day.

* Purificádo, cleansed, made pure.

Purificár, 1. Præt. Purifiqué, to purifie, to
cleanse, to make pure.

Puridád, f. puritie, cleannes, a secret pur­
pose.

* Purifique, vide Purificár. 

Púro, pure, cleane, neate, vnspotted, vnde­
filed.

Púrpura, f. purple.

* Purpúreo, m.of a purple colour, made of
purple, belonging to purple.

* Pusante, vide Pujánte. 

* Púse, vide Ponér. 

* Pusiéra, Pusiésse, vide Ponér. 

Pusilanimidád, f. cowardlines, faintnes of
hart, effeminate dastardlines of men.

Pusilánimo, m.faint harted, a coward, a
dastard, a meacoke, a white liuered fel­
low.

Púta, f. a harlot.

* Púta velláca, a naughtie vile whoore.

* Púta matréra, f. a cunning harlot.

Putaneár, to followe harlots, to haunt
whoores.

Putañéro, m.a whooremonger.

* Putaría, vide Putería. 

* Puteár, to play the whoore. Also to fol­
low whoores.

Putería, or Burdél, a stawes, or brothel
house.

* Putésco, m.belonging to whoredome.

* Putíco, a little beastly brothell knaue, a
little Ganimedes or Bardáxo.

Púto, a shamelesse brothell, or beastly
knaue, a Ganimedes or Bardáxo.

* Putrefactión, corruption, rottennes.

* Púxa, an outbidding another in price.

* Puxádo, m.outbidden in price.

* Puxamiénto, m.an outbidding ano­
ther in price.

* Puxamiénto de sángre, a fresh increase
or comming of blood at the spring of the
yeere.

* Puxándo, by out-bidding another in
price.

* Puxár, to out-bid another in price in
buying a thing.

† Puxavánte, vide Pujavánte, a smithes
buttrice, wherewith he pareth the horse
hoofes.

* † Púxo, a desire to goe to stoole, and yet
in vaine.

* Púxo, as Púxo de viéntre, the griping





of the bellie, a desire to goe to stoole, and
yet in vaine.

* Púya, vide Púja. 

* Puzánça, vide Pujánça, power, abili­
tie.

* Puzánte, vide Pujánte. 



Q

Quadérnas, f. the sides of a ship.

Quadérno, the fourth in account,
a sheete folded, a roll written.

* Quádra, f. a great hall square, or a
square dining roome in a house.

Quádra de cása, the fower corners r
square of a house. Also a square roome
in a house.

Quadráda, f. a thing squared, made
square, fitted.

* Quadrádo, squared, fitted.

* Quadragésima, vide Quarésma. 

Quadragésimo, the fortieth in number.

* Quádran me sus costúmbres, his ma­
ners and mine are alike.

Quadrángula, a forme fower square, a
quadrangle.

* Quadrángulo, m.fower square.

Quadránte, a quadrant, a little circle to
discerne the windes by, a circle of the
the sunne, a thing fower square.

Quadrár, to make square, to make fit.

Quadratúra, squaring, fitting.

* Quadréte, m.a square little banner.

† Quadril, m.the hippe.

Quadrílle, f. a little company of foote­
men, a squadron of some 25. or fewer
soldiers.

* Quadrilléro, m.a captaine or leader of
such a companie or squadron, an officer
in warre that draweth out, or taketh
out such a squadron of soldiers, to goe
with him in the fieldes in the armie, to
see if there be any robbers, or other such
misorders, and to correct them.

* Quadríllo, a little square court. Also a
little company of footemen, or a squa­
dron of 25. or fewer soldiers.

* Quadrín, m.a farthing.

Quadro, a fower square, a squadron of
soldiers, a square forme of setting a
battell, a companie or quadret in war.

* Quadrúpede, fowerfooted.

* Quadrúplo, fowerfold.

* † Quajáda, or Quaxáda, f. a posset, a
syllibub. Also any thing curded or
congealed.

* Quajadílla, or Quaxadílla, f. a sylli­
bub, a posset.

Quajádo, or Quaxádo, curded, con­
gealed.

† Quajamiénto, or Quaxamiénto, m.curding, congealing.

† Quajár, or Quaxár, to curde, to con­
geale.

* † Quájo, rennet to make cheese.

Qual, which, whither.

* Qualesquíer, whithersoeuer, which so
euer.

* Qualesquíera, idem. 

* Qualidád, vide Calidád, the qualitie
or condition.

Qualquiér, whosoeuer.

* Qualquiera, idem. 

Quando, when.

* Quándo quíera, whensoeuer.

Quantas vézes, how often, howe manie
times.

* Quantía, f. quantitie.

Quantidád, vide Cantidád. 

Quánto, how much.

Quántos, how many?

* Quánto média légua, about the
quantitie of halfe a league.

* Quánto, as Por quánto, for howe
much.

Quánto más, how much more?

* Quántos se quiéra, howe manie so­
euer.

* Quaránta, vide Quarénta. 

Quarénta, fortie.

* Quarenténo, or Quarentésimo, the
fortieth in order.

* Quarésma, f. Lent.

* Quárta, the quarter of a yarde, the
fowerth part, a kinde of taxe for par­
dons, &c. Also a mule or mare that is
put to cart.

Quartágo, m.a nagge, a small horse.

* Quartál, a quarter, a measure contai­
ning the fowerth part of an other
measure.

* Quartána, f. the feauer quartaine.

* Quarteár, to quarter in peeces, to 
quarter armes.

Quartél, m.a quarter to lodge soldiers
euerie companie their quarter, a hatch
a shipboard which couereth the hole of
going downe or vnder hatches of a ship,
a place to laie vppe sailes in. Also the
fourth part of a galley.

* Quartél maéstre, a quarter master,
who appointeth euery companie in a
campe, their places of lodging.

* Quartéles, the hatches on shipboorde, a
place to lay vp the sailes in.

* Quarterón, m.a quarter of a tun, that
is a hogshed, or halfe pipe, a small bas­
ket of figges. Also the quarter of anie
thing whether it be of waight or mea­
sure.

Quartílla, f. a peece of threehalfe pence, a
kinde of duty or tribute that the coun­
trey people in Spaine pay of their corne
to Saint Iames, euery yeere. Also the
pasterns of a horse or other beast.

* Quartílla, or Doblegadúra, the pa­
sternes of a horse, &c.

* Quartíllo, the fourth part of a hun­
dred, the fourth part of sixe pence, a
quarter of any measure of wine, oile,
&c. the fourth part of any weight.

Quárto, m.the fourth. Als a small peece
of money of fower marauedís, of Eng­
lish money about a pennie halfe pennie
farthing. Also a quarter of mutton,
veale, lambe, &c. or the fourth part of
any other thing.

* Quártos, peeces of money of fower ma­
rauedís, a pennie halfe pennie far­
thing. Also quarters of mutton, veale,
lambe, &c.

* Quártos, as hazér Quártos, to quar­
ter a man.

* Quasináda, id est, Casináda, as it
were of nothing, as a thing of no
worth.

* Quasinádas fráscas, sweepings of a
house, leaues or sticks fallen from trees,
rubbish or paltrie stuffe nought worth,
vnprofitable folke.

Quátro, fower.

Quátro ciéntos, fower hundred.

* Quátro tánto, fower times as much.

* Quátro mil, fower thousand.

* Quátro cuéntos, fower millions of
thousands.

* Quaxáda, vide Quajáda, a congea­
ling, a curding.

* Quaxadílla, or Quajadílla, f. a posset,
sillibub, &c.

* Quaxádo, vide Quajádo. 

* Quaxamiénto, or Quajamiénto, 
curding, congealing.

* Quaxár, vide Quajár. 


Qu E
Que, what, that, as.

* Quebánto, vide Quebránto. 

Que cósa, what matter.

Quebráda, f. a breach or breaking.

Quebráda de mónte, a vallie or breach
betweene bils.

* Quebradaménte, brokenly.

* Quebrádas, as Hóndas quebrádas,
waues or billowes broken at sea.

Quebrádo, broken, burst.

Quebrádo, or Potróso, m.burst bellied.

* Quebradór, a breaker, one that brea­
keth.

Quebradúra, breach, a breaking, a rup­
ture.

* Quebrándo, breaking.

Quebrantádo, broken, burst.

Quebrantadór, a breaker.

Quebrantahuéssos, a kinde of eagle
that breaketh bones.

Quebrantamiénto, m.breaking.





Quebrantár, to breake.

Quebrár, yo Quiébro, to breake, to
burst.

* Quebrár el crédito, to loose his credit.

Que cósa, what? how now?

* Quéda, f. the nine a clocke bell, after
which hower in Spaine the watch ap­
prehendeth those that be abroad, taketh
away their weapons as forfeited, and
imprisoneth the persons.

Quedáda, f. staying, resting.

* Quedádo, staied, abidden, rested.

Quedár, to stay, to tarrie, to abide, to
rest, to stand still.

* Quedár el cámpo por algúno, to be
conqueror, to ouercome.

* Quedito, m.still, quiet, soft.

Quédo, quiet, still.

Que es cósa y cósa? a riddle.

* Quejár, vide Quexár. 

* Quejóso, vide Quexóso. 

* Quiéro, or Bréco, a shrub called heath,
linge or sweete broome.

* Quel, id est, Que el, the which.

* Quélla, id est, Que ella, that shee,
that it.

* Quéllo, id est, Que ello, that it.

* Que es? what is the matter?

Quéma, f. burning, blasting.

* Quemáda, f. a blast.

† Quemádo, burned, scorched, blasted.

Quemadúra, f. a burning, a blith, a bla­
sting.

† Quemár, to burne, to blast.

* Quénca, or Cuénca, any little round
vessell or dish of wood.

* Quénta, or Cuénta, an account, a rec­
koning. Also a bead of the praiers.

* Hazér quénta, to reckon, to make ac­
count of, to thinke for, to be sure of.

* Quentár, vide Contár. 

* Quéntas, or Cuéntas, a paire of
beades.

* Quénto, or Cuénto, a million, a tale,
a number, a historie, the blunt end of a
pike or staffe.

* Quépa, vide Cabér. 

Querélla, a complaint.

Querellár, to complaine.

Querellóso, complaining.

Queréncia, f. loue, liking.

Querér, Præs. Quiéro, Quiéres, Qui­
ére, 1. Præt. Quíse, Quisíste, Quí­
so, Fut. Querré, rás, ra, Sub. Præs.
Quiéra, or Quérra, Imperfect. Qui­
siéra, Querria, or Quisiésse, Fut.
Quisiére, to desire, to endeuour, to
will, to loue.

* Querér, Subst. vide Queréncia. 

* Querído, disposed, affected.

* Quérra, Quérre, vide Querér. 

* Queseadéro, vide Queseria. 

* Queseadór, one that maketh cheese.

* Queseria, a place where cheese is made.

* Queséro, a cheesemonger, one that sel­
leth cheese.

Quéso, cheese.

* Quésta, id est Que ésta, that shee, that
this thing.

* Quéste, id est, Que éste, that hee, that
this.

Questión, or Quistión, a question or
demand, a quarrell, a controuersie.

* Questionéro, or Quistionéro, a de­
mander of questions, a quarrelling fel­
lowe.

* Quésto, id est, Que ésto, that, this.

* Questór de las órdenes, a limiting or
begging frier, a pardoner.

* Quetár, vide Quietár, to quiet, to
still.

† Quéxa, f. a complaint.

† Quexár, to complaine.

† Quexígo, m.a kinde of oake, a wilde
ashe tree.

Quexóso, complaining, giuen to quarrell
or complaint.

† Quexúra, haste, instance, earnestnes.


Qu I
† Quiçá, peraduenture, perhaps.

† Quiciál, or Quício, hinges of a dore.

* Quiciál de ventána, the hinges of a
window.

† Quício, or Quiciál, hinges of a dore.

* † Quícios cherriadóres, creaking hin­
ges, or hinges making a creaking noise.

* Quiébras, f. breach, as in a mans word,
or credite. Also sorrow, harthbreaking,
greefe, vexation. Also breaking in of
water into a field.

* Quíebre, Quiebro, vide Quebrár. 

Quien, who? he which.

* Quien en tal lugár, Quien en tál, 
some in such a place, and some in such.

* Quienquier, whosoeuer.

Quienquiéra, whosoeuer.

* Quiéntos, vide Quiniéntos, fiue
hundred.

* Quíere, Quíero, vide Querér. 

* Quier, as, Cómo quier, howsoeuer.

* Quiéra, as Como Quiéra, howso­
euer.

* Quietádo, quieted, pacified.

Quietaménte, quietly, peaceably.

Quietár, to make quiet, to pacifie.

Quiéto, quiet, at rest.

* Quiéto, a riuer in Cappadocia so cal­
led.

* Quietúd, f. quiet, rest, ease.

* Quilár, vide Quiláte. 

* Quilatádo, tried, or touched as gold.

Quilatár, to trie or touch as gold, to make
perfect or excellent.

Quiláte, m.the touch of gold, &c. fine­
nes, a caract.

Quílla, f. the keele of a ship.

* Quílma, f. a wallet, a bag.

Quiniéntos, fiue hundred.

Quiñón, a part, a portion.

Quiñonéro, a diuider, a parter.

* Quinquiéra, vide Quienquiéra. 

Quintál, m.a hundred weight.

* Quintár, to take away the fifth.

Quintérno, the number of leaues in prin­
ting being fiue to a letter.

Quínto, the fift.

Quinze, fifteene.

* Quinzéno, the fifteenth.

* Quíse, vide Querér. 

* Quisiéra, Quisiére, Quisiésse, vide 
Querér. 

* Quiso, vide Querér. 

* Quistión, or Questión, a question or
demand, a controuersie.

* Quísto, as Bien quisto, mal quisto,
well beloued, ill beloued.

* Quistoncílla, f. a short question or de­
mand.

* Quitación, vide Quitánça. 

Quitádo, taken away, giuen ouer, re­
mooued.

Quitamiénto, taking away, discharge,
giuing ouer, release, riddance.

* Quitánça, or Quitánza, riddance,
discharge, taking away.

Quitár, to take away, to remooue, to
withdrawe, to breake off, to cut off the
haire, to put off clothes, &c.

* Quitasól, a broad thing made in the
manner of a canopie put on a staffe to
carrie ouer ones head in hot countries
to keepe away the sunne, as in China
and in Spaine they vse on horsebacke.
The word comming of Quitár, which
is to take away, and Sol the sunne: and
so Quitasól, a taker away of the sun,
or such a canopie for that vse.

* Quitáte de ay, stand aside, stand out of
the way, remooue thence.

Quixáda, f. a iaw.

Quixár, m.vide Quixáda. 

† Quixónes, bastard parsley, or wilde
cheruill.

Quixótes, m.terces, armour for the
knees.



R

RAbáças, water parsley, yellow water
cresses, belrags.

Rabadán, m.a chiefe shepherd, a princi­
pall among shepherds.





Rabadílla, f. the skut of a birde, the
rumpe.

Rábanos, or Rávanos, m.radish rootes.

Rabáño, vide Rebáño, m.a flocke of
cattell.

* Rábdo, vide Ráudo. 

Rabeár, to wag the taile.

* Rabéço, vide Ravéço, a wilde goate.

† Rabél, m.an instrument called a re­
becke.

* Rabéla, vide Ravéla, f. idem. 

* Rabia, or Rávia, f. furie, rage, mad­
nesse.

* Rabiár, to rage, to be furious or mad.

Rabicáno, id est, Rábo cáno, an horse
with a grey taile.

* Rabillo, m.a little taile.

* Rabiosaménte, furiously, madly, ra­
uingly.

* Rabióso, furious, raging, mad.

* Rabirúbio, a birde with a red taile cal­
led a wagtaile. Also a kinde of fish.

* Rabiséco, a drie taile, a poore starue­
ling beast. Also a poore wretch leane
and ill clothed.

Rábo, m.the taile, the fundament.

* Rábo de vestidúra, a long traine of a
womans gowne, a long garment that
plaiers vsed.

* Rábo, or Códa de múla, an herbe
called horse taile.

Rábo de puérco, an herbe called May­
den-weed.

* Rabón, m.a short or stumpe taile, any
beast curtailed, or the taile cut off, a
curtall.

* Rabúdo, m.with a great taile.

† Ráça, f. a ray or beame shining through
a hole. Also a race, stocke, kinde, or
breede.

Ráça de sól, the sunne-beame.

Ráça de páño, the place where cloath is
seare or thin, a braike in cloth.

Raçádo, full of bracks in cloth. Speckled
or spotted as a horse or beast.

Racaménta, f. the parle of the yard of a 
ship, which holdeth the yard to the
mast.

* Raciocinación, reasoning.

* Raciocinio, reason.

Ración, f. a peece, a portion, allowance of
victuals, &c.

* Racionál, reasonable, that hath the vse
of reason.

* Racionár, vide Raciocinár, to reason,
to argue, to dispute.

Racionéro, m.an inferiour prebend in a
Church, that hath but halfe so much re­
uenewes by yeere as a Prebend hath.

* Raçón, vide Razón, f. reason.

* Raçonár, vide Razonár. 

Raedéra, f. a raser to shaue with, anie
thing that one shaueth with.

Raedúra, f. shauing, rasing of writings.

Raér, yo Ráygo, Sub. Præs. Ráyga, to
rase, to shaue, to blot, to plaine with a
plainer.

* Raér héno con el Rástro, to rake.

† Raéz, easie.

* † Rahéz, f. easie, not hard to be done.

* Ráia, vide Ráya, a ray fish, a strake.

Rája, f. a chip, a lathe, cloath rashe.

* Rája de léña, f. a billet or shide of
wood.

* Rajadór, one that razeth or marketh
out any thing, a lyer.

Rajár, to hew out, to cut into lathes, to
shaue, to cut into small peeces.

Rajár madéra, to hew into lathes, to cut
out timber, to make into small peeces or
shingles.

* Raigádo, vide Raygádo. 

* Raigár, vide Raygár, to take roote.

* Ráio, vide Ráyo. 

* Raióla, vide Rayóla. 

Rajuélas, f. little chips.

* Raíz, vide Raýz. 

* Raíz del álla, f. an herbe called Ele­
campane.

* Rála, as Cósa rála, a thin matter or
thing.

Rálas vézes, seldome times.

* Rálas batállas, f. thin battels, weake
companies of men.

Raléa, f. a race, streene or breed of hor­
ses.

Raleár, to make thin.

* Ralecér, yo Ralésco, to waxe or make
thin.

* Ralecído, made thin.

* Raléer, vide Raleár. 

Raléro, a sieue for to sift with.

Raléza, f. seldomnes, thinnes.

* Ralidád, idem. 

* Ralladúra, f. a grater to grate spice or
bread, &. Also a shauing yron.

* Rallár, to grate bread, spice, &c. Also to
shaue with a shauing yron.

* Rállo, a bread-grate, a grater for spice,
a shauing yron.

Rálo, thinne.

Ráma, f. or Rámo, a bough.

* Ramáça, f. vide Ramáda. 

Ramáda, f. an arbour, a tent of boughes.

Ramál, or Ramón, a dead bough, or the
end of a coard.

* Ramár, to dresse, or doe with boughes.

* † Rámbla, a grauelly place.

Raméra, f. a harlot.

* Ramilléte, m.a nosegay of flowers.

* Ramillétes de pláta, m.counterfaited
or false flowers of siluer or other met­
tall.

Ramíllo, a little bough.

Rámo, m.or Ráma, a bough.

Ramón, or Ramál, a dead bough.

Ramóso, full of boughes.

* Ramúa, a village in Zeland so called.

Rampójos, the pricks of briers.

* † Ramplón, m.cawkes on a horse- shoo.

† Rampónes, vide Ramplón. 

Rána, a frogge.

Rancuájo, m.a little frogge, a poolwig,
or toadpoole.

* Rancheria, f. a ranke or tents or cabins
for souldiors.

* Ráncho, m.a ranke, an order or place
where euery one is to keepe or abide.

Ráncio, m.rusty, rammish in smell, ill
willing.

Rancióso, rusty, full of rammishnes.

Rancór, rankor, hatred, malice.

* Ránzio, vide Ráncio. 

* Ranzióso, vide Rancióso. 

Ránda, f. network, open-worke.

* Randádo, made as networke.

* Randílla, f. little network.

* Ranúdo, of or pertaining to frogs.

* Ranzón, vide Rescáte. 

* Rapacéjo, vide Rapáz, a soldiers boy,
a great waggish boy.

† Rapacéjos, fringe.

* Rapacóva, f. a moth.

* Rapádo, shaued, pared, filed.

Rapár, to shaue, to pare, to file. Also to
rampe as a lion doth.

* Rapáx, vide Rapáz, rauenous.

Rapáz, a soldiers boy, a waggish boy. Also
one that is rauenous or greedie giuen
to pilling.

Rapiña, f. rapine, catching by violence.

Rapósa, f. or Zórra, a shee fox.

* Raposéras, f. fox holes.

* Raposería, f. craftie wilinesse, foxie
craftinesse, or subtilnesse of a fox.

* Rapóso, a hee fox.

Raposúno, belonging to a fox.

* Rápto, m.any thing taken or snatched
violently.

* Raquéta, f. a racket to play at tennis
with.

* Ráras vézes, vide Rálas vézes, sel­
dome.

* Raridád, vide Ralidád, f. seldomnesse,
strangenesse, thinnesse.

Ráro, seldome, thin.

* Ráros cabéllos, thin haires.

* Rása, vide Ráça. 

* Rasadór, vide Raçadór. 

Rasadúra, the striking of a measure.

Rasár, to strike a measure, to pare.

Rasár medída, to strike a measure.

* Rásca cavállos, an ostler, a horsekee­
per, one that currieth horses. Also a
base fellow.

* Rascádo, scraped, scratched or combed,
as a horse.

Rascadór, a scraping toole, or one that





scrapeth or scratcheth.

* Rascadúras, f. the markes or signes
made by scratching.

Rascár, 1. Præt. yo Rasqué, to scrape,
to scratch, to currie.

* Rascuñádo, scratched.

Rascuñár, to scratch, to scrape.

Rascúño, m.a scratch.

Raséro, m.a strike of a measure.

Rasgádos ójos, faire large eies.

† Rasgár, Præs, yo Rásgo, 1. Præt. yo
Rasgué, to teare in peeces.

* † Rásgo, a scrape, a scratch, a dash with
a pen, to make a great or first letter.

† Rasgón, m.a scratch, a scrape.

* Rásgos de létras, a dash with the pen
to make a great letter, or when one be­
ginneth to write.

* Rasgue, vide Rasgár. 

Ráso, plaine shaued, a plaine field, sat­
ten.

* Ráso tiémpo, cleere weather without
any clouds.

Ráspa, f. a file, an eare of corne, a shooma­
kers cutting knife.

Raspádo, filed, shaued, spared.

Raspár, to file, to pare, to shaue, to fret.

* Ráspa de espíga, the beard of an eare
of corne.

* Rasgué, vide Rascár. 

* Rássa, vide Rása. 

* Rastél, vide Rastíllo. 

Rastílla, or Rastíllo, a carde or combe for
flaxe, a precullis for a gate.

Rastilládo, carded, combed.

Rastillár, to carde, to combe flaxe.

* Rastíllo, m.or Rastílla, a combe for
flaxe, a rake, a percullis for a gate.

* Rástra, miérra, or Narría, a drag, a
slead.

* Rastrár, vide Rastreár. 

* Rastreár, to follow diligently, to follow
by the footesteps, to vent or winde as a
spaniell doth.

* Rastréro, one that hunteth or followeth
by the foote.

Rastríllo, a little rake. Also a hatchell or
combe for hempe. Also a percullis for a
gate.

Rástro, a harrow, a step, a trace, a sent or
smell, a rake, the residue or remainder,
a market for cattell, &c.

* Caér en el rástro, to finde out the foot­
steps, to hit vpon the sent or smell by the
foote.

Rastrójo, or Restójo, stubble of corne.

Rasúras, parings, shauings, drosse, dregs,
lees of wine, &c.

Rasúras de cúba, dregs, lees, or drosse of
wine vessels.

Ráta, f. a part, a portion.

Ráta, a rat.

* Ratificár, to approoue for good, to rati­
fie or allowe.

Ráto, m.a space, firme, approoued.

* A rátos, otherwhile.

Ratón, a mouse.

* Ratonádo, mouse-eaten, eaten with
mise.

Ratonçílla, or Ratonzíllo, a little
mouse.

* Ratoncíto, idem. 

* Ratonéra, f. a mouse trap. Also a mouse
hole.

* Ratonzíllo, a little mouse.

* Ratonzíto, idem. 

* Raváño, vide Rabáño. 

Rávano, or Rábano, a radish roote.

Rávano gagísco, blacke hellebor.

Raudál, a swift streame of water.

Ráudo, rauenous, violent, swift in course.

* Raveár, vide Rabeár. 

Ravéço, m.a wilde goate.

* Ravejár, to stand wauering or totte­
ring.

* Ravél, vide Rabél. 

* Ravéla, idem. 

Rávia, or Rábia, f. rage, furie, madnes.

Raviár, to rage, to be furious or mad.

* Ravicáno, vide Rabicáno. 

* Ravíllo, vide Rabíllo. 

Raviosaménte, or Rabiosaménte, fu­
riously, madly, rauingly.

Ravióso, or Rabióso, raging, furious,
mad.

* Ravirúbio, vide Rabirúbio. 

* Raviséco, vide Rabiséco. 

* Rávo, vide Rábo. 

* Ravúdo, vide Rabúdo. 

* Ráxa, vide Rája. 

Ráya, the graine of wood, a line, a strake,
a fish called a ray or scate fish.

* Ráya,  a strake or marke by straking.
Also a fish called a ray.

Rayádo, lined, marked out, rased, stra­
ked out.

* Rayadúra, casting of beames as the
sunne doth, straking or drawing out.

Rayár, to marke out, to drawe strakes or
lines, to cast beames as the sunne doth.

* Raýdo, shaued, pared.

* Rayga, Raýgo, vide Raér. 

* Raygádo, rooted, hauing taken roote.

* Raygadúra, f. rooting or taking roote.

Raygár, 1. Præt. yo Raygué, to take
roote.

* Raygue, vide Raygár. 

Ráyo, a flash of lightening, the sunne
beame, the spolke of a wheele.

Rayóla, f. a rasor.

Raýz, f. a roote, a round head of garlicke,
an onion, &c.

* Raýz del álla, an herbe called elecam­
pane.

* Ráza, vide Ráça. 

* Razaménto, vide Raçaménto. 

Razímo, m.a bunch of grapes.

* Razión, vide Ración. 

Razón, f. reason.

Razonáble, reasonable.

Razonableménte, reasonably.

Razonamiénto, reasoning, discourse,
conference.

Razonár, to reason, to discourse in talke,
to conferre.


R E
Reál, royall or king-like, a campe or armie
of soldiers in the field. Als a riall or
sixe pence.

Realéngo, belonging to the king.

* Realidád, f. the substance, effect, or
very truth of the matter.

Realménte, really, in very deede, in
sooth.

* Reamado, loued again.

* Reamár, to loue againe.

Reáta, a binding or tying againe.

Reatadúra, binding againe.

Reatár, to binde or tie againe.

* Rebañádo, gathered into a flocke. Also
licked, as the dish or platter when the
broth is eaten vp.

Rebañár, to gather into a flocke. Also to
licke a dish or platter after the broth
is eaten.

Rebañégo, of the flocke.

Rebáño, a flocke of sheepe, &c.

Rebatádo, snatched, catched.

Rebatár, to snatch, to catch.

* Rebatído, rebated or abated of price
or reckoning, rebounded as a ball, bea­
ten backe.

Rebatína, f. a sodaine skirmish, a scam­
bling, a musse.

* Rebatimiénto, m.rebating in a recko­
ning or account, rebounding backe.

Rebatir, to rebate in reckoning, to re­
bound, or beate backe againe.

Rebáto, m.a tumult, a sodaine stirre, an
vprore.

* a Rebáto tocár, to strike vp alarme, to
make an vprore.

Rebéço, m.a wilde goate.

Rebelár, to rebell, to begin a mutinie. Al­
so to reueale.

Rebélde, a rebell, a mutinous fellow.

Rebeldía, f. rebellion, mutinie, insurrec­
tion, a writ of rebellion when a man
refuseth to appeere and answer his case
in law.

Rebellín, or Rebelín, a platforme or
bulwarke to lay ordinance on, a fort
where ordinance is planted.

* Rebellón, m.insurrection, mutinie, re­
bellion.

Rebellión, vide Rebeldía. 

Rebentaçón, a breach, a cracke.





* Rebentádo, broken, cracked, burst out,
as the bowels out of the bodie.

Rebentár, yo Rebiénto, to breake in
sunder, to cracke, to burst, as bowels
out of the bodie.

Reberdecér, or Reverdecér, to waxe
greene againe.

* Rebés, or Revés, backward, contrary,
crosse.

Rebezár, to keepe turne.

Rebezéro, he that keepeth turne.

Rebidár, to reuie.

* Rebiénta, Rebiénto, vide Rebentár. 

* Rebistír, vide Revistír. 

Rebite, m.a reuie.

Rebivír, to reuiue.

* Rebocádo, called backe, reuoked.

* Reboçádo, masked ouer the face, muf­
fled.

* Rebocár, to reuoke, to call backe.

† Reboçár, to maske, to couer with a
maske or vizarde, to muffle the face, to
wimple, or go with the face couered.

* Rébo, a man so called.

* † Rebóço, m.a maske, a vizard, to 
wimple the face.

Rebolár, to flie againe, to flie backe.

* Rebolcádo, tumbled, or wallowed.

Rebolcadéro, a poole to tumble in, a
puddle or place where swine vse to
wallow.

Rebolcár. 1. Præt. yo Rebolque, to
tumble, to wallow.

* Reboldón, m.a caterpiller or such
like worme, a worme called the diuels
goldring, which spoileth vines.

* Reboleár, to reuolt, to flie backe.

* Rebolque, vide Rebolcár. 

Reboltón, vide Reboldón. 

Reboltóso, a turmoyler, an ouerturner, a
disquieter.

* Reboltúra, turmoile, disquietnes.

Rebolvedéro, any thing turned ouer.

Rebolvedór, a turner ouer, a disquie­
ter.

Rebolvér, yo Rebuélvo, to ouerturne, 
to roll vp, to turmoile, to disquiet.

Rebolvimiénto, ouerturning, turmoy­
ling, disquieting.

* Reborujár, to entangle, to snarle togi­
ther, as threed or silke, or such like.

Rebossadúra, ouerflowing.

Rebossár, to run ouer, to ouerflow.

Rebotádo víno, dead wine, wine past
the best.

Rebotádo, made dull, or blunt of edge.
Also put back.

Rebotadúra, dulnes, bluntnes. Also a
putting back, with the hand, or such
like.

Rebotár, to make dull, or blunt, to waxe
naught. Also to put back.

* Rebóte, m.putting back, a making
dull or blunt.

* Rebramiénto, roaring like a lyon.

* Rebramár, to roare like a lyon.

* Rebuelque, Rebuélco, vide Rebolcár. 

* Rebuélta, f. an ouerturning, a tumult, a
disquietnes.

Rebuélto, ouerturning, turmoiling, dis­
quietnes, a lustie stirring horse.

* a Rebuélto ser, to be in a troublesome
state.

* Rebuélve, Rebuélvo, vide Rebol­
vér. 

* Rebullir, to mooue a little, to wrinch, to
striue being oppressed.

Rebúsca, f. gleaning of corne, gathering of
the eares that are fallen.

Rebuscár, 1. Præt. yo Rebusque, to seeke
againe.

* Rebusque, vide Rebuscár. 

† Rebuznár, to crie like an asse.

* Rebúzno, m.the crying or braying of an
asse.

* Recabádo, recouered.

Recabár, to obtaine, to shake off.

* Recábdo, vide Recáudo. 

* Recadéro, one that carrieth a letter or
present, or such like.

* Recádo, vide Recáudo. 

* Tódo está en recáudo, all is safe.

Recaér, Præs. yo Recáygo. Sub. Præs.
Recáyga, to fall againe.

* Reçága, the last, the rereward.

* Reçágua, f. vide Reçága, idem. 

Recalcadaménte, thickly, fully.

Recalcár, 1. Præt. yo Recalqué, to
stuffe, to stop clifts, to beate in.

* Recalque, vide Recalcár. 

* Recálte, a thing vsed about diers trade.

Recamádo, layed with lace, laced, em­
brodered.

Recamár, to lace, to lay on with lace, to
embroder.

Recámara, f. a wardrobe, a dining cham­
ber, a closet.

* Recambiár, to change.

* Recámbio, m.change.

* Recámera, vide Recámara. 

Recámo, m.lacing, wauie, embroderie.

* Recánbio, vide Recámbio. 

Reçadór, vide Rezadór. 

* Reçár, vide Rezár. 

* Recatadaménte, warily, heedfully.

Recatádo, warie, heedfull, circumspect.

Recatamiénto, warines, heed.

Recatárse, to be warie, to be circumspect.

* Recádo, m.heed, warines.

Recatón, m.or Regatón, the pike of a
staffe or speare at the lower end. Also a
huckester or seller of victuals at second
hand.  Also a pinching or hucking fel­
low in buying or selling.

* Recaudádo, recouered, sped, succeeded,
happened.

Recaudadór, a recouerer, one that get­
teth, a receiuer of rents.

Recaudamiénto, recouerie.

Recaudár, to recouer, to procure, to speed.

Recáudo, a warrant, successe, a letter of
atturney, a caueat or warning, aduise
or admonition, answearing to a plea.

* tódo está en buen Recáudo, al is safe.

Recaýdo, fallen againe.

* Recáyga, Recáygo, vide Recaér. 

Recebido, receiued.

Recebidór, a receiuer, an allower.

Recebimiénto, receit, allowance.

* Recebimiénto de cása, a by parlor,
hall or place to receiue folke in a house.

Recebír, or Recevír, to receiue, to take.

* Receládo, fearing, warie of, suspicious.

Recelár, or Recelárse, to feare, to take
heede of, to suspect.

Recélo, feare, warinesse, suspicion.

* Recelóso, fearefull, suspicious, warie.

* Recentál, vide Rezentál. 

* Recentárse, to make himselfe fresh, or
to be made fresh.

* Recénte, fresh, new.

Receptár, vide Recetár. 

Receptór, a receiuer.

* Receptória cárta, or Receptéria, a
bill or receit, a letter of exchange.

* Recésso, m.going backe.

* Recéta, a receit of phisicke.

* Recetádo, the receit of phisicke written
or deliuered.

* Recetár, to write or ordaine a receit in
phisicke.

* Recevír, or Recebír, yo Recívo, to
receiue, to take.

* Receumándo, leaking as a pot that
runneth out at a cracke or broken
place.

* Receumár, to leake or run out as a
vessell runneth out at a crackt place.

Recháça, f. a driuing backe, a repulse.

Rechaçár, to beate or driue backe, to re­
pell.

Rechinár, to make a whizzing noise by
hastie breaking of the aire, as a bullet
shot from a peece doth, or as the winde
doth in the shroudes of a ship. Also to
gnash the teeth.

* Récia, vide Rézia, strong.

* Reciba, Recíbo, vide Recebír. 

* Recienteménte, vide Rezientemén­
te, freshly, newly, lately.

* Reciénte, vide Reziénte. 

* Récio, vide Rézio. 

* Recíve, Recívo, vide Recevír. 

Reclamación, calling backe, gainsay­
ing.

* Reclamádo, called backe.

Reclamár, to call backe.





Reclámo, a call for birds.

* Reclinádo, inclined, bowed downe, a­
bated, waxed worse.

* Reclinár, to abate, to decline, to waxe
worse.

* Reclusión, a shutting in.

Recobrádo, recouered.

Recobradór, a recouerer.

Recobrár, to recouer.

* Recodádo, m.leaned on the elbow.

Recogedór, a gatherer, a taker vp.

Recogér, yo Recójo, Sub. Præs. Sub. Præs. Recó­
ja, to gather vp, to take vp, to retire, to
withdraw.

Recogído, retired, gathered, with­
drawen.

Recogimiénto, gathering, retiring,
withdrawing.

* Recója, Recójo, vide Recogér. 

* Recojér, vide Recogér. 

Recomendación, recommending, sen­
ding of greeting or salutations.

Recomendádo, recommended.

Recomendár, yo recomiéndo, to re­
commend, to send salutations vnto.

* Recomiénde, Recomiéndo, vide Recomendár. 

Recompensación, recompense, amends.

* Recompensado, recompensed, made
amends.

Recompensár, yo Recompiénso, to
make amends, to recompense.

* Recompiénse, Recompiénso, vide Recompensár. 

* Recompuésto, set in order againe.

Reconcentrádo, vnited togither in his
center.

* Reconcentrár, to meete or vnite togi­
ther in his center.

Reconciliación, reconciling, attone­
ment.

Reconciliádo, reconciled.

Reconciliár, to reconcile, to make attone­
ment.

* Reconciliamiénto, m.reconcilement.

Reçongadór, m.a murmurer, a grudger,
one that goeth mumbling and repining
at any thing.

Reçongár, 1. Præt. yo Reçongué, to
murmur, grudge, or mumble at a thing.

* Reçongéro, one that murmureth,
mumbleth, or grudgeth at a thing.

* Reçongue, vide Reçongár. 

Reconocedor, an acknowledger, a
viewer, a scoute or spiall.

Reconocér, yo Reconósco, or Reco­
noscér, Sub. Præs. Reconósca, to ac­
knowledge, to view, to ouerlooke.

Reconocido, viewing, acknowledging.

Reconocimiénto, a view, acknowledg­
ment, ouerlooking.

* Reconósca, Reconósco, vide Reco­
nocér. 

Reconoscér, or Reconocér, to acknow­
ledge, to viewe, to giue knowledge, to
ouerlooke.

* Reconoscér baterías, to view batte­
ries.

* Reconoscído, vide Reconocído, 
viewed, ouerlooked, acknowledged.

* Reconoscimiénto, vide Reconoci­
miénto. 

* Recontádo, m.recounted, told, declared.

Recontár, yo Recuénto, to recount, to
tell, to relate.

* Recontrádo, met with, encountred.

* Recontrár, yo Recuéntro, to meete
with, to encounter.

Reconvalecér, yo Reconvalésco, Sub.
Præs. Reconvalésca, to recouer
health againe, to waxe well againe.

* Reconvalésca, Reconvalésco, vide Reconvalecér. 

* Reconvención, f. a reconquering, or
ouercomming.

* Recopilación, compiling, or gathering
out of bookes.

Recopiládo, compiled, gathered out of
bookes.

Recopilár, to compile, to gather out of
bookes.

* Recordación, remembrance, calling to
minde.

* Recordádo, called to remembrance.

* Recordadór, a remembrancer.

Recordár, yo Recuérdo, to remember,
to reckon vp, to call vnto minde.

Recorrér, to run backe, to run vnto.

Recosér, to sow againe, to amende.

* Recosido, sowed againe, amended.

* Recostár, yo Recuésto, to lay downe
vpon one side.

Recozér, to seeth or boile againe.

* Recozído, sodde againe, well tried,
refined.

Recreación, refreshing.

Recreár, to refresh, to recreate.

Recrecér, yo Recrésco, Sub. Præs. yo
Recrésca, to increase, to grow afresh.

* Recrecído, increased.

Recrecimiénto, increase, growing a­
fresh.

* Recrésca, Recrésco, vide Recrecér. 

Recrescér, or Recrecér, to increase, to
grow afresh.

* Recrescído, vide Recrecído. 

Recrescimiénto, or Recrecimiénto,
increase, growth.

* Rectaguárdia, the rereward.

* Récto, right.

* Rectór, a chiefe schoolemaster, a chan­
cellor or gouernor of a vniuersitie.

Récua, a droue of horses or mules, such as
carriers vse to driue.

* Recuáje, m.many droues of horses or
mules togither, such as carriers and
packemen driue.

Recuájo, the spawne or frie of fish. The
crudding of milke.

Recudimiénto, restoring, paying rent.

Recudír, to restore, to pay rent.

* Recuénte, Recuénto, vide Recontár. 

* Recuéntre, Recuéntro, vide Recon­
trár. 

* Recuéntro, an incounter or meeting
with.

* Recuérde, Recuérdo, vide Recor­
dár. 

† Recuéro, m.a carrier that driueth
mules or horses loaden with packes.

* Recuéste, Recuésto, vide Recostár. 

Recuésto, the hanging or steepe side of a
hill.

* † Reçumándo, leaking as a pot that
runneth out, or taking or licking the
iuice.

* † Reçumár, to leake as a pot, to licke the
iuice.

Recuperáble, recouerable, that may be
recouered or gotten.

Recuperación, recouerie.

Recuperár, to recouer, to obtaine.

* Recupiládo, vide Recopiládo. 

* Recupilár, vide Recopilár, to compile,
to gather or heape togither.

* Recusación, f. refusall.

* Recusádo, refused.

Recusár, to refuse.

Réd, f. a net. Also a grate or a lattise.

Redáño, the caull wherein the bowel lie.

Redarguimiénto, reproofe.

Redarguir, to reprooue, to finde fault
with.

* Redeádo, vide Rodeádo. 

Rededór, round about.

* al Rededór, about, round about.

Redemción, redeeming, purchasing a­
gaine.

Redemído, redeemed.

Redemír, yo Redímo, to redeeme, to
purchase againe.

* Redempción, or Redemción, redee­
ming, purchasing againe.

Redemptór, a redeemer, a purchaser a
fresh.

* Redención, vide Redempción. 

* Redentór, vide Redemptór. 

Redéro, a net-maker.

Redezílla, a little net.

* Rediézmo, a retithing, taking of euery
fifteene one.

* Redil, m.hurdles to fold sheepe in.

* Redilla, vide Raquéta, a racket.

* Redíma, Redímo, vide Redemír. 

* Redobládo, doubled.

Redoblár, to double, to line.

Redóble, double.





† Redóma, f. a glasse viall.

Redomádo, vide Refalçado. 

* Redomilla, f. a little viall of glasse.

* Redondaménte, roundly.

Redoñdeár, to make round.

Redondéz, f. roundnes.

* Redondillas, a kinde of verse, rounde­
layes.

Redóndo, round.

Redrójo, a new bud.

Redropélo, against the haire.

* Redundár, to rebound backe.

* Redúto, a barricade to defende from
small shot.

* Redúzga, Redúzgo, vide Reduzír. 

Reduzído, brought backe.

Reduzimiénto, a bringing backe.

Reduzír, yo Redúzgo, Sub. Præs. Re­
dúzga, to bring backe.

* Reedificádo, builded vp againe, repai­
red.

* Reedificár, yo Reedífico, 1. Præt. yo
Reedifique, to builde againe, to re­
paire.

* Reedifique, vide Reedificár. 

Refalçado, malicious.

* Refectório, or Refetório, a dining
place, a baiting place.

* Referendár, vide Refrendár. 

* Referído, that which hath beene decla­
red or set downe.

Referír, yo Refiéro, to report, to declare,
to tell.

Refetório, or Refitório, vide Refectó­
rio. 

* Refiere, Refiéro, vide Referír. 

* Refino, that which is verie fine, as
cloth or such like, &c.

Refitoléro, m.one that hath charge or
gouernment of the victuals in the co­
uent among friers, a clarke of the kit­
chen.

* Refligério, or Refrigério, a refre­
shing.

Reflorecér, yo Reflorésco, Sub. Præs. 
Reflorésca, to flourish againe.

* Reflorecído, or Reflorescído, flou­
rished againe.

* Reflorésca, Reflorésco, vide Reflo­
recér. 

* Reflúxo, the ebbe of the sea, after tide,
the fluxe of the belly.

* Reforçádo, reinforced.

Reforçár, yo Refuérço, to reinforce.

Reformación, a reformation.

* Reformádo, reformed.

Reformadór, a reformer.

Reformár, to reforme.

Refran, m.a prouerbe.

Refregádo, rubbed, fretted.

Refregadúra, f. rubbing, fretting.

Refregamiénto, fretting, rubbing.

Refregár, yo Refriégo, Sub. Præs. Re­
friegué, to rubbe againe, to weare, to
fret.

* Refregério, vide Refrigério. 

* Refrendádo, signed with the secretaries
hand.

* Refrendár, to signe with the secretaries
hande.

Refrenár, to refraine.

* Refrescádo, refreshed, renewed.

Refrescár, to renew, to refresh.

* Refrésco, a renewing, a refreshing.

* Refriárse, to waxe very colde.

Refriega, f. a skirmish.

* Refriégo, vide Refregár. 

* Refriegue, vide Refregár. 

Refrigério, or Refligério, a refreshing.

* Refuérce, Refuérço, vide Reforçár. 

Refúgio, a refuge.

* Refulgiénte, shining.

Refunfuñár, to murmur, to mumble, to
mutter.

* Refutár, to refute, to confound.

Regaçádo, tucked vp.

Regaçár, to tucke vp the clothes.

Regáço, the lap.

Regadio, or Regadúra, a place watered,
watering of herbes or plants.

Regadízo, waterie, full of water.

* Regádo, watered.

Regadór, a waterer.

Regadúra, or Regadío, watering.

* Regajál, a place or lowe vallie which
receiueth the quantitie of raine water
from the higher places, and is thereby
much watred.

Regaladaménte, gently, curteously,
daintily, cockeringly.

* Regaládo, cockered daintily, bred vp
nice, daintie, fine.

Regalamiénto, melting, thawing, coc­
kering.

Regalár, to cocker, to make much of, to
melt.

* Regalícia, f. licorice.

Regalíllo, a womans gloue, a fauor, a
muffe or snufkin to put the hands in.

Regalíza, f. licorice.

Regálo, gentle vsage, daintinesse.

* Regalón, one that cockereth himselfe, a
wanton, full of pleasure, nicenesse and
wantonnesse.

Regañár, to grin like a dog, to gnash.

Regañár los diéntes, to gnash with the
teeth.

Regáno, vide Regañón. 

Regañón, a grinning fellow, the north
winde.

Regár, yo Riégo, to water, to bedeaw.

* Regateár, to pinch or hucke in buying
or selling.

Regatón, m.or Recatón, a pedler, a
huckster, a pinching fellow in buying
and selling, a mercer, a retailor of
wares, the blunt end of a staffe.

* Regatóña, vide Regatonia. 

Regatoneár, to sell pedlarie ware, to play
the huckster, to pinch or hucke in buy­
ing or selling.

Regatonía, pedling, buying of small
wares.

* Regazádo, vide Regaçádo. 

* Regazár, vide Regaçar. 

* Regeneración, new birth, spirituall
conception and birth.

* Regenerádo, begotten and borne a­
gaine.

* Regenerár, to beget and bring into the
world anew.

* Regerminár, to bud againe, to spring
anew.

Regibádo, or Corcobádo, crooke bac­
ked.

Regidór, a gouernor, an alderman, a
burgomaster, a clarke of the market, or
an officer in a citie that is to reforme
ciuill matters, but not criminall.

Regimiénto, rule, gouernment, regi­
ment.

* Régio, kingly, royall, princely.

Región, f. a countrie.

Regír, yo Ríjo, Sub. Præs. Ríja, to rule,
to gouerne, to beare sway or authoritie,
to stir a ship, to play the pilot.

* Registrádo, registred, reckoned vp.

* Registradór, a keeper of register, a
Custos-rotulorum, a master of the
roles, a Custos-breuium.

Registrár, to reckon vp, to register.

Regístro, or Regístre, a register, a booke
of remembrance.

Régla, f. a rule, a line to write by, a pre­
cept.

* Régla, a rule to rule withall. Also wo­
mens flowers.

* Regládo, ruled, ordered.

Reglár, to rule.

* Regoldár, yo Reguéldo, to rospe, to
belch in the stomacke, to vomit.

Rególfo, a whirlepoole.

Regordído, or Regorgído, swollen, full,
puffed vp with fat.

Regorgído, or Regordído, idem. 

* Regostár, to taste or prooue againe.

* Regósto, a tasting or proouing againe.

Regozijádo, feasted.

Regozijár, to reioice, to solace, to make
merrie.

Regozíjo, or Regozíxo, ioy, gladnes.

* Regrésso, a going back againe.

* Reguélde, Reguéldo, vide Regoldár. 

Reguéldo, rosping, belching of the
stomach.

Reguéra, a path betwixt beds in a gar­
den.

Reguizár, to be stiffe.

Regularménte, by rule.





Regulár, belonging to rule.

* Rehága, Rehágo, vide Rehazér. 

* Rehará, Reharé, Reharía, vide 
Rehazér. 

Rehazér, Præs. Rehágo, Reházes,
Reháze, 1. Præt. Rehize, Rehizíste,
Rehize, Fut. Reharé, rás, rá, Sub
Præs. Rehága, Imperfect. Rehiziéra,
Reharia, or Rehiziésse. Fut. Rehizi­
ére, to doo againe, to renew, to make
afresh.

Rehazimiénto, making or dooing a
fresh.

Reházio, m.a lazie idle fellow.

Rehécho, strongly set in the body, great
limmed.

† Rehén, m.an hostage, a man pledge.

* Rehenchído, filled againe.

Rehenchír, to fill againe.

* Rehíze, Rehiziéra, Rehiziésse, vide Rehazér. 

* Rehízo, vide Rehazér. 

* Reholládo, troden or trampled vnder
foote.

Rehollár, to tread or trample vnder
foote.

* Rehuír, or Rehuýr, to run away a­
gaine.

* Rehundído, drenched againe.

Rehundír, to drench or drowne againe.

* Rehusádo, refused.

Rehusamiénto, a refusall.

Rehusár, to refuse.

* Rehuzár, idem. 

Réja, or Réxa, a plough, the culter of a
plough, an iron grate. Also a barre of
iron to put in a window.

Réja para arár, a plough irons.

† Rejalgár, poison, arsenick or rats bane,
charmed potions.

* Rejétton, a branch with fruit.

* Réina, vide Réyna. 

* Reintegrár, to restore, to renew.

* Reintegración, a renewing.

† Réjo, m.the pricke of a goade or any
other iron pricke or point. Also the
countrie folke of Spaine vse it for Ré­
zio, stoute, strong.

Réjo de cínto, the toong of the buckle of
a girdle.

* Reír, vide Reýr, to laugh.

* Reiteración, a repetition, a reiteration.

* Reiterár, to repeate, to reiterate.

Relación, recounting, telling.

Relamér, to licke againe.

Relámpago, a flash of lightening.

Relampagueár, to flash with lightening,
to lighten.

* Relánce, peraduenture.

* Relápso, fallen or sunke downe againe.

Relatádo, related, told at length.

Relatár, to relate, to tell a historie or a
matter at length.

Relatór, a recounter, a teller, a reporter,
an informer, an officer in Spaine that
is to informe the iudges or iustices tru­
ly of matters, according as haue
informed of their causes: a clarke of
the peace, a recorder or such like officer
a remembrancer.

Relavár, to wash againe.

* Relaxádo, released, let loose, set at li­
bertie.

* Relaxamiénto, m.a releasing, a setting
at libertie, a loosing, a slacking.

* Relaxár, to set loose, to release, to dis­
charge, to set at libertie.

* Reléjes, vide Reléxes. 

Relentecér, yo Relentésco, Sub. Præs. 
Relentésca, to waxe weake, to relent,
to yeeld.

* Relentésca, Relentésco, vide Relen­
tecér. 

* Relevádo, lifted vp, eased, releeued, set
at quiet.

* Relevádo de trabájo, resting from
labour.

* Relevádo pécho, a quieted minde. Al­
so a breast high bulked.

* Relevár, yo Reliévo, to relieue, to lift
vp, to quiet, to set at ease.

Reléxes, m.knobs, or bunches in a table r
other smooth thing. Also rowtes or
signes of a cart wheele, which hath been
at a stand, & hath made many saies to
get out, those signes so made of the cart
whele, be called Reléxes.

Relicário, a boxe to keepe relickes in.

Reliéve, m.that which is ouerplus of
meate, fragments, broken meate, crums,
&c. Also embossed worke, any manner
of worke in ioyners or free masons
trade, bossing or bunching out, lifted or
eleuated higher then the rest of the
workmanship.

* Reliéve, Reliévo, vide Relevár. 

* Reliéves, m.fragments or broken
meates.

Religión, religion, deuotion, a matter of
conscience.

Religiosaménte, religiously, deuout­
lie.

Religióso, religious, deuout.

† Relinchár, to neigh as a horse.

† Relinchído, the neighing of a horse.

† Relinchamiénto, idem. 

* † Relíncho, the neighing of a horse.

* Relinga, f. a coard in a shippe called the
bolt rope.

Reliquário, a boxe to keepe relikes in.

Relíquias, f. relikes.

Rellanádo, any thing plained ouer.

* Rellanár, to plaine with a planer.

Rellenádo, filled, stuffed, made full, fat­
ted.

Rellenár, to fill full, to make fatte.

Relléno, a pudding, any thing that is fil­
led full.

* † Relogéro, or Reloxéro, a clocke ma­
ker, a diall maker: also one that keepeth
or ordereth a clocke, a clocke keeper.

† Relóx, m.a clocke, a diall, an houre
glasse.

* Relox del sol, a sunne diall.

* Reloxéro, or Relogéro, a maker of
clocks or dials, or one that keepeth the
clocke and setteth him in order.

* Relucír, or Reluzír, to shine, to gli­
ster.

* Remachádo, flat, not bunching vp.

* Remachádo de naríz, flat nosed.

* Remachár, to make flat and euen
without bunches.

* Remádo, rowed.

Remadór, a rower, one that roweth with
oares.

Remadúra, rowing with oares.

* Remallár, to do or dresse a thing with
maile, to mende iackes of maile.

Remanchádo de naríz, flat nosed.

Remanecér, or Remanescér, to re­
maine, to abide.

Remaniénte, remaining.

Remánso del río, a calme passing or
running of the riuer: the calme or still
water of a riuer, which after it hath
runne with a swift current, it com­
meth into a plaine broad plot, and be­
commeth calme and still water.

Remár, to rowe with oares.

Rematár, to summe vp sundry reckonings
into one.

* Remáte, the summe of an account, a
full reckoning, an end, a top.

Remedamiénto, imitating, following in
fashions.

Remedár, to imitate, to follow in fashions.

Remediár, to remedie, to cure.

Remédio, or Rimédio, remedie, helpe.

Remembránça, remembrance.

Remembrár, to remember, to put in mind.

Remendádo, amended, patched, ragged.

* Remendádo cavállo, a flea bitten
horse.

* Remendádo lebrél, a pied grey-hound.

Remendár, yo Remiéndo, to amend.

Remendón, a botcher, a cobler.

Remendón de çapátos, a cobler.

Reméro, a rower, a gallie-slaue.

Remessár, yo Remiésso, to teare the
haire.

* Remiénde, Remiéndo, vide Remendár. 

Remiéndo, a patch, a peece.

* lléno de Remiéndos, full of patches, all
ragged.





* Remíesse, Remíesso, vide Remes­
sár. 

Reminicéncia, remembrance.

Remirár, to ouerlooke, to looke on.

* Remissión, forgiuenes, slacking.

* Remisso, remisse, not vehement, slacke,
loose, lewd, negligent.

Remitido, remitted, forgiuen, pardoned,
released, giuen ouer suite.

Remitir, to remit, to forgiue, to release, to
giue ouer suite.

Rémo, an oare.

Remoçár, to be yoong againe.

Remocecér, idem. 

* Remojádo, wet againe.

* Remojamiénto, wetting againe.

* Remojár, to wet againe, to water.

* Remojár la saladúra, to water salt
meate.

Remójo, wetting, steeping.

* Remoládo, m.battered, rugged, or crag­
gie.

* Remolcádo, towed along.

Remolcár, 1. Præt. yo Remolque, to
towe along with a boate.

Remolinádo, turning round as a whirle
poole.

Remolinár, to turne round.

* Remolineár, to turne round as a mill.

Remolíno, a whirle-poole, a whirle-
winde, the turning of the haire.

* Remolino de la cabéça, the crowne of
the head.

* Remolinos viéntos, whirle-windes.

Remondár, to make cleane againe.

Remontár, to goe vp the hill, to run.

Remordér, yo Remuérdo, to bite again,
to haue a pricking in conscience.

* Remordido, bitten againe.

Remordimiénto, remorse, sting of consci­
ence.

Remostecérse el vino, to waxe mu­
stie.

* Remóto, far off, remte.

Removér, yo Remuevo, to remooue, to
take away.

* Removído, remooued, put away.

Rempuxár, or Rempujár, to push for­
ward.

Rempuxón, or Rempujón, a thrust.

Remudár, to change.

* Remuérda, Remuérdo, vide Remordér. 

* Remuéve, Remuévo, vide Remo­
vér. 

Remuneración, rewarding.

* Remunerádo, rewarded, recompensed,
requited.

Remunerár, to reward, to recompence, to
requite or make amends.

Rén, or Reñón, the kidney, the reines of
the backe.

Renacér, yo Renásco, to be borne a­
gaine, to spring againe.

* Renascér, idem. 

* Renacimiénto, or Renascimiénto, 
new birth, an after spring, or growing
againe.

* Rencilla, vide Renzílla. 

* Rencillóso, vide Renzillóso. 

* Rencór, or Renquór, hatred.

* Rencontrár, yo Rencuéntro, to en­
counter, to meete.

* Rencontrádo, met with.

* Rencuéntre, Rencuéntro, vide Ren­
contrár. 

* Rencuéntro, an encountering or mee­
ting with againe.

Rendájo, m.a iay.

Rendido, yeelded, giuen vp.

Rendér, yo Rindo, Sub. Præs. Rínda, to
yeeld, to giue vp.

Renegádo, an apostata, one that hath
forsaken the faith.

* Renegadór, idem. 

Renegár, Præs. yo Reniégo, 1. Præt. yo
Renegué, to deny or forsake the faith.

Rengláda, or Reñonáda, fat about the
kidneys or loynes.

Renglón, m.a written line.

Reniégo, m.apostate, falling from the
faith.

* Reniégue, vide Renegár. 

* Reñido, chidden.

Reñída guérra, contentious or wrangling
war.

* Reñír, yo Ríño, to chide, to braule, to
wrangle.

* Renobádo, vide Renovádo. 

* Renobár, vide Renovár. 

Reñonáda, fat about the loynes or kid­
neyes.

Renómbre, m.a renoune. also a surname.

Renovación, renewing.

Renovádo, renewed.

Renovamiénto, renewing, refreshing.

Ronovár, yo Renuévo, to renewe, to
make or do a fresh, to budde out as
trees doe.

Renovéro, an vsurer.

* Renquentrár, vide Rencontrár, to
encounter, to meete with.

* Renquéntro, an incounter, a meeting,
a skirmish.

Rénta, rent, reuenue, yeerely, comming in.

Rentár, to let to farme, to hire.

Rentéro, hee that letteth to farme, hee
that hireth.

* Renuéve, Renuévo, vide Renovár. 

Renuévo, vsurie, increase, the budding of
a tree.

* Renuévo de árbol, the sprouting or
budding of a tree, a yoong sprout new­
ly growen.

* Renumeración, a paying againe of
money, telling ouer againe, reckoning.

Renumerádo, money paide againe, mo­
ney tolde againe, recounted.

* Renumerár, to pay againe, to tell a­
gaine, to recount or reckon againe.

Renunciación, renouncing, casting off,
giuing ouer.

Renunciár, to renounce, to giue ouer, to
cast off.

Renzilla, a braule, a brabble, wrangling.

Renzillóso, bent to brauling or wrang­
ling.

Réo, accused, charged with, guiltie.

* Repágulo, a bolt or barre of a dore, a
raile or barre which staieth horses
from running.

* Repájo, vide Repáxo. 

Reparár, to repaire, to amende, to de­
fend.

Repáro, reparation, a bulwarke, a de­
fence.

* Repartído, diuided, parted.

Repartimiénto, parting, diuision, distri­
buting.

Repartír, to diuide, to part asunder, to
appiont by course.

Repastár, to feede.

* Repáxo, or Repájo, a thicket of yong
trees. Also a place of grazing for cattel.

* Repechádo, leaned on the breast.

* Repechár, to leane on the breast.

Repécho, the side of a hill, a bulwarke.

* Repeládo, plucked off, as haires are
plucked away.

* Repelár, to plucke off, to plucke againe.

Repelo, Respigón, or Padrásto, the pil­
ling of the nailes, too much skin grow­
ing ouer the nailes.

* Repelón, a plucking off of haires.

Repentimiénto, repentance, penance.

* Repentinaménte, suddenly.

Repentíno, sudden, vnawares.

Repentír, yo Repiénto, to repent.

* Repéro, vide Repélo, against the
haire.

* Repetición, repeating, rehearsing, say­
ing againe.

Repetidór, a repeater, a rehearser.

Repetír, yo Repito, to rehearse, to re­
peate, to say ouer againe.

Repicár, 1. Præt. yo Repiqué, to sound
as bels, to iangle, to clatter.

* Repiénte, Repiénto, vide Repentír. 

* Repilogár, to repeate againe and a­
gaine.

* Repíque, vide Repicár. 

* Repiquéte, m.a little noise or clattering
togither of bels, weapons or such like.

* Repiquéte de broquél, a clashing or
clattering on a buckler.

* Repíso, sudden, on the sudden.





* Repita, Repite, Repito, vide Repetir, 

* Repléto, full, replenished, replete.

* Réplica, replying, answering againe.

Replicación, vide Réplica. 

Replicár, Præs. yo Replíco, 1. Præt. yo
Repliqué, to reply, to answer againe.

* Replique, vide Replicár. 

Repóllo, a cabbage that groweth very
round together.

* Repoquito, very little.

* Repoquitos, very few.

Reportádo, quieted, setled, pacified.

Reportamiénto, setling, quieting.

Reportár, to quiet himselfe, to settle him­
selfe, to write downe or set in a booke.

Reportório, a memoriall, a kalender or
almenacke.

Reposádo, rested, reposed.

Reposár, to rest, to repose, to be at quiet.

Repóso, rest, ease, quietnes of minde.

Repostéro, a carpet, a couerlet of arras,
or hangings that hath ones armes wo­
uen in it. Also he that charge of
keeping such hangings. Also one that
hath charge of plate.

* Repostéro de pláta, one that hath
charge of the plate in great houses.

* Repostéro de remiéndos, a couerlet
of shreads of many colours.

* Repregúnta, streight examination, a
re-asking or asking againe.

Reprehendedór, a chider, a finder of
faults.

Reprehendér, yo Reprehiéndo, to re­
proue, to finde fault with.

Reprehendído, reproued, found fault
with.

Reprehensión, reproofe, blame, finding
fault with.

* Reprehensór, a reprouer, a finder of
faults.

* Repremído, repressed, kept down.

Repremír, yo Reprímo, to represse, to
keepe downe, to keepe backe.

* Reprendér, to reprehend, to find fault.

* Reprendído, vide Reprehendído. 

* Représa, f. a stop or stay, an arrest.

Represáda água, a standing water, water
that is stopped that it cannot run.

Represár, to stop a water course.

Representación, a representing, making
a shew.

* Representádo, represented, set before
ones face in shew.

* Representadór, a representer of persons
in action, a player of comedies.

* Representánte, idem. 

Representár, to represent in shew, to play
a comedie.

* Repretár, to streighten.

* Reprimído, repressed, reprehended, kept
vnder.

* Reprímo, Repríme, vide Repremír. 

* Reprobáble, reprooueable.

* Reprobár, to reprooue.

* Reprócha, or Repróche, reproache,
reproofe, captiousnes.

* Reprochadaménte, reprochfully, cap­
tiously.

* Reprochadór, m.a reproouer, a repro­
cher, a captious fellow.

Reprochár, to reprooue, to reproch, to
checke or cast in ones teeth, to be capti­
ous.

Repróche, or Reprócha, reproofe, re­
proch, casting in ones teeth, captious­
nes.

Reprovación, reproouing, disallowing.

Reprovádo, reprooued, disallowed.

Reprovár, yo Repruévo, to disallow, to
finde fault with.

* Repruéve, Repruévo, vide Reprovár. 

* Reptádo, challenged, defied.

* Reptadór, m.a challenger, a defier.

* Reptár, to chalenge, to defie.

* Reptília, all creeping things on the
ground, as vermine, wormes, &c.

* Réptos, or Desafis, defyings, challen­
ges.

* República, f. a common-weale.

* Repudiádo, diuorced, cast off.

Repudiár, to diuorce, to cast off.

Repúdio, a diuorce.

* Repuésto, laied vp, a store-house.

Repugnáncia, strife, debate, controuersie
in law.

Repugnár, to striue, to contend against.

Repúlga, f. a hem, a skirt of cloathing.

Repuntár, to begin to point out, or breake
out, as the winde, the sea, or water: to
begin to point out or appeare, as a hill
that first beginneth to discouer it selfe
to our sight: to begin to grow in choler
or anger: to beginne to breake out into
rage.

Reputación, estimacion, reputation.

Reputár, to esteeme, to account of.

Requebrádo, a woer, a louer.

Requebradór, idem. 

Requebrár, yo Requiébro, to make loue,
to woe.

* Requemáda cólera, choler adust, me­
lancholy.

Requemádo, burned, combust.

* Requemár, to burne.

* Requerído, sought, requested.

Requerimiénto, requiring, request.

Requerír, yo Requiéro, to require, to
warne, to request.

Requesón, curds made of whey.

Requésta, a request.

Requestádo, requested.

Requestár, to request, to aske, to require.

* Requiébre, Requiébro, vide Reque­
brár. 

Requiébros, loue toyes.

* Requiére, Requiéro, vide Requerír. 

Rés, f. all cattell, & beasts vnder mans
gouernment, as oxen, sheepe &c. some­
times for game in hunting.

* Resabiár, to play or vse iadish tricks, to
haue an euill taste or sauour, to vse ill
fashions and tricks.

Resabído, a craftie suttle fellow, a taun­
ting fellow.

Resabio, m.an ill or vntoward tricke, cu­
stome or fashion in a man, a iadish
tricke in a horse.

* Resár, vide Rezár. 

Resbaladéro, or Resvaladéro, a slippe­
rie place.

* Resbaladór, or Resvaladór, vide Res­
baladéro. 

Resbalár, or Resvalár, to slip, to slide.

* Resbalízo, or Resvalizo, vide Res­
valizo, a slipperie place.

Resbalóso, vide Resvalóso, slipperie.

* Rescatádo, ransomed.

Rescatár, or Resgatar, to ransome, to re­
deeme.

* Rescátas, or Resgátas, vide Rescáte. 

Rescáte, or Resgáte, m.ransome.

Rescólde, m.hot imbers.

Rescrevír, yo Rescrívo, to write again,
to write backe.

* Rescríto, or Rescrítto, a writing back,
letters dimissorie or of fauor.

* Rescríva, Rescrívo, vide Rescrevír. 

* Réses, all cattell and beastes that are
vnder mans gouernment, as sheepe,
oxen, &c. Also sometime for any game
in hunting.

* Resedír, vide Residír. 

Reséña, or Alarde, a muster of men.

* Resentír, yo Resínto, to feele againe
plainly.

* Resentído, felt againe, plainly per­
ceiued.

* Reservár, to reserue, to keepe backe.

* Resfregár, vide Refregár. 

Resfriádo, cooled, cold, taken cold.

Resfriár, to coole, to waxe cold, to take
cold.

* Resgatár, to ransome, to redeeme.

* Resgáte, m.ransome, redeeming.

* Resible, ridiculous.

* Residéncia, residence, aboade.

Residír, to be resident, to abide.

Resignación, resigning, giuing ouer to
another.

Resignádo, resigned, giuen ouer.

Resignár, to resigne, to giue ouer.

Resína, rosin.

Resinóso, full af rosin.

* Resínte, Resínto, vide Resentír. 

* Resinvenído, one new come.

Resisténcia, resistance, standing against.

* Resistéro, the reflexe of the sunne.





Resistído, withstood, resisted.

Resistír, to resist, to withstand.

* Resitoléro, vide Refitoléro. 

* Résma, a reame of paper.

* Resmílla, vide Reznílla. 

* Résno, vide Rézno, a tike.

* Resolána, f. a place where the sunne shi­
neth warme, and the winde commeth
not.

Resolgár, Præs. yo Resuélgo, 1. Præt.
yo Resolgué, to breath, to fetch his
winde.

* Resolgue, vide Resolgár. 

* Resólla, vide Resuéllo, also vsed for
one that breatheth thicke or fetcheth his
winde hard.

Resollár, yo Resuéllo, to breath, to fetch
winde.

Resolvér, yo Resuélvo, to resolue, to de­
termine, to vntie, to open, to dissolue, to
rid from snares or danger.

Resolución, resolution, a determinate
purpose.

* Resolúto, resolued, vndone, loosed, rid
from.

* Resonánte, sounding againe.

Resonár, yo Resuéno, to sound againe.

* Resoplár, to blow, to fetch wind.

* Resóplo, a blowing with the breath or
a fetching of winde.

* Resorbér, to soape againe.

Respectádo, regarded, respected.

Respectár, to respect, to regard.

Respécto, vide Respéto, regard, respect.

* Respeluzár cabéllos, to plucke off the
haires of the head.

* Respetár, or Respectár, to regard.

* Respeto, or Respécto, regard, respect.

* Respiár, vide Respirár. 

Respigón, the pilling about the nailes, too
much skin growing ouer the nailes.

Respiración, breathing.

Respiradéro, a breathing place.

Respirár, to breath, to take breath, to take
comfort, to be refreshed or eased, to
pause, to rest.

Resplandecér, yo Resplandésco, Sub.
Præs. Resplandésca, to shine bright, to
glister.

Resplandeciénte, glistering, bright shi­
ning.

* Resplandésca, Resplandésco, vide 
Resplandecér. 

* Resplandescér, vide Resplandecér. 

* Resplandesciénte, vide Resplandeciénte. 

Resplandór, brightnes, cleare shining.

* Resplendescér, vide Resplandecér. 

* Resplendór, vide Resplandór. 

Respondér, to answere.

Respónso, an answere.

* musica de Respónso, singing of priests
at burials, when the answere one the
other.

Respuésta, an answere.

Respúso, he made an answere, or he an­
swered.

† Resquebrajádo, clift, chapped.

Resquebrajadúra, a chinke, a choppe, a
clift.

† Resquebrajárse, to chap, to cleaue in
two.

† Resquício, a chap, a clift, a chinke.

* Ressabiár, to haue an ill taste or sauour,
to vse ill fashions or trickes.

* Ressábio, an euill taste or sauour: an
euill tricke, fashion, or custome.

* Ressollár, yo Resuéllo, to breath, to
fetch wind.

* Resuélle, Resuéllo, vide Ressollár. 

* Ressuéllo, a breathing or a fetching the
winde.

Restañár, or Restriñír, to stench, to stop.

* Restánte, remaining.

Restár, to remaine, to rest, to subtract in
Arithmeticke.

Restaurár, to restore, to renew.

Restitución, restoring, renewing.

Restituír, to restore, to renewe, to make
good againe.

Restituýdo, restored, renewed, made good
againe.

Résto, the residue, the remainder, sub­
traction in arithmetike.

Restrañar la sángre, to stanche or stop
bleeding.

Restribár, or Restrivár, to straine, to in­
force.

* Restringído, restrained, strained, hard
stopped, letted, seuere & streight.

* Restringír, to restraine, to stop, to let, to
stay, to binde hard.

* Restriñído, restrained, kept backe,
bound hard.

Restriñidóra cósa, a thing that is stip­
tick.

Restrinír, to restraine.

* Restrivár, or Restribár, to straine, to
enforce.

* Resvaladéro, or Resbaladéro, a slip­
pery place, a sliding place.

* Resvaladór, or Resbaladór, idem. 

Resvalár, or Resbalár, to slide, to slip.

* Resvalízo, or Resbalizo, a slipperie
place.

* Resvalóso, or Resbalóso, slippery.

* Resuélgo, Resuélge, vide Resolgár. 

* Resuelle, Resuéllo, vide Resollár. 

Resuéllo, breathing.

* Resuélto, resolued.

* Resuélue, Resuéluo, vide Resolvér. 

Resuéne, Resuéno, vide Resonár. 

* Resultádo, resolued, redounded, re­
bounded.

Resultár, to result, to redound.

Resumír, to begin againe, to go ouer
againe with.

Resurrección, a rising againe.

Resurtír, to rebound.

Resuscitádo, raysed againe, risen from
death.

Resuscitár, to raise.

Retáblo, a painted table.

* Retáço, m. a shred or peece of cloth.

* Retaguárda, f. the hinder part or rere­
ward of a battell.

* Retaguárdia, the rereward, or hinder
part of a battell.

Retajádo, or Circuncidádo, circumci­
sed.

Retájar, to cut off short, to circumcise.

Retál, or Cortadúra, the cutting off,
circumcising, a shred or cutting off of cloth.

† Retáma, f. a kinde of binding shrubbe,
or broome, greene broome.

* Retamál, a place where such broome or
shrubs grow.

* Retardádo, delaied, staied.

Retardár, to delay, to staie.

* Retassár, to taske againe.

Retención, holding, keeping still.

Retenér, Præs. Reténgo, Retiénes,
Retiéne, 1. Præt. Retuve, Retuviste,
Retúvo, Fut. Reterné, or Retendré,
ás, á. Sub. Præs. Reténga, Imperfect.
Retuviéra, Retuviésse, or Reternía,
Fut. Retuviére, to hold, to keepe still.

* Reténga, Reténgo, vide Retenér. 

* Retenido, holden, kept still.

* Retentríz, f. a woman that keepeth or
holdeth backe.

* Reterná, Reterné, Reternía, vide 
Retenír. 

Retesamiénto, strouting out.

Retesár, to strout out, to swell or looke
bigge.

* Retesgár, idem. 

* Retiéne, vide Retenér. 

* Retificádo, straightened.

Retificár, Præs. yo Retifico, 1. Præt.
yo Retifique, to make straight.

* Retinádo, vide Retirádo. 

Retiñír, to sound as a bell, to tingle.

Retínte, m.a tingling sound.

* Retiráda, a retrait, a retiring.

* Retirádo, retired, withdrawen.

Retirár, to retire, to withdraw.

* tocár a retirár, to sound a retrait on
the drum.

* Réto, right, a challenge.

* Retoçádo, tickled.

† Retoçár, to tickle, to play the wanton.

† Retóço, m.tickling, wantonnes.

† Retoçón, m.a wanton, a ticklish fel­
low.

* Retólica, or Retórica, rhetorike, the
art of perswading by cunning speech.





Retóño, the bud of a tree.

Retoñecér, yo Retoñésco, Sub. Præs. 
Retoñésca, to but out.

Retór, a rhetorician, a cunning man to
perswade. Also a rector, gouernor or
corrector in schooles.

Retorcér, yo Retuérço, Sub. Præs. Re­
tuérce, to wreathe, to bend backe.

Retorcedúra, wreathing, bending backe.

Retorcído, wreathed, bent backe.

Retorcimiénto, wreathing, bending
backe.

Retórica, or Retólica, rhetorike, artifi­
ciall perswasion.

* Retórico, a rhetorician, one that can
with speech perswade well.

Retornado, returned, comming againe.

Retornár, to returne, to come againe.

Retórno, a returne againe.

* Retorzér, vide Retorcér. 

* Retorzido, vide Retorcído. 

* Retorzimiénto, vide Retorcimi­
énto. 

* Retostádo, scorched, toasted.

Retozádo, vide Retoçádo. 

* Retozár, vide Retoçár. 

* Retozón, vide Retoçón. 

Retraér, Præs. Retráygo, Retráes, Re­
tráe, 1. Præt. Retrúxe, or Retráxe,
Retruxíste, or Retraxíste, Retrúxo,
or Retráxo, Fut. Retraeré, rás, rá,
Sub. Præs. Retráyga, Imperf. Retru­
xéra, or Retraxéra, Retruxésse, or
Retraría, Fut. Retruxére, to with­
draw, to retire, to draw backe.

* Retrahamiénto, vide Retraimiénto. 

* Retraimiénto, drawing backe, the in­
ward part of a house, a place to bestow
things in out of the way.

* Retratádo, pourtraied, pictured out.

Retratár, to pourtray, to draw out plots,
to picture proportionably. Also to goe
backe from that he hath spoken.

Retráto, m.a portraiture or linely plot
shewing the proportion and fashion of
any building, &c. Also a repurchase or
getting againe into ones hands.

* Retráxe, Retraxéra, vide Retraér. 

* Retraýdo, drawen backe, withdrawen,
retired.

* Retráyga, Retráygo, vide Retraér. 

Retraymiénto, a closet, a withdrawing
place, a retreat, drawing backe or aside.

* Retribuír, to retribute or rewarde for
merite.

* Retrogradár, to go backward.

Retronár, yo Retruéno, to sound againe
as thunder.

* Retruécano, a changing one thing for
another.

* Retruéne, Retruéno, vide Retronár. 

* Retrúxe, Retruxéra, Retruxésse, vide 
Retraér. 

Retráxo, vide Retraér. 

* Retuérce, Retuérço, vide Retorcér. 

Retuérto, bent backe.

* Rétulo, a writing or subscription that
declareth some act or matter.

* Retumbándo, tumbling, comming
with a noise or rumbling.

* Retumbár, to tumble, to come with a
rumbling noise, to fall backe againe.

* Retúmbo, tumbling, rumbling.

* Retúve, Retuviéra, Retuviésse, vide 
Retenér. 

* Revalidár, to reinforce, to make strong
againe.

Revanáda, f. a shred of cloth, a slice of
bread.

Revanár, to cut, to shred.

Revelación, reuealing, opening of darke
matters, or of secresies.

Reveládo, reuealed, lifted vp.

Revelár, to reueale, to lift vp.

* Revéldo, or Rebéldo, a rebell, a muti­
nous fellow.

* Revellín, or Rebéllín, a certaine for­
tification vpn a wall called a Raue­
lin.

Revendér, yo Reviéndo, to sell againe.

* Revendído, sold againe.

* Revénga, Revéngo, vide Revenír. 

* Revenido, come backe, come againe.

Revenír, Præs. Revéngo, Reviénes,
Reviéne, 1. Præt. Revíne, Revi­
níste, Revíno, Fut. Revendré, or
Reverné, ás, á, Sub. Præs. Revénga,
Imperfect. Reviniéra, Revernía, or 
Reviniéste, Fut. Reviniére, to re­
turne, to come backe, to come againe.

* Revér, to see againe, to review.

Reverberación, beating backe.

* Reverberádo, beaten backe.

Reverberár, to beate backe.

Reverdecér, yo Reverdésco, Sub.
Præs. Reverdésca, to waxe greene.

* Reverdecído, growen greene.

* Reverdésca, Reverdésco, vide Re­
verdecér. 

* Reverdescér, or Reverdécer, to waxe 
greene.

* Reveréncia, reuerence.

Reverenciár, or Acatár, to reuerence or
to hold in great estimation.

* Reveréndo, reuerend, worthy of great
estimation.

* Reverne, Revernía, vide Revenír. 

* Revérso, turned inside outward.

Revés, backwarde, contrarie, crosse, ouer­
thwart.

Revesádo, or Traviésso, froward, cross,
vntoward.

Revesár, vide Revessár. 

* Revessár, or Revesár, yo Reviésso, to
ouerturne, to belch mightily, to vomit
vp his meate and drinke againe.

* Revestido, clothed againe, apparelled a
new.

Revestír, yo Revísto, to cloath againe.

* Reviénda, Reviéndo, vide Reven­
dér. 

* Reviéne, vide Revenír. 

* Reviésse, Reviésso, vide Revessár. 

* Revine, Reviniéra, Reviniésse, vide 
Revenír. 

* Revino, vide Revenír. 

* Revisabuélo, a fathers great grandfa­
ther, or a great great grandfather.

* Revista, f. a reuiew or fresh sight, an
ouerlooking.

* Reviste, Revisto, vide Revestír. 

Reúma, the rheume, waterishnes of the
stomacke.

* Revocación, a repeale.

* Revocádo, called backe, reuoked, called
in againe.

Revocár, Præs. yo Revóco, 1. Præt. yo 
Revoqué, to call backe, to call in a­
gaine.

* Revoçár, vide Reboçár. 

* Revolár, vide Rebolár. 

* Revolcár, vide Rebolcár. 

* Revoldón, vide Reboldón. 

* Revoleár, vide Reboleár. 

* Revoltón, vide Reboltón. 

* Revoltóso, vide Reboltóso. 

* Revoltúra, vide Reboltúra. 

Revolución, reuoluing, tumbling ouer.

* Revolvedór, vide Rebolvedór. 

* Revolvér, vide Rebolvér. 

* Revolvimiénto, vide Rebolvimién­
to. 

* Revossár, vide Rebossár. 

* Revotádo, vide Rebotádo. 

* Revotár, vide Rebotár. 

* Reupóntico, an herbe called Centorie.

* Reutadór, an accuser, a layer to other
mens charge, a challenger.

* Reutár, to accuse, to lay to mens charge.

* Revuélto, vide Rebuélto. 

* Revuznár, vide Rebuznár. 

† Réxa, Réja, or Rexál, a lattise win­
dow, a grate of iron or woode, the
coulter of the plough, a harre or iron.

† Rexádo, lattised, grated.

Réy, m.a king.

* Réy católico, the catholike king, the
king of Spaine.

* Reyezuélo, m.a pettie king.

* Reyme, m.I laughed.

* Fiésta de los Réyes, Twelfe day.

* El dia de los Réyes, idem. 

Réyna, a queene.





* Reynár, to raigne, to rule, to gouerne.

Réyno, m.kingdome.

Reýr, or Reir, yo Rio, to laugh.

* Réytes, swart rutters.

* Reytres, idem. 

* Réz, vide Rés. 

* Rezádo, prayed, meditated on.

* Rezadór, a praier, one that vseth to
pray, or to meditate.

Rezagádo, the last of all.

Rezár, to pray, to recite, to meditate or
consider well off.

* Rezélo, or Reçélo, feare, dread.

* Rezelóso, vide Recelóso. 

Rezental, fresh, a lambe or kid taken out
of the dams bellie that neuer sucked.

Rezentár, to make fresh.

* Reziaménte, stoutly, lustily, strong­
ly.

Rezién, newly, lately.

* Rezién hécho, idem. 

* Rezientár, vide Amassár, to make
dough.

Reziénte, fresh, new.

* Rezienteménte, newly, lately.

Rézio, strong, lustie, hard.

Reziúra, hardnes, difficultie.

Rézma de papél, a reame of paper.

Rezmilla, f. the top of a mans yard.

* Reznilla, f. idem. 

Rézno, a tike.


R H
* Rhéno, the great riuer called Rhine.

* Rhetórica, f. Rhetoricke.


R I
Ría, the mouth of a riuer, a port or ha­
uen.

* Riachuélo, a little streame.

Riatillo, vide Riachuélo. 

† Ribáço, or Ribázo, a high banke.

* Ribadávia, a towne in Galizia in
Spaine, where the vino de Ribadávia
is made: it is wine, and a secke, but
verie delicate.

* Ribadoquin, a certaine peece of artille­
rie.

Ribéra, the banke by a riuer, or by the sea,
a shoare.

* Ribéra álta, a cliue or high banke by the
sea.

* Ribéte, a hem of a garment.

* Ribeteádo, made with hems as a gar­
ment.

* Ribetón, m.a great hem or welt of a
garment.

* Ricaménte, richly, costly.

* Rica, a slaughter or ouerthrow in war,
discomfiture, great miserie.

Ricázo, wealthie, rich.

Ríço, a tuffe of feathers, vnshorne vel­
uet.

Ríco, rich.

Ridiculo, ridiculous.

* Rie, Rio, vide Reýr. 

* Riégo, vide Regár, to water.

* Riegue, vide Regár. 

Riél, a kinde of iewell, a carquenet.

Riénda, the reines of a bridle.

* Riénda suélta, the reines loose or at li­
bertie.

* Reýr a Riénda suélta, to laugh his fill.

* Riente, laughing.

* Riéptos, or Desafios, defyings, chal­
lenges.

* Riésgo, vide Riézgo, danger.

* Riéstra de ájos, a bunch of garlicke.

* Riéstra de cebóllas, a rope of onions.

* Riéto, m.a challenging, a defying.

Riézgo, danger.

† Rifa, wringling, grinning, fretting,
brauling, chafing.

† Rifadór, one that chafeth or brauleth.

† Rifár, to grin, to chafe, to fret, to braule.
Also rifling at dice, &c.

* Rigír, vide Regír, to rule, to gouerne.

Rigór, m.rigour, cruell or hard dealing.

Rigorosaménte, rigorously.

Rigoróso, rigorous, cruell, sterne.

* Riguróso, vide Rigoróso. 

* Rigurosaménte, vide Rigorosa­
ménte. 

* Rija, vide Regír. 

* Rijo, vide Regír. 

Rima, or Riméro, a heape, a stacke.

Riméro, or Rima, a heape.

* Rinchaón, an herbe called rocket
gentle.

† Rincón, m.a corner.

* Rinconcillo, m.a little corner.

* Rínda, vide Rendír. 

* Ríndo, vide Rendír. 

Riña, f. chiding, a braule.

* Riñe, Riño, vide Reñír. 

Riñón, m.the kidney.

* Rinocerónte, vide Abáda. 

Riñónes, the reines of the backe.

Río, m.a riuer.

* Río, I laugh, vide Reýr.

* Rióse, he laughed.

* Rípa, vide Ripia. 

* Ripária ciudád, a citie neare the sea
shore or coast.

* Ripéra cósa, a thing on the shore, or on
the banks side.

Rípia, f. rubbish that falleth from a de­
caied house.

Rípias, chips, shingle to couer houses,
laths.

Ripiár la paréd, to lath or to rod a wall.

* Rípio, vide Rípia. Also an axlet tree.

Riquéza, f. riches, goods.

* Riquíssimo, most rich, most wealthie.

Risa, f. laughter.

Risáda, f. laughing.

Rísco, a crag, a rocke.

Rístra, a rope of onions.

Ristrár, to set a lance to his rest, to make
ropes of onions, or bunches of garlicke.

Rístre, as Lánça de Ristre, a horsemans
lance.

Rístre de ájos, a bunch of garlicke.

Risuéño, a laughing fellow, a ieering
fellow.

* Rithmo, m.rithme, meter.

Ríto, m.a custome, a rite.

* Rivál, m.a fellow louer.

* Rivéte, vide Ribéte. 

* Riveteádo, vide Ribeteádo. 

Rixa, fretting, chafing, quarrelling, fal­
ling out.

Rixóso, bent to fretting or chafing.

* Rixóso cavállo, m.a horse neighing or
lusting after mares.

Ríza, or Ríça, a scattering, a putting to
flight.

* Rizádas, f. the frizling of haire with a
hot frizeling iron.

* Rizo, vide Riço. 

Rízo ter ciopélo, vnshorne veluet.


R O
Robádo, robbed, stolen.

Robadór, a robber, a theefe.

Robár, to rob, to steale.

Róble, m.a hard oke, a great growne oke.

* Robléço, of an oke, as strong as an oke.

Robledál, a groue of okes.

Roblézo, strong as an oke.

Róbo, m.theft, robberie, spoile or taking
by violence.

* Róbra, a writing vpon a bargaine, ar­
ticles of agreement.

* Róbre, vide Róble. 

Robústo, strong, sturdie, stout.

Róca, or Péña, a rocke.

† Róça, f. ground new grubbed or clean­
sed from bushes and briers, a hedging
bill, a sieth to cut bushes and bram­
bles with.

* Rocadéro, m.a peece of paper rolled vp
togither like a grocers coffin. Also vide 
Coróça.

* † Roçádo, grubbed.

† Roçadór, a grubbing toole.

Roçagánte vestido, a long side garment.

* Rocál, a place of rocks.

† Roçár, to grub or plucke vp, to weede
corne, to enterfier.

* Rociáda, or Ruciáda, bedeawing. Also
a volley of shot.

* Rociadéro, the holy water sprinkle.

Rociádo, bedeawed.

* Rociadór, one that watereth or be­
deaweth.





Rociár, to bedeaw, to besprinkle.

Rocín, m.a horse, a gelding.

Rocío, m.the deaw.

Rocióso, full of deaw.

* Róda, round in figure.

* Rodabálla, vide Rodaválla. 

* Rodabállo, vide Rodavállo. 

* Rodáda de camíno, the trackes in a
way, the cart rowtes, or the signe that
the wheeles of a carte make vpon the
waie.

* Rodádo, tumbling or running as a
boule runneth on the ground. Also a
horse of dapple grey colour.

* Rúcio Rodádo, dapple grey colour.

* Rodadór, a roller about, or that which
goeth tumbling or rolling as a wheel or
boule running on the ground.

† Rodája, f. a rowell of a spurre, a dance
called the round.

† Rodájo, a pulley.

* Rodánte, a thing rolling.

† Rodapíes, a settle about a bed.

Rodár, to run or tumble rounde as a
wheele or boule runneth on the ground.

* Rodaválla, a fish called a turbut.

Rodavállo, m.a turbut fish.

* Rodavíllo, m.a fish called a plaise, a
colerake.

Rodeádo, compassed about.

* Rodeadór, one that goeth compassing
or wheeling about.

* Rodeándo, wheeling or compassing a­
bout.

Rodeár, to compasse about.

Rodéla, a target.

Rodéo, the turning of a way, a certaine
attire about women.

* Rodéos, far fetched speeches, or tur­
nings of a way.

Rodétes, rolles for the head of women.

Rodézno, a peece of wood or timber that
draweth the vpper milstone about
when it grindeth.

Rodílla, a knee. Also a dishclout.

* Rodilláço, vide Rodillázo. 

* Rodillázo, m.a blow or stroke with the
knee.

* Ródo, vide Rodéo. 

Rodovállo, a turbut.

Rodrigár, to vnderprop.

Rodrigón, a pole or prop for a vine to lie
vpon.

* Roedór, a gnawer.

* Roedóra cósa, a gnawing or eating
vpon.

Roedúra, gnawing.

Roér, yo Róygo, Sub. Præs. Róyga, to
gnaw.

Rofián, or Rufián, m.a whoremaster, a
ruffian, a baude, a champion for a
whore.

Rofianería, f. bawderie, whoredome.

Rofianeár, to play the whoremaster.

* Rogádo, requested.

* Rogadór, one that requesteth or wish­
eth.

Rogár, Præs. yo Ruégo, 1. Præt. yo
Rogué, to request, to wish, to aske,
to desire, to pray.

* Rogue, vide Rogár. 

Rójo, vide Róxo, red.

Rolléte, a roll for the head.

Rolléte de mugér, vide Rodéte. 

* Rollíço, vide Rollízo. 

Rollízo, round, a rowler, any round peece
of wood or timber.

* Bráços rollízos, round armes.

* Rollón, a roll, or side of a sheete written
wide, as lawyers copied things.

Róllo, any round thing, a pibble stone, a
gallowes, a gibet, a roll, or scroll of wri­
ting.

* Róma, Rome the citie. Also a mule got­
ten of a horse and asse. Also a wo­
man with a flat nose.

* Romadiçárse, vide Romadizárse. 

* Romadíço, vide Romadízo. 

Romadizárse, to take the rheume.

Romadízo, the rheume.

* Romána, f. a paire of ballance or scales
to weigh with, a pomgranate.

Románce, the Castilian toong, a song in
Spanish.

* Romançár, to write in Spanish.

* Romancista, one that vnderstandeth
and speaketh Spanish.

* Romanéro, a clarke that keepeth a
booke of all the cattel that each butcher
killeth, vsed in Spaine.

* Romañedór, idem. 

Romáza, f. sorrell, or sower docke.

* Rómbo, vide Rúmbo. 

Rombón, a stopper, a stopple.

Romería, f. going on pilgrimage.

* Romeríllo, a little pilgrim.

Roméro, a pilgrim, the herbe Rosemarie.

Rómo, m.flat nosed.

* Rompenécios, one that weareth out
fooles to the hard stumps, one that ser­
ueth his turne so long of the simple, that
he maketh them past recouerie to serue
for any thing euer after.

Rompér, to breake.

Rompidaménte, brokenly.

Rompído, broken.

Rompimiénto, breaking.

* Roncadór, one that vseth to snort, and
to route, a fish like whiting.

* Rónca, hoarse, snorting.

Roncár, Præs. yo Rónco, 1. Præt. yo
Ronqué, to snort, to route.

* Róncas óndas, hoarse, roring waues.

Ronceár, to be idle or lazie.

Roncería, f. flatterie, setting at debate.
Also lazie idlenes.

Roncéro, m.a flatterer, a glosing fellowe
that by his speech goeth about to set de­
bate. Also a lazie idle fellow.

* Rónces, or Halágos, flatterings, plea­
sant allurements.

* Roncesváles, a monasterie betweene
Fraunce and Spaine where the great
battle was fought betweene the Spa­
niards and the French, wherein were
lost Charlemaigne the Emperour and
king of Fraunce with the twelue Peeres
of Fraunce, onely except Roldan, which
escaped.

Róncha, f. the prick of a nettle, the marke
of a stripe, the marke that a flea or louse
leaueth after biting the flesh.

* Rónchas, a disease called the mea­
zels.

Rónco, hoarse, snorting.

* Rónco sonido, such a hollow noise as
Bees make in the euening before they
swarme. Also the waues of the sea
make such a noise vpon the rocke.

Rónda, f. the round, a watch.

* Rondadór, one that goeth the round to
see whether the watch be duely kept.

Rondár, to go round about, to go about to
see whether the watch be duely kept in
night.

* Rondeléro, a gentleman of the round.

* Róndo, the circuit of the libertie.

* Rondón, as entrár de Rondón, to en­
ter in roundly without asking leaue.

Róña, f. scabbines, a scab.

Roñóso, scabbed, full of scabs.

* Ronque, vide Roncár. 

Ronquedád, f. hoarsnes.

Ronqéra, f. idem. 

Ronquído, hoarsnes, snorting.

* Ronquíto, somewhat hoarse.

Rópa, f. a garment.

Ropavegéro, vide Ropavejéro. 

Ropavejéro, m.a seller of old cloaths, a
broker.

Ropéro, a tailer.

* Ropéta, a little coate or garment, a cas­
socke.

Ropílla, f. a cassocke.

Ropón, a gowne, a rug gowne.

† Róque de axedrés, the rooke at chesse­
play.

* Roquédo, the bottome of the sea where
many rockes be, or a castle built on
rockes of the sea.

* Roquéra, f. a place of many rockes.

Roquéte, m.a bishops rotchet.

Rósa, a rose, a flower.

* Rósa castellána, a red rose.

* Rósa albardéra, vide Rosa montés. 

Rósa sylvéstre, or Garvánça, sweete
brier, Eglantine.

* Rósa montés, or Rosa de mónte, Pi­
onie, hill Rose, or Kings bloome.





* Rosáda, f. many roses togither. Also an
Electuarie made of roses. Also colour of
roses.

Rosádo, rose coloured.

Rosál, a bed or bank of roses, the rose
tree.

Rosário, a praier booke, a prayer of
beades.

* Rósca, f. a roll of bread.

Rósca de huzíllo, reeling of threed, lying
round of a snake or adder.

* Rosiclér, colour of roses.

Rosquéte, m.a pancake. Also vide Ros­
quílla.

Rosquílla, f. a clue of threed. Also a little
roll of bread.  Also lying round like a
snake.

Rostrituérto, looking awry.

Róstro, m.the face, the visage.

Rosúz, Licorice.

* Róta de náo, vide Derróta, a course
that the ship taketh.

* Róto, or Rompído, broken.

Rotúra, or Rompimiénto, a breaking, a
breach.

* Róve, a bramble bush.

* Roxeár, to blush.

Róxo, or Rúvio, reddish, yellow, blush­
ing.

* Roxúra, f. a reddishnes, a blushing.

Roýdo, gnawed.

* Roýdo de gente, vide Ruýdo. 

* Royéndo, gnawing.

* Róyga, vide Roér. 

* Róygo, vide Roér. 

* Róza, vide Róça. 

* Rozadór, vide Roçadór. 

* Rozár, vide Roçár. 

* Rozéta, f. a little rose, the rowell of a
spurre.

* Roziáda, vide Rociáda. 

* Roziár, vide Rociár. 

* Rozín, or Rocin, a horse, a gelding.

* Roznár, to bray as an asse.

* Roznído, m.braying of an asse.

* Rozío, vide Rocío, m.

* Rozquéte, vide Rosquéte. 

* Rozquilla, vide Rosquilla. 


R V
* Ruán, kinde of linnen cloth. Also the
towne Roan in Fraunce.

* Ruándo, walking the streetes, roming
vp and downe.

* Ruár, to walke the streetes, to roame
abroad.

* Ruár cálles, to go vp and downe the
streetes.

* Ruár las tárdes, to go late abroad.

* Ruás, f. streetes.

Rubí, a precious stone called a rubie or
carbuncle.

* Rúbia líga, an herbe or rather the iuice
of an herbe called madder wherewith
they die red.

* Rubicúndo, reddish of colour, ruddie,
shamefaste.

* Rúbio, or Rúvio, red coloured.

* Rubióso, very red coloured.

Rúbrica, f. the marke in a booke, or a knot
vnder ones name after he hath written
it, as most vse, that it may not so easily
be counterfeited.

* Rubricádo, marked, signed.

* Rubricár, Præs. yo Rubrico, 1. Præt.
yo Rubriqué, to signe, to put a
marke, to set to the hand.

* Rubrique, vide Rubricár. 

* Rúcca, vide Ruéca. 

Ruciáda, vide Rociáda, a volley of shot.
Also a bedeawing.

Ruciádo cavállo, a dapple grey horse.

Rúcio, grey, dapple
grey.

Rúda, the herbe called rue.

Rudaménte, rudely, grossely.

Rudéza, rudenes, vnhandsomnes.

* Rudillo, somewhat dull, somewhat
rude.

Rúdo, rude, dull.

Ruéca, a distaffe or rocke.

Ruéda, a wheele, the rime of a wheele.

* Ruéda del arcabúz, the nut of a crosse
bowe.

* Ruédo, the lower skirt or hem of a gar­
ment which goeth belowe compasse
round.

* Ruego, vide Rogár. 

Ruégo, a request, intreatie, praier.

* Ruegue, vide Rogár 

* Rúfas, a place of Campania in Italie.

Rufián, vide Rofián, a ruffian, a whoore­
master.

* Rufianádo, become a ruffian or a haun­
ter of harlots.

* Rufianaría, f. bawderie, whooredome.

* Rufiáno, vide Rufián. 

Rúga, a wrinkle.

Rugído, vide Ruýdo, a noise, a crying.

Rugimiénto de tripas, the crying of the
guts.

Rugír, to roare.

Rugóso, full of wrinkles.

Ruibárbo, vide Ruybárbo, Ruybár­
baro, or Ruypóntico, Rhubarbe.

Ruido, vide Ruýdo. 

* Ruido hechizo, vide Ruýdo. 

* Ruín, vide Ruýn. 

* Ruína, vide Ruýna. 

* Ruindád, vide Ruyndád. 

* Ruinménte, vide Ruynménte. 

* Rújo, a fish called a tench.

* Ruipónces, vide Ruypónces. 

* Ruipóntigo, vide Ruypóntigo. 

* Ruiseñór, vide Ruyseñór. 

Rúmbo, a stopper, or stopple, a course, a
waie.

* Rúmbo derécho, the right course, the
right way.

Rumiár, to chewe the cud.

* Ruminár, idem. 

Rumór, a report, a rumor, a noise.

Rumpér, vide Rompér, to breake.

Rusticaménte, rudely, clownishly.

Rusticidád, or Rustiquéza, clownishnes,
rudenes.

Rústico, rude, clownish.

Rustiquéza, or Rusticidád, clownish­
nes.

* Rutilánte, or Replandeciénte, bright
shining, glistering.

* Rutilár, to glister, to shine.

* Rútilo, glistering, shining like gold.

* Rutilos, auncient people of Hetruria.

Rúvia, Rója, or Granéza, madder to die
red with.

* Ruvicúndo, vide Rubicúndo. 

Rúvio, or Róxo, red of colour.

* Ruvióso, reddish.

Ruvión, red wheate.

Ruybárbo, or Ruybárbaro, rhubarbe to
purge choler with.

Ruýdo, a noise, a hurliburly, an affray.

* Ruýdo Hechízo, a rumour made of one
thing when another is meant.

* Ruýdo mánso, a soft noise.

Ruýa, m. naught, lewd.

* Ruýna, or Ruína, destruction, ruine,
decay.

* Ruynménte, naughtily, badly.

Ruypónces, rapes, wilde turneps.

Ruypóntigo, an herbe called Centaurie.

Ruyseñór, a nightingale.

* Ruziáda, vide Rociáda. 



S

SÁbado, m.saturday.

* Sábalo, a fish called shadde.

* Sábanas, vide Sávanas, f. sheetes.

* Sabañón, vide Savañón. 

* Sábato, a wooden shooe, a patten, a
slaue.

Sabér, Præs. Sé, Sábes, Sábe, Imper­
fect. Sabia, Sabias, Sabia, 1. Præt.
Súpe, Supiste, Súpo, Fut. Sabré, Sa­
brás, Sabrá,  Sub. Præs. Sépa, Imper­
fect, Supiéra, Sabría, or Supiesse,
Fut. Supiére, to know, to vnderstand,
to sauour or taste, to perceiue.

* Sabía, vide Sabér. 

Sábia, or Sabiaménte, wisely, discreetly.

Sábia, y Prudenteménte, very wisely,
with much aduise.

Sabído, knowen.

Sabidór, one that knoweth or vnder­





standeth the matter.

Sabidóra, knowen, knowing.

* Sabidoría, vide Sabiduría. 

Sabiduria, f. wisedome, knowledge, dis­
cretion, vnderstanding.

* a Sabiéndas, wittingly, knowing of it.

* Sabiéza, vide Sabiduria, knowledge,
vnderstanding.

Sabína, or Savína, savin.

* Sabinos, people of Italy not farre from
Rome.

Sábio, wise, skilfull, cunning.

* † Sabóga, f. a fish called a shad, as some
say, other say it is a pilchard.

* Sábolo, idem. 

Sabór, or Savór, sauour, taste.

Saboreár, to make sauory.

* Saboyána, f. a womans peticoate.

* Sabrá, Sabré, vide Sabér. 

* Sabrosaménte, sauorily.

Sabróso, sauory.

* Sabucal, m.a place where elder trees
growe.

* Sabúco, Saúco, or Caninéro, the el­
derne tree.

* Sabúco pequeño, danewort or wale­
wort.

Sabuésso, m.a spaniell.

Sáca, f. a sacke, a bag, a deliuerie out of
prison by pardon, &c. a getting out.

* Sáca de bachilléres, a kinde of hoode
worne of graduates.

Sacabúche, an instrument of musicke cal­
led a sackbut.

* Sacádo, drawen out, gotten out, brought
vp.

* bien Sacádo, well brought vp.

* Sacadór, a getter out, one that bayleth
another out of prison.

* Sacadóres, miners that get mettals out
of the ground.

Sacaliña, the obtaining or getting any
thing by entreatie and request. Also a
dart to hurle with a string.

* Sacapelótas, a vice or skrew to plucke
out bullets with.

Sacár, Præs. yo Sáco. 1. Præt. yo Sa­
que, to get out, to draw out, to pull or
dig out, to bring vp.

* Sacár a ráso, to take out quite and
cleane.

* Sacco, vide Sáco. 

Sacerdócio, priesthood.

Sacerdóte, a priest, a minister of the
Church.

Sacerdoríssa, a nunne, a shee priest.

Sachadór, a harrower.

Sachadúra, harrowing.

Sachár, or Escardár la tiérra, to har­
row.

* Sachár, vide Sacár. 

* Sácho, a mattocke, or pickaxe.

* Saciádo, satisfied, filled.

* Saciamiénto, filling, satisfying.

* Saciár, to satisfie, to fill.

Sáco, a sacke, the spoile of a towne.

* Sacomaneár, to sacke, to spoile, to rui­
nate, or ouerthrow.

Sacománo, a sacking or spoiling. Also
one that sacketh, spoileth or wasteth.

Sacraménto, a sacrament, an oath.

* Sacrános, ancient people of Italy neere
to Rome.

* Sacrár, to hallow.

† Sácre, a hauke called a Saker. Also a
peece of ordinance so called.

Sacrificár, Præs. yo Sacrifico, 1. Præt. 
yo Sacrifique, to sacrifice.

Sacrifício, m. sacrifice.

* Sacrifique, vide Sacrificár. 

Sacrilégio, sacrilege, stealing of church
goods, violating of holy things.

Sacrílego, a sacrilegious person, a church
rbber, a violater of holy rites, a nota­
ble lewd person.

* Sacrísta, m.vide Sacristán. 

Sacristán, a clerk or sexten in a church.

Sacristanía, f. the office of a sexten or
clerk in a church.

* Sacristía, a vestry of a church.

* Sácro, holy.

* Sacudída, f. a shaking off.

Sacudidaménte, snappishely.

Sacudído, shaken off.

Sacudimiénto, shaking off.

Sacudír, to shake off.

Saéta, f. am arrow, a dart, a shafte.

Saetéra, or Tronéra, a loope hole to lay
ordinance out at.

Sagacidád, f. sharpnes of wit.

* Sagacíssimo, most quickwitted.

Sagáz, wise, witty, circumspect, sharpe­
witted.

Sagazménte, wisely, wittily.

Ságe, a diuiner, a wise man, a soothsay­
er.

Sagittário, the signe called sagittarius.

* Sagorída, or Axedréa, an herbe called
sauory.

* Ságra, as Ságra de Tolédo, a countie
or shire about Tolédo, as Middlesex
about London.

* Sagraménto, vide Sacraménto. 

Sagrádo, holy, sacred.

Sagrário, m.a sanctuarie, a hallowed
place, whence malefactors might not
be fetched to punishment.

* Sáhio, vide Sábio, wise, skilfull, cun­
ning.

Sahornádo de sudór, filthie with sweat.

Sahornamiénto, filthines of sweat. Al­
so heating in an ouen.

Sahórno, galling with sweat, stinke of
sweat. Also heating in an ouen.

Sahumádo, perfumed.

Sahumadór, a perfuming pan. Also a
perfumer.

Sahumadúra, perfuming.

Sahumár, to perfume.

Sahumério, f. perfume.

* Sain, fat, sewet, dropping of meate.

Sál, f. salt.

Sála, f. a hall.

Salácio, a sawsedge.

Saláda, salt meate.

* Saladia, f. saltnes.

* Saladilla, a fish somewhat salted.

Saládo, salted, wittie.

Saladúra, salting, seasoning with salt.

Salagárda, f. a trap, an ambush.

* Salamánca, a chiefe citie and vniuersi­
tie in old Castile in Spaine so called.

* Salamándra, f. a salamander that is
sayde to liue an be nourished by fire
only, it is like a lizard, but full of spots.

* Salamándria, vide Salamançuésa. 

Salamanquésa, vide Salamandra, a
salamander.

Salár, to salt.

* Salariádo, payed his hire or wages, one
that receiueth wages.

Salário, salary, wages, hire.

* Salarmoniác, a gumme so called.

* Sálce, a willow, a sallow.

Salchícha, a sawsidge.

* Salchichón, a great sawsidge.

* Salcícia, or Salchícha, a sawsidge.

* Sáldo, or firme, solide, whole, firme.

* Saldrá, Saldré, vide Salír. 

* Saldría, vide Salír, did go out, or did
sally out.

* Saledízo, the iuttie of a house, the bea­
ring out of a wall.

* † Saléma, f. a stockefish.

Saléro, a saltseller.

* Sálga, vide Salír. 

* Salgáda yérva, a kinde of herbe.

* † Salgéma, a kind of stuffe which pain­
ters vse.

* Sálgo, vide Salír. 

* Salguéiro, Salzér, or Sáuz, a willowe,
a withie, a sallow.

Salída, f. a sally, a going out, an escape.

Saledízo, the iuttie of a house, the bea­
ring out of a wall.

* Salido, sallied out, gone out.

* Salína, f. a salt pit.

Salínas, tribute for salt. Also salt pits.

Salinéro, a salt maker.

Salír, yo Sálgo, Sub. Præs. Sálga, to sal­
lie out, to go foorth, to escape.

* Salír en blánco, not to come to effect
or purpose.

* Salír de mádre, to ouerflowe the banks
and drowne the land.

* Salír de rebuélta, to get out of a laby­
rinth and entangling wherein a man
standeth wrapped in, to get out of
trouble.





* Salitrádo, done with salt peter.

Salitrál, a place to dig or make salt peter.

Salítre, m.salt peter.

Salitróso, full of nitre.

Saliva, spettle.

Salivóso, full of spettle.

* † Salma, a great sacke, a halfe quarter
sacke or bag.

Salmista, a psalmist or maker of psalmes.

Sálmo, a psalme.

Salmón, a salmon.

* Salmonéte, a fish called a barbell.

* Salmonéte, or Bárvo de la már, a
fish called a mullet.

Salmoréjo, pickle or brine to keepe oliues,
sampire or such things in.

Salmoréjo, or Salmuéra, pickle for fish.

† Salmuéra, brine, pickle.

Salóbre, sower, sauorie. Also brine or salt
water, as the sea.

* Salpicádo, dashed with durt.

* Salpicádo de água, dashed with wa­
ter.

Salpicadúras, dashings.

Salpicár, Præs. yo Salpico, 1. Præt. yo
Salpiqué, to dash with durt, to beray.

Salprésa cósa, any thing beginning to
take salt.

* Salpréso, beginning to take salt, begin­
ning to be powdred, somewhat pow­
dred, corned with salt.

Sálsa, sawce.

* Salséra, a dish to put sawce in, a saw­
cer.

* Salséro, a sawcer.

* Salséro, or Tomíllo, the herbe Thime.

* Saltaparédes, anticke worke. Also one
that leapeth ouer wals.

Saltár, to leape, to skip.

* Salteáda, f. a robbing, a leaping on.

* Salteáda melodia, musicke broken off,
vpon some sudden fright or accident.

* Salteádo, set vpon, leaped on, assailed,
robbed.

Salteadór, a robber, an assaulter.

Salteár, to assaile, to rob.

Saltério, a psalter or psalme booke, or a
musicall instrument called a psalterie.

Saltéro, m.a forrester, a wood- man.

Sálto, a leape, an assault, a robberie. Also
a forrest.

Sálva, a taste. Also a saluation.

* hazér Sálva, to taste meate or drinke,
before another eateth or drinketh
thereof, as they do to Princes and great
Potentates.

* Salvatión, f. saluation.

Salvadéra, a dust boxe.

Salvádo, bran, cribble.

Salvádos, idem. 

* Salvadór, a sauiour. Also a kinde of
nagge.

Salváge, or Salváje, sauage, wilde.

* Salvagina, wilde cattell or wilde foule.

* Salvaguárdia, safegard.

* Salváje, or Salváge, wilde, sauage.

Salvaménte, safely.

Salvamiénto, a sauing.

Salvár, to saue.

* Salvaróba, a wardrobe.

* Salvay, vide Selvia. 

Salúd, f. health.

Saludable, wholesome.

Saludableménte, wholesomly.

* Saludádle, id est, Saludád le, salute
him.

Saludadór, a saluter, a charmer, or one
that helpeth the biting of mad dogs.

Saludár, to salute, to greete, to charme.

* Sálvia, or Salváy, sage.

Sálvo, safe, sound, except.

* Sálvo el guánte, alwaies excepting:
for a woman to say, Sálvo el guánte,
is alwaies excepting her honour and her
honestie.

* Salvo condúto, a safe conduct.

Salvonór, sauing your reuerence. Also a
close stoole, the fundament.

Salutación, greeting, saluting.

Salze, a willow.

* Sámbra, a kinde of barke in old time
vsed.

* Sambúco, or Sabúco, an elderne.

* Sámo, the Iland of Samos.

* † Sampóña, vide çampóña, a fluite.

* Sampuzár, vide çampuzár. 

* Sán, Sáncto, Sánt, or Sánto, holy, a
saint.

Sanáble, that may be healed.

* † Sanahória, or çanahória, a caret
roote.

* † Sanahória blánca, a parsnep roote.

Sanaménte, soundly.

Sanamúnda, a gilliflower.

Sanár, to heale, to cure.

* Sanbeníto, id est Sánto Beníto, Saint
Bennet. Also a deformed coate put on
such as are founde and prooued prote­
stants.

* Sánca, vide Sáncta, holie.

* Sancadilla, vide çancadilla. 

* Sánco, vide çánco. 

* Sanctidád, vide Santidád, holines.

Sanctión, as pragmática sanctión, a
law established by royall authoritie.

* Sáncto, Sánt, Sánto, or Sán, holy.

* Sandálias, sandals, pantofles, or pat­
tens of wood.

* Sándalo arból, a certaine tree.

Sándalos, sandales, pantofles, or pattens
of wood.

Sandía, f. a kinde of Melon.

Sándio, m.a foole.

Saneádo, satisfied.

Saneamiénto, satisfying.

Saneár, to satisfie, to make good.

Sanglúto, the hickot, or yeske.

Sangostár, id est Se Angostár, to
streighten, to binde.

* Sangráça, vide Sangráza. 

Sangradera, f. a toole to let bloude with, a
pipe or trench to let out water.

Sangradór, a bloud letter.

Sangrár, to let bloud, to bleede, to drop as
raine doth.

Sangráza, ill, or corrupt bloude.

Sángre, f. bloud.

Sangrellúvia, a bloudie fluxe, bleeding
much, monthly termes in women.

Sangrentár, yo Sangriénto, Sub. Præs. 
Sangriénte, to defile with bloud.

Sangria, f. letting of bloud.

* Sangriénte, Sangriénto, vide Sangrentár. 

Sangriénto, m.bloudie.

Sanguáza, bloud and matter together,
matter of a wounde.

* Sanguijuéla, a worme in ditches cal­
led a bloudsucker or horseleach.

* Sanguilénto, bloudie, cruell.

* Sanguinária yérva, an herbe stopping
bloud.

* Sanguínco, or Sanguilíno, of a san­
guine complexion.

* Sanguíno, idem. 

Sanguisuéla, f. a bloudsucker.

* Sánja, vide çánja. 

* Sanjádo, vide çanjádo. 

Sanidád, f. health.

Sáña, f. wrath, furie, rage.

Sañúdo, wrathfull, furious.

Sáno, sound.

* San Páblo, Saint Paul.

* San Martin, Saint Martin. Also a
towne in new Castile in Spaine, where
the wine called Vino de San-Martín
is made, it is reputed for the most deli­
cate wine of Spaine, the colour is white.

* San Pédro, saint Peter.

* Sanqueamiénto, vide çanqueami­
énto. 

* Sanqueár, vide çanqueár. 

Santéro, an heremite.

* Santiágo, or Santyágo, saint Iames.

Santidád, f. holines.

Santificación, f. making holie, sanctify­
ing.

* Santificádo, sanctified, hallowed,
made holy.

Santificadór, a hallower, one that ma­
keth holy, the holy ghost.

Santificár, Præs. yo Santifico, 1. Præt. 
yo Santifiqué, Sub. Præs. Santifi­
que, to hallow, to make holy, to san­
ctifie.

* Santifique, vide Santificár. 





* Santiguáda, as por mi santiguáda, by
my holidome.

Santiguár, to blesse, to hallow.

* Santillána, a townes name in Castile.

Sánto, Sáncto, Sánt, or Sán, holy.

* Santochádo, or Santuchádo, m.foo­
lish, franticke.

* Sanze, vide Sáuze, a willow.

* Sapatéro, vide çapatéro. 

* Sapatíllo, vide çapatíllo. 

* Sapiéncia, f. wisedome.

* Saphír, m. a precious stone so called.

Sápo, a toade.

Sápo, or Escuérço, a toade.

* Sapuzár, vide çapuzár. 

* Sáque, vide Sacár. 

Saqueádo, sacked, spoiled.

Saqueadór, a sacker, a spoiler of townes,
&c.

Saqueár, to sacke, to spoile, to make ha­
uocke.

* Saquiçamí, vide çaquiçamí. 

Saquillo, a  little bag, a satchell.

Saquíto, a little sacke.

* Saráças, vide çaráças. 

* Saragóça, vide çaragóça. 

* † Saraguélles, or çaraguélles, m.great
Venetian breeches.

Sarampión, m.a tetter, a ringworme.

* Saránda, vide çaránda. 

Saráo, m.a feasting, dauncing or sporting
of great persons in a great hall, or a
royall feasting or dauncing.

* Saratán, vide çaratán. 

* † Sarazinésca, f. a percullis made of
wood at the gate of a citie, for to de­
fend men when they skirmish.

* Sárba, vide Sárva. 

* Sárça, vide çárça. 

* Sarçál, vide çarçál. 

* Sarçaparíllo, vide çarçaparíllo. 

* Sarcillo, vide çarcillo. 

* Sárço, m.a hurdle.

Sardína, a little pilchard, a sardine.

* Sárga, f. searge, say.

Sargál, any thing made or done with
searge or say.

* Sárgas, searge, say.

Sargénta, f. a weapon like a halbard.

* Sargenteár, to doe the office of a sar­
geant of a band.

* Sargénto, a sargeant in a band of soldiers.

† Sárgo, m.a sea breame, a fish.

* Sarisa, f. a long pike, speare or iauelin,
vsed of the Macedonians in warre, be­
ing ten cubits long.

* Sarmentár, yo Sarmiénto, Sub. Præs. 
Sarmiénte, to gather the branches of
vines cut off, into bundles or fagots.

* Sarmentéra, a place or house to lay vp
vine branches. Also a house to lay wood
in, a wood house.

* Sarmiénte, Sarmiénto, vide Sarmentár. 

* Sarmiénto, a branch pruned or cut off,
a drie branch of a vine.

Sárna, a scab, a sore, scuruinesse, mangi­
nes, or the wilde scab.

Sarnóso, scabbie, mangie, scuruie.

* Sarpár la ancóra, to weigh anchor.

* Sárpas, vide çárpas. 

* Sárpe, vide Sárpe. 

* Sarpedón, a king of Lycia who aided
the Troians.

* Sarrája, the sowthistle.

* Sárta, f. a file or or putting on a string of
pearles, beades or of any other thing
that may be filed vp in that maner.

Sárta de higos, a rope of figs.

* Sartál, vide Sárta. 

Sartál de cuéntas, a paire of beades.

* Sartaléjos, little necklaces of pearles or
such like, as women weare about their
neckes.

Sartár, to put on a string, or file vp.

Sartén, m.a frying pan.

* Frúta de sartén, fritters, pancakes, or
such like.

* † Sárzo, m.a hurdle, a dragge to breake
clods, a grate.

Sassifrágia, an herbe called Saxifrage.

Sástre, m.a taylor.

* Satán, vide Satanás. 

* Satanás, or Sathanás, the diuell.

* Satáno, vide Satanás. 

* Sateadóra muérte, vide Salteadóra. 

* Satíra, vide Satýra, a Satyre, a biting
or taunting poeme.

* Satiricaménte, bitingly, tauntingly.

* Satirión, vide Satyrión, an herbe cal­
led Ragwoort.

Satisfación, satisfying, contenting.

* Satisfár, vide Satisfazér, to satisfie, to
content.

Satisfazér, to content, to satisfie.

* Satisfécho, satisfied, contented.

Satýra, a sharpe, biting or taunting
poeme.

Satyrión, an herbe called Ragwoort.

* Sávado, vide Sábado. 

Sávalo, a kinde of fish like a shadde.

* Sávana, a sheete for the bedde, sometime
vsed for a horsecloath.

* Sávanas, sheetes.

* Savandíja, all kind of wormes or ver­
mine creeping on the earth.

* Savanílla, a little sheete.

Savañón, m.or Friéras, a kibe on the
heele.

* Savanóñe, idem. 

Sáuco, Saúz, Sambuguéyre, the
Elderne tree.

* Sávete, vnderstand thou.

* Savér, vide Sabér, to knowe, to vnder­
stand, &c.

* Savia, vide Sabía. 

* Saviaménte, vide Sabiaménte. 

* Savído, vide Sabído, vnderstoode.

* Savidór, vide Sabidór, a knower or
vnderstander.

* Saviduría, vide Sabiduría, skil, know­
ledge, wisedome, vnderstanding, cun­
ning.

* Saviéndas, vide Sabiéndas, witting­
lie.

* Saviéza, vide Sabiéza, wisedome.

* Sávio, vide Sábio, wise.

* Savina, or Sabina, Sauin.

* Sávolo, a shad fish.

* Savór, vide Sabór, m.sauor, taste.

* Savoreár, vide Saboreár. 

* Savoyána, vide Saboyána. 

* Savrá, Savré, hee shall knowe, I shall
know, vide Savér.

* Sáuz, m.a sallow, a willow.

Sáuze, m.a willow.

Sauzedál, a place full of willowes.

Sauzegatillo, a little willow.

* Saxár, to launce the flesh, to let the bloud
out.

Saxifrágua, or Sassifrágia, an herbe cal­
led Saxifrage.

Sáya, f. a womans petticoate.

Sayál, m.course stuffe, such as horse coue­
rings are made of, course sackcloth.

Sayaléro, one that maketh such course
sachcloth.

Sayéte, m.a little cassocke.

* Sayéte de ármas, a coate armour.

Saýn, m.fat, grease.

Saynár, to fatten, to feede fat.

Saynéte, daintie meate, pellets made of
paste to cram fowles with.

Saýno, m.an vpper and loose wastecoate,
or kinde of cassocke.

* Sáyo, m.a coate, a ierkin.

Sayón, m.a hangman, a great cassocke.

* Sayuéla, a little petticoate for a wo­
man, or an vnder peticoate.

* Sayuélo, m.a ierkin, a little cassocke,
such as women vse in Spaine.

Sazón, f. season, due time.

Sazonádo, seasoned, done in due time.

* Sazonadór, one that doth things in due
time, an obseruer of seasons or fit times.

Sazonár, to season, to ripen.


S C
* Scácos, m.vide Escáques, checker
works, one of one colour, another of an
other, as the chesseboord.

* Scalentadór, one that warmeth, or a
warming pan.

* Scalentadór de cáma, a warming
pan.

* Scambrónes, harts thorne, a shrub so
called. Also a kinde of white bramble





very fruitfull called rhamne.

Scamonéa, f. scammonie, the iuice of an
herbe vsed to purge choler vehemently.

* Scaragól, a shell fish called a whelke, a
perwinkle.

* Scéa, one of the gates of Troy so called.

* Scelerádo, vngracious, wicked.

* Scéna, as much as is acted in a comedie
at one shew on the stage, the playing
stage or forepart thereof, the place
where plaiers dresse themselues.

* Sciéncia, knowledge, skill, cunning.

* Scifa, a cockboate, a shipboate, a little
boate made of a tree vsed on riuers.

* Scopéta, f. a fouling peece, a birding
peece to kill fowle or birds.

Scopetína, f. spittle.

* Scórdio, an herbe called water ger­
mander.

* Scorpión, a serpent most venemous so
called.

* Scrofulária, an herbe called the lesser
celidonie or figwoort.

Scóta, or Escóta, a rope in a ship where­
with they hoise or strike saile, called
the sheate.

* Scuérta, f. vide Escúcha, a scoute
watch.

* Sculpido, vide Esculpído, graued,
carued.

* Scúrzo, an herbe called vipers grasse.


S E
* Se, the pronoune signifying him or
them. Sometimes a signe of the passiue
voice of a verbe, as Se dize, it is said.

* Sé, I know, vide Sabér.

* Séa, vide Sér. 

* Seáys, you may be, vide Sér.

* Seberidád, vide Severidád. 

* Sebéro, vide Sevéro. 

* Sébo, or Sévo, tallow, fat.

* Sebóso, or Sevóso, fat, full of tallow.

Séca, drouth and drinesse, a kernell in the
armehole.

Secáces, followers.

Secár, Præs. yo Séco, 1. Præt. yo Se­
qué, Sub. Præs. Séque, to drie vp.

Séco, m.drie.

Secrestación, or Secrésto, sequestra­
tion, putting of goods into an indiffe­
rent mans hands.

Secrestár, to sequestar, to put into indif­
ferent mans hands.

* Secrésto, vide Secrestación. 

Secretaménte, secretly, priuily, closely.

Secretário, a secretarie, one that wri­
teth his masters letters, and is partici­
pant of his priuie dealings.

Secréto, secret, priuie, close.

* Sécta, f. a sect, a faction where some
hold of opinion contrarie to other in
matters of religion, &c.

Secúra, f. drouth, drie weather.

* Secutívo, following, or one that fol­
loweth.

Séd, f. thirst, drinesse of stomacke.

* Séd, be yee, vide Sér.

Séda, silke. Also a bristle or stiffe haire.

* Séda de ajuél, raw silke.

* Séda de puérco, a hogs bristle.

Sedadéra, f. an instrument, with which
they dresse and make the silke.

Sedál, m.a fishing, a haire line.

Sedéña, f. the hurds of the silke.

Sedéro, a silke-man.

Sediénte, thirstie.

* Seér, vide Sér. 

* Segáda, f. or Segazón, f. haruest.

* Segádo, mowed, reaped.

Segadór, a mower, a reaper, a haruest
man.

Segár, Præs. yo Siégo, 1. Præt. yo Se­
gué, Sub. Præs. Siégue, to mow, to
reape, to cut.

Segazón, f. or Segáda, haruest.

* Seglár, secular, lay, not of the cleargie.

* Seguida, f. a following, a traine.

* Seguida, as Mugéres de seguida, com­
mon brothell harlots or queanes.

* Seguído, followed.

Seguidór, a follower, one that waiteth or
attendeth vpon any.

* Seguílla, Seguílle, Seguíllo, id est Se­
guír la, Seguír le, Seguír lo, to follow
her, to follow him, to follow it.

Seguimiénto, following, attending on.

Seguír, Præs. yo Sígo, 1. Præt. Seguý.
Sub. Præs. Siga, to follow.

* Seguíto, m.a traine of men, successe of
matters.

Según, according, as.

* Segundaménte, secondly.

* Segundár, to second.

* Segundariaménte, secondarily.

Segúndo, the second.

Segúr, m.an axe, a battle axe, a hatchet.

Seguraménte, surely, safely, securely.

Segurár, to make safe or sure.

Seguréja, a hatchet.

* Segurélla, Sagorída, or Axedréa, an
herbe called Sauorie.

Seguridád, f. safetie, assurance, securi­
tie.

Segúro, sure, safe, secure, safetie, secu­
ritie.

* Segúro reál, a safe conduit.

* Segúro, as a buén Segúro óso jurár, I
dare safely sweare.

Segurón, m.a battle axe, an axe, a chip­
axe.

* Selláda, f. vide Seláda. 

* Selládo, m.sealed.

Selladór, a sealer.

Selladúra, sealing.

Sellár, to seale, to signe.

* Sellinis, a citie so called in Sicily, that
hath plentie of Dates and Palme trees.

Séllo, a seale.

* Sélva, f. a wood.

* Selvático, woodie, full of woods.

Semána, f. a weeke, a seuen- night.

Semanéra cósa, a weekely matter.

Semanéro, one hyred by the weeke, from
weeke to weeke.

Semblánte, like, semblable, making
shewe of.

* Sembráda, f. a sowing or setting of
beanes, seedes, or such like.

Sembrádo, sowen, a corne fielde, beset
with pearle, &c. embrodered.

Sembradór, a sower.

Sembradúra, sowing, setting of beanes
or such like, &c.

Sembrár, to sowe seede or corne.

* Semejáble, like, semblable, making
shewe of.

Semejánça, resemblance, likelihoode,
semblance, an image or picture of.

Semejánte, like, the patterne or image of.

Semejanteménte, likely, semblably.

Semejár, to liken, to resemble, to be like.

Sementál, that which is sowen.

Sementár, yo Semiénto, to sowe.

Sementéra, f. a sowing season.

Semiénte, f. seed.

* Semiénte de Papagáyos, Alácor, or 
Cartámo, bastard saffron.

* Semiénte, Semiénto, vide Semen­
tár. 

* Semílla, f. seede.

* Semíllas, seedes, graine.

* Semitiérra, vide Alfángo, or Cimi­
tárra, a woodknife, fauchion, or han­
ger.

Sémola, vide Acemíte. 

* Semoviénte, putting aside.

* Sempitérno, euerlasting, perpetuall,
continuall.

* Semprevíva, or Yérva puntéra, the
greater Sengrene, Housleeke.

Sén, Seny, an herbe to purge with.

Senádo, m.a senate, a councell of Alder­
men.

Senadór, a  senator, an alderman.

* Senatório, belonging to a senator, or
of the senate.

* Sencillaménte, vide Senzillaménte. 

* Sencíllo, vide Senzíllo. 

Sénda, f. or Sendéro, m.a path.

* Séndas vézes, seuerall times.

* Cáda séndas péras verdiñáles, euerie
one a peare or such a kinde.

* Con séndas Mocháchas, with euerie 
one his wench.

Sendéro, m.or Senda, f. a pathway.

Sendilla, f. a little path.

Séndos, m.euery one, one by one.





* Senectúd, or Senetúd, old age.

* Senetúd, f. idem. 

Séña, f. or Señál, a signe, a token, a becke,
a watchworde, a nodde, a winke.

Señál, f. or Séña, f. a signe, an ensigne, a
marke, a shew, an earnest penny.

* Señál de Herida, a skarre after a
wounde.

* Tocár en la señál, to hit the marke, to
winne the goal.

* Señál de cómpra, an earnest pennie.

Señaladaménte, excellently, notably.

Señaládo, excellent, notable, especiall.

* Señaladór, one that marketh or poin­
teth out any thing.

Señalár, to note, to marke, to point at.

* Señaléja, f. a little signe, marke, token
or shew.

Señeraménte, solitarily.

Señéro, alone, solitarie.

* Séño, vide Séno, the bosome, a creeke.

Señór, a lord, a master.

* Señór de titulo, a lord of high calling.

Señóra, a ladie, a mistresse.

* Señóra, as Nuéstra Señóra, our La­
die Marie.

Señoreádo, ruled, gouerned.

Señoreadór, a ruler, a gouernor, a man
in authoritie.

Señoreár, to gouerne, to rule, to beare
sway or authoritie.

Señoria, f. lordship, a title of honor.

Señoríl, lordlike.

Señorilménte, lordly.

Señorío, m.lordship of the possessions,
mannors and lands a noble man hol­
deth.

Señuélo, m.a lure to call haukes with, a
stale to take birdes with.

Séno, a creeke of the sea. Also a bosome.

* Senogíles, garters of cruell or such like
stuffe.

* Senóso, m.full of creekes and crooked
banckes.

* Sensáto, of or pertayning to sense, sensi­
ble, with sense, that can feele or per­
ceiue.

Sensíble, sensible, that may be felt or
perceiued.

Sentádo, sitting, set, placed.

Sentár, yo Siénto, Sub. Præs. Siénte, 
to sit.

Sentárse en cuclíllas, to sit on his but­
tocks, to sit rucking or cowring downe,
to sit crosse legged like a tailor.

Senténcia, a sentence, an opinion, a
iudgement.

Sentenciádo, iudged.

* Sentenciadór, a pronouncer of sentence
or of iudgement.

Sentenciár, to iudge, to pronounce sen­
tence of iudgement, to adiudge.

Sentído, feeling, sense. Also felt or per­
ceiued.

* Sentídos, the fiue senses.

Sentimiénto, sense, feeling, perceiuing.

Sentina, f. a sinke, a pumpe in a ship.

Sentír, yo Siénto, to feele, to perceiue, to
iudge, to be grieued.

* Senzída dehésa, a common pasture
abounding with grasse where no cattell
haue yet come.

Senzillaménte, simply, singly.

Senzilléz, f. singlenesse, not double. Also
simplicitie and plainnes.

Senzíllo, single, not double. Also simple,
plaine, pure.

* Sépa, may know, vide Sabér.

* Seperación, a seperation, a putting a­
sunder.

Seperadaménte, seuerally, asunder, ne
from another, apart.

* Seperádo, seuered, parted.

Seperár, to separate, to part asunder.

* Séps, a kinde of serpent, whose biting
causeth a woonderful swelling, and
maketh the flesh to rot.

* Séptimo, the seuenth.

Sepúlcro, a  graue, a burying place.

* Sepultádo, buried.

Sepultár, to burie.

Sepultúra, a buriall.

Sepulturéro, a digger of graues.

* Sequáce, or Secáce, a follower.

* Seque, vide Secár. 

Sequedád, fidrouth, drines.

* Sequedáles, drie countries or places.

* Sequéra, vide Sequedád, drines,
drouth.

* Sequería, f. extreme, drouth or dri­
nesse.

Sequéro, drie by nature, that cannot be
watered, or made moist.

Sequíllas, kernels in the necke.

Sér, Præs. Indicat. Soy, éres, és. Imper­
fest. Éra, éras, éra. 1. Præt. Fuy, fu­
iste, fue. Fut. Seré, rás, rá. Sub. Præs. 
Séa. Imperfect. Fuésse, Sería, or Fué­
ra. Fut. Fuére, to be.

Séra, f. a great basket.

* Será, he, or it shall be, vide Sér.

* Serafín, or Seraphín, m.a seraphin.

* Seráo, m.vide Saráo, a royall festing
or sporting.

Serapíno, a kind of gum or Rosin.

* Serápis, m.an Idoll among the AEgyp­
tians worshipped as their chiefe God.

* Sérba, vide Sérva. 

* Serbál, vide Servál. 

* Serbício, vide Servício. 

* Serbil, vide Servil. 

* Serbilla, vide Servilla. 

Seréna, a Mermaide, which was saide to
haue beene halfe a woman, halfe a fish.

Serenár, to make cleere or faire.

Serenidád, f. cleernes, fairenes of wea­
ther.

* Sereníssimo, most cleere, most illu­
strious.

Seréno, cleere, bright.

* Seréno, the eeuening dew, often times
blasting those that lie in it, in Spaine
and other boat countries.

* Sergésto, a captaine of one of the ships of
AEneas.

* Serínga, vide Sirínga. 

Sermón, m.a sermon, speech.

Sermoneár, to preach, to make a ser­
mon.

* Sérna, vide Sárna. 

* Sérnas, harrowes.

* † Serójas, f. stickes.

Serón, m.a bigge basket, such as they load
a horse or beast withall.

Sérpa, mother thime, wilde thime.

* Serpál, a place where mother thime
groweth.

* Serpentina, a long peece of ordinance,
calle a basiliske. Also the cocke of a
musket or harquebuse, wherein they
put the match to giue fire to shoote it
off.

* Serpentíno, m.like a serpent, belong­
ing to a serpent. Also a stone called a
Serpentine.

Serpiénte, f. a serpent.

* Sérpo yérva, a kinde of herbe.

Serpól, or Serpóllo, wilde thime, mother
thime.

* Serrána, a hilly place, belonging to a
hill.

* Serracenésca, vide Sarracenésca. 

* Serrádo, vide Cerrádo. 

* Serrája, vide Cerrája. 

* Serrájas, a kinde of herbe.

* Serrán, a sea fish like a pearch.

Serranía, f. a hilly countrey.

Serráno, hilly.

* Serrár, vide Cerrár. 

* Serrazón, vide Cerrazón. 

* Serrejón, m.a hill.

* Sérro, vide Cérro. 

Sérva, a fruit called a Saruice.

Sérva frúta, idem. 

Servál, a seruice tree, or a place where
they grow.

* Servár, to keepe, to obserue, to vpold.

Servénda, late ripe.

Servício, seruice, bondage. Also a priuy,
a close stoole.

* Servído, serued, pleased.

* Si Dios suére servído, if it shall please
God.

Servidór, m.a seruant, a close stoole, a 
trey or trugge.

Servidúmbre, f. bondage, seruitude.

* Serviénte, or Sirviénte, a seruant.

* Serviéta, vide Servilléta, a table nap­
kin.





Servil, slauish, seruile.

Servílla, f. a clout. Also pinsens that women in Spain
were in pantofles.

Servilléta, f. a table napkin.

Servír, yo Sirvo, to serue, to waite.

Sessár, vide Cessár, to cease.

Sessénta, threescore.

Sésgo, calme, quiet, deepe. Also aslope, a­
swash, a thwarte, a side.

* Sésgo pécho, a quiet pacified brest.

* vn gólpe a Sésgo, a blow athwarte or
aswash.

* Sésgo, or al trauers, ouerthwarte, a­
swash, aslope, sidelong.

* Sesillo, little wit, or litte braine.

Sesito, m.little witte.

* Sesméro, a knight of the shire, one that
solliciteth the case of the commonalitie.

Sésmo, the sixt.

Séso, braine, wit, sense.

Sesteadéro, or Sesteadór, a summer
house, to passe the heate of the day in.

Sesteadór, or Sesteadéro, a summer
house, to passe the heate of the summer in.

Sesúdo, sensible, wittie.

Séta, f. a sect.

Seteciéntos, seauen hundred.

Setenál, one of seauen yeeres old.

Setenár, to punish by the seauenth.

Seténas, the seauenth, seauen fold, a kind
of fine or forfeyture imposed on men
for breach of the kings prerogatiue of
lawes, &c.

* Seténo, or Séptimo, the seauenth.

Seténta, seauentie.

* Setentrión, the north.

* Setentrionál, northerly.

Setiémbre, the moneth September.

Sétimo, Séptimo, or Seténo, the sea­
uenth.

Séto, vide Sóto, a hedge, an inclosure.

Sétro, a kings scepter.

Severaménte, seuerely, rigorously.

Severidád, f. seueritie.

Sevéro, seuere, rigorous, stearne, the
name of a hill in Italy.

Sevílla, the chiefe citie of Andaluzia in
Spaine.

* Sevílla la véja, the old town hard by it.

Sévo, vide Sébo, tallow, fat.

Sevóso, or Sebóso, fat, full of tallow.

Séxo, the sexe, male or female.

* Sextário, a certaine measure about
a pinte and a halfe.

* Sezéno páño, a verie course base
cloath.

* Séy, be thou, vide Sér.

* Seýdo, been.

* Seyéndo, being.

Séys, sixe.

Seysciéntos, sixe hundred.


S I
* Sí, the pronoune, him.

* Si, as Fuéra de Si, besides himselfe, out
of his wits.

* Por si, by himselfe.

Si, the preposition or aduerbe, signifying
if, yea.

* Siça, vide Síza. 

* Sicánia, the countrey of Sicilie.

* Sicáno, Siciliáno, or Siculo, a Sici­
lian.

* Sichéo, the husband of Queene Dido,
whom his brother Pygmalion slue for
couetousnes of his treasure.

* Siciál, as pescádo Siciál, a kinde of
fish in Galizia in Spaine, of great big­
nes and very daintie.

* Siciliáno, Siculo, or Sicáno, a Sici­
lian.

* Siclecolóre, or Sirgueríto, a bird cal­
led a linnet.

* Siculo, vide Sicáno. 

* Sidérco, starlike, bright shining.

* Sido, as yo he Sido, tu ás Sido, I haue
been, thou hast been.

* Sidra, f. sider made of apples.

* Siéga, vide Segár. 

* Siéglo, vide Siglo. 

* Siéque, vide Segár. 

* Siémbra, Siémbre, vide Sembrár. 

Siémpre, alwaies, euer, continually.

Siempreviva, syngreene or housleeke.

Sién, or Siénes, the temples of the head.

* Siéndo, being.

* Siénta, Siénto, vide Sentír & Sentár. 

* Siénte, Siénto, vide Sentár, & Sen­
tír. 

Siérpe, f. a serpent.

Siérra, a hill, a mountaine, a saw, a rock.

* Siérra moréna, a high hill in Andalu­
zia, diuiding Andaluzia from the
kingdome of Toledo, so called because of
the dark, swarty colour it hath.

* Siérro, vide Siérra, a sawe.

Siérva, a maydseruant.

* Slerva, Siérvo, vide Servír. 

Siérvo, a manseruant.

Siésso, a close stoole. Also the taile, the
buttocks. Also a seate or sitting downe
on the buttockes.

Siésta, f. heate of the summer.

Siéte, seuen.

* Siete ciéntos, seuen hundreds.

Siéte en ráma, seuen leafed grasse.

Sieteñál, of seuen yeres old.

* Síga, vide seguír. 

Síglo, an age.

* Síglo, as buén Síglo áya, god haue
mercy vpon the soule.

Signár, to signe, to seale.

Signatúra, signing, sealing.

Significación, signification, betokening.

* Significádo, signified.

Significár, Præs. yo Significo, 1. Præt.
yo signifique, to signifie, to giue to vn­
derstand.

Signifique, vide Significár. 

Signo, a signe, a token, a seale.

* Sigo, vide Seguír. 

* Sigualdád, f. vide Desigualdád, vne­
qualitie.

* Siguénça, f. a citie of Castile in Spaine.

* Siguiéndo, following.

Siguiénte, following.

* Sigurádo, assured, hauing securitie.

* Siguridád, vide Seguridád, securitie,
assurance.

* Sigurár, vide Segurár, to assure, to
make secure.

* Sigúro, vide Segúro, safe, sure, se­
cure.

Silaba, f. a syllable.

Silla, a chaire, a seate, a stoole, a saddle.

* Silla reál, a throne, or kings seat.

Siléncio, silence, holding the peace.

* Silléra, f. vide Silléta. 

* Silleria, a place where they make or sell
either chaires or saddles. Also workes
called Cillerie workes on the heads of
postes or pillers, and made as cloath or
leaues turning diuers waies: a kinde of
carued worke.

Silléro, a maker of chaires or stooles, a
saddler.

Silléta, a little stoole.

* Sillíca, f. a little chaire.

Silo, a granier to lay vp corne in.

* Silogizár, to argue or reason like a Lo­
gitian.

Silva, or Sélva, a wood.

Silvár, to hisse, to whistle.

Silvéstre, woodish, or of the wood, wilde.

Sílvo, m.hissing, whistling.

* Síma, a deepe pit, a dungeon.

* Sima de vicios, a gulphe or depth of
vices.

Simár, vide Síma. 

* Siméthio, a riuer of Sicily so called.

Simiénte, f. seed.

* Similágines, that part of meale or
wheat which is neither mere meale or
pure flowre.

* Similár, alike.

* Simóis, a riuer so called, that passeth by
Troy.

Simonia, f. symonie, buying and selling of
ecclesiasticall liuings for money, corrupt
briberie in church matters.

Simoniaco, a dealer with such briberie
or symonie.

Símple, simple, vnmixt, sincere, pure,
plaine, without deceit, fraud or guile.

* Simplecíto, vide Simplezíto. 

Simpleménte, honestly, simply, plainely.





Simpléza, f. simplenes, plainenes, honest
dealing.

* Simplezíto, a poore simple fellow.

* Simplicidád, f. simplenes, plaine dealing
and meaning.

Simuladaménte, fainedly, counterfait­
lie.

Simuladór, a dissembler, a counterfai­
ter.

Simulár, to counterfaite, to dissemble.

Sín, without.

Sincél, or Sinzél, a grauing toole, carued
worke.

Sinceládo, carued, graued.

* Sinceladúra, caruing, grauing.

Sincelár, to graue, to carue.

* Sinceridád, f. sinceritie, purenes, cleere­
nes of conscience.

* Sincéro, pure, sincere, perfect, vpright,
no dissembler.

* Sindicádo, iudged, the office of a iudge.

* Sin éste, besides this, without this.

* Singulár, singular, notable, excellent.

* Singularménte, notably, singularly,
excellently.

* Siniéstra máno, the lefte hand.

* Siniestraménte, awkly, vntoward­
ly.

Siniéstro, the lefte.

* Sinjusticia, iniury, without iustice or
right.

Sinó, if not, vnlesse.

* Sino, vide Sígno, a signe, a token, a
seale.

* Sinón, a famous theefe among the Gre­
cians, by whose industry and crafty in­
uention, in deuising the huge horse of
woode, and mangling himselfe, Troie
was betrayed.

* Sinó que, vnlesse that.

* Sinrazónes, iniuries.

* Sinsabóres, vnsauerines, vnpleasant­
nesse.

* Sínte, vide Siénte, and Sentír.

* Sinzél, or Sincél, a grauing toole, gra­
ued worke.

* Sinzeládo, or Sinceládo, graued, car­
ued.

* Sinzelár, or Sincelár, to graue, to
carue.

* Sinzélo, or Sincélo, m.grauing, car­
uing.

* Sinzéro, or Sincéro, pure, sincere, per­
fect, vpright.

* Siquiéra, onely.

† Sírga, a rope to tow along with.

* Sirgano, a silkeworme.

Sírgo, silke twist.

Sirgueríto, m.a birde called a goldfinch.

Sirguéro, one that draweth a boate along
with a rope.

Sirínga, a clister. Also a siring, a spout.

* Sírve, vide Servír. 

Sirviénte, or Serviénte, a seruant.

Sisa, an assise, solder for golde, a keeping
or a sauing backe something for ones
selfe.

* Sisár, to keepe backe, or saue something
into his owne purse.

* Sistra, an herbe called Spikewell or
Bearefoote.

Sitiál, f. a stoole and a cushion.

Sitiádo, seated, besieged.

Sitiár, to besiege, to seate himselfe.

Sítio, m.scituation, seate, siege laide to a
towne.

* Situádo, scituated.

* Situár, to situate.

* Sivil, curteous, ciuill, well manered.

* Sivilidád, curtesie, ciuilitie, good man­
ners.

* Síza, a kinde of bird which crieth zize,
zize.


S O
So, vnder.

* Soagém, an herbe called Alkanet. Some
say it is Buglosse, other say, Burrage.

* Soagén, idem. 

Sobacár, or Sobarcár, to trusse vp vnder
the armepits.

Sobáco, the armepit.

Sobádo, vide Sovádo. 

* Sobár, vide Sovár. 

Sobajár, or Sobaxár, to mould dough, to
groape.

Sobaquína, stinch of the armepits.

* Sobár, vide Sovár. 

* Sobarcádo, trussed vp vnder the arme­
pits.

Sobarcár, or Sobacár, Præs. yo Sobár­
co, 1. Præt. yo Sobarqué, to trusse vp
vnder the armepits.

* Sobarque, vide Sobarcár. 

* Soberádo, vide Algórfa, a sollar, a
loft.

Soberadár, to make a loft, or sollar.

Soberaménte, or Soberanaménte, so­
ueraynly, from aboue.

* Soberanaménte, highly, soueraignely.

* Soberanía, f. souerainty.

Soberáno, a soueraine, a head or high go­
uernour.

* Sobérbia, or sobérvia, pride.

Sobérvia, or Sobérbia, pride, insolency.

Soberviaménte, proudly, insolently.

Sobérvio, proud, arrogant, insolent.

Sobornál, a  surplus in measure. Also a
kinde of bottle to cary wine.

* Sobornádo, suborned, hired, mayntei­
ned.

* Sobornadór, a suborner, a maynteiner,
one that setteth on.

Sobornár, to suborne, to set on, to procure
to some yll.

* Sobórno, aduantage, whatsoeuer is
giuen ouer more than bargaine, a bribe.

* Sóbra, ouer and aboue.

Sobrádo, excellent, passing, superfluous, a
lofte, a parlour, a dining chamber, a
mayne beame of a house.

* Sóbra nómbre, a surname.

Sobrár, to passe, to surpasse, to be too much.

Sóbre, vpon, aboue.

* Sobreaguár, or flotár, to floate or fleete
vpon the water.

* Sobreáño, any yong of more then a
yeare old.

* Sobre cameréro, a chiefe chamberlaine.

* Sobrecárga, a surcharge, an ouer­
charge.

* Sobrecargár, Præs. yo Sobrecárgo,
1. Præt. yo Sobrecargué, to sur­
charge, to ouerweigh.

* Sobrecargue, vide Sobrecargár. 

* Sobrecédula, a writ or warrant gran­
ted vpon another.

* Sobrecéjo, an eie-brow.

* Sobregueádo, vide Sobreaguádo, 
gone on the water.

* Sobreház, the outward shewe, the vt­
ter face.

* Sobrél, id est, Sobre él, vpon it.

* Sobréllo, id est, Sobre éllo, vpon it.

* Sobremésas, carpets.

* SobreNadár, to swim aboue.

* SobreNaturál, supernaturall, aboue
nature.

SobreNómbre, a surname.

* Sobreójo, a lowring or hanging coun­
tenance.

Sobrepelliz, f. a surplice.

Sobreponér, Præs. Sobrepóngo, So­
brepónes, Sobrepóne, 1. Præt. So­
brepúse, Sobrepusiste, Sobrepúso,
Fut. Sobreporné, or Sobrepondré,
ás, á, Sub. Præs. Sobrepónga, Imper­
fect. Sobrepusiéra, Sobrepornía, or 
Sobrepusiésse, Fut. Sobrepusiére, to
put vpon, to set vpon.

* Sobrepónga, vide Sobreponér. 

* Sobrepóngo, vide Sobreponér. 

* Sobreporné, Sobrepornia, vide So­
breponér. 

* Sobrepujádo, m.excellent.

Sobrepujár, to excell.

* Sobrepúse, Sobrepusiéra, Sobrepu­
siésse, vide Sobreponér. 

Sóbre rópa, an vpper garment.

Sobresalido, impatient, rash, headstrong,
hastie, soone mooued to anger.

* Sobresaliénte, headstrong, rash, impa­
tient.

* Sobresaltádo, mooued with a sudden
passion.

Sobresálto, m.a sudden passion.





* Sobresanaherída, a wound cured vp
aboue, and within vnperfect.

Sobrescrevír, to write vpon, to write a
superscription.

Sobrescrípto, written vpon, a super­
scription.

Sobreséer, to sit on, to surcease.

* Sobresédo, vide Sobrescýdo, sur­
ceased.

* Sobreseymiénto, a demurre or stay of
a suite in law.

Sobrestánte, standing ouer.

* Sobrestéra, id est, Sobre estéra, vpon
a matter.

* Sobrevárda, an ouerseer of the garde.
Also a garde vpon a garment.

* Sobrevénga, Sobrevéngo, vide So­
brevenír. 

Sobrevenir, Præs. Sobrevéngo, So­
breviénes, Sobreviéne, 1. Præs. So­
brevíne, Sobreviniste, Sobrevino,
Fut. Sobreverné, or Sobrevendré,
ás, á, Sub Præs. Sobrevénga, Imperf.
Sobreviniésse, Sobrevernia, or So­
breviniéra. Fut. Sobreviniére, to
come vpon, to come in the nicke, to take
one napping.

* Sobreverné, vide Sobrevenír. 

* Sobrevernía, vide Sobrevenír. 

* Sobrevíne, Sobreviniéra, Sobrevi­
niésse, vide Sobrevenír. 

Sobrevista, the beuer of a caske or horse­
mans headpeece.

Sobrína, a neece, a brothers or sisters
daughter.

Sobríno, a nephew, a brothers sonne.

* Sóbrio, sober.

* Sobróso, vide Sabróso. 

* Socápa, priuily, vnder the cloake.

Socarrén, m.the eaues of a house.

Socarrár, or Chocarrár, to iest, to mock,
to sing.

* Socarréña, a crannie, a chinke.

Socavár, to vndermine.

* Sochántre, m.an vnder-chaunter in the
Church.

* Sociáble, fellowlike, able or fit to be
kept companie with.

Sócio, a fellow, a companion.

Socolór, vnder colour, by pretence.

Socorrér, to succour, to helpe, to relieue, to
aide.

* Socorrído, succoured, relieued, aided.

Socórro, aide, succour, helpe, reliefe.

Socrósio, a medicine.

* Socrósio mitridático, Mithridate.

Sodícho, vndermentioned, spoken of be­
low.

* Sodóma, the citie Sodom.

* Sodomético, a buggerer with man­
kinde.

* Sodomía, buggerie, the sin of Sodom.

* Sodomíta, m.a Sodomite or Bugge­
rer.

* Sodómo, vide Sodomíta. 

* Soficiénte, or Suficiénte, sufficient,
able to satisfie or content.

* Sofista, a sophister.

* Sofistico, belonging to sophistrie.

Sofrenáda, f. a chocke with the bridle, a
twitch, gird or snatch backe with the
bridle. A restraint.

Sofrenádo, refrained, kept backe.

Sofrenár, to refraine, to keepe backe.

Sóga, f. a roape. Sometime a long coard to
tie beastes with at pasture.

* Soguéro, a maker of roaps, a roape ma­
ker.

* Soguilla, f. a little roape.

* Sohés, f. dregs or adust matters in the
bodie.

* Sojusgádo, subiected, subdued.

Sojuzgár, to subdue, to bring in subiecti­
on.

Sól, m.the sunne.

Soládo, floored, planchered, paued.

Soládo, a floore, a pauement.

Solaménte, onely, alone.

Solána, f. a sunnie place, a sollar or loft in
a house, a sunne-diall.

Solána, vide Resolána, a pension paied
to the Prince for to liue out of common
busines, rent that one payeth yeerely for
a house: a sollar or loft.

* Soláno, the east-winde.

Solapádo, hidden, concealed.

Solapár, to hide, to conceale, to keepe close.

* Solár, the court yard neere a house, a
place not fully builded, a foundation, a
floore. A stocke or kinred.

* Solariégo, the originall of a stocke or
kinred.

* hidálgo de Solár conocído, a gentle­
man of auncient house.

Soláz, m.solace, pleasure, delight, recrea­
tion.

Solazár, to solace, to delight, to sport.

Sólda, or Sónda, the plum-line where­
with they sounde the depth of the wa­
ter.

Soldáda, paiment of wages to soldiers or
seruants, soldering with lead, tin, &c.

* Soldadár génte, to take vp men for
the war, to presse soldiers foorth.

* Soldadésca, f. the skill or profession of
soldiers.

Soldádo, a soldier. Also soldered, as me­
tall is in setting on eares, &c.

Soldadúra, or Atincadúra, soldering of
mettall.

Soldán, a soldan, an emperour of Persia.

Soldár, to solder things of mettall.

Soledád, solitarinesse, being alone.

* Solemnizádo, solemnised, obserued
solemnely, celebrated.

* Solemnizadór, a keeper of ancient ob­
seruations and rites.

* Solemnizár, to solemnize, to celebrate,
to obserue solemnely.

* Soléne, or Soléno, solemne.

Soleneménte, solemnely.

Solenidád, solemnitie.

Soléno, solemne, annuall, yeerely vsed,
ordinarie, publike, accustomed.

Solér, yo Suélo, to be woont.

* Soléta, the foote or sole of the stockings.

* Sólho, Sóllo, or Sullo, a fish called a
sturgeon.

* Solicitádo, solicited, set on.

Solicitaménte, carefully.

Solicitár, to sollicite, to call on, to pricke
forward.

Solicíto, carefull, pensiue, heauie minded.

Solicitúd, carefulnes, diligence.

* Sólido, firme, solide.

Solimán, m.mercurie sublimate.

Solitário, solitarie, alone.

Soliviár, to releeue, to succour, to rescue.

* a Sólla salíva, id est, al Sol la saliva, at
the sun the spittle.

Sollamár, to seare, to burne off haires,
to scorch.

Sollár, yo Suéllo, to blowe, to breath, to
pant.

Sóllo, a sturgeon, a pike fish, a sea pickrel.

Solloçár, to sigh, to sob.

Sollóço, a sigh, a sob, the hicket.

Sólo, alone.

* Solómos de el puérco, a hogs hasse­
let.

* Sólo que, only that.

* Sólo úno, one alone.

* Solstício, the stay of the sun, when it is
at the highest and at the lowest, as
when it entreth into Cancer and Ca­
pricorne.

* Solsticial, belonging to those staies of
the sunne.

Soltadór, a looser, an expounder of
dreames and riddles.

Soltár, yo Suélto, to loose, to let loose, to
release, to abate.

Soltéra, a single woman.

Soltería, single life.

Soltéro, a single man.

* Soltúra, loosing, deliuering, vntying.

Sómas, bran, crible.

Sómbra, f. shadow.

Sombrájo, a shadowie place.

Sombreréra, butter Burre.

* Sombreréro, a hatmaker.

Sombréro, m.a hat.

* Sombréro de obíspo, a bishops myter.

* Sombréro de Albanéz, a high crow­
ned hat.

* Sombría, or Cabañuéla, a place where
stage players dresse themselues.

Sombrío, shadowy, darke.

Sombróso, full of shadowe.
 




* Somergujadór, one the diueth vn­
der water.

* Somergujár, to diue vnder water.

* Somergújo, a certaine water birde
called a Diuer, or Diuedapper.

Soméro, the higest.

Sometér, to submit, to put vnder.

Sometído, submitted, put vnder.

Sómo, vpon, aboue.

Somorgujadór, vide Somergujadór. 

Somorgujár, vide Somergujár. 

Somorgújo, or Somorgujón, vide 
Somergújo. 

Son, a sound, a noise.

* Són, they are, vide Sér.

Sonáble, that which may be sounded.

Sonáda, a deed much spoken of, a famous
deed.

Sonája, or Sonajéras, or Tarréna, a
little bell or rattle for children to plaie
with.

Sonajéras, vide Sonája. 

Sonár, yo Suéno, to sounde, to make
noise, to blow the nose.

* Sónchos yérva, an herbe.

* Soncochádo, a kinde of pottage.

Sónda, a plummet to sounde the depth of
waters with.

* Sonéto, m.a sonnet.

Sonído, or Sóno, m.a sound, a noise.

Soñár, yo Sueño, to dreame, to trifle, or
dally.

Soñoliénto, sleepie, drowsie.

* Sonóra vóz, a hollow sounding voice.

Sonóro, sounding hollow.

* Sonoróso, very sounding.

* Sonreýr, to smile.

* Sonríre, vide Sonreýr. 

* Sonríso, a smiling.

* Sonsacár, to subduce.

* Sontuosaménte, or Suntuosaménte, 
stately, costly, sumptuously.

* Sontuóso, or Sumptuóso, sumptuous,
costly, stately.

Sópa, a soppe.

* Sopár, to make sops, or to sop into anie
thing.

Sopeár, to soppe, to put vnder feete.

* Sopércha, superfluitie, ouermuch.

* Soperchadaménte, superfluously.

* Soperchár, to exceed, to haue too much.

* Sopercheár, idem. 

* Soperchería, f. an exceeding.

* Sophísta, vide Sofísta. 

* Sopláda, a blaste, easie to blow.

Soplár, to blow, to breath.

* Soplído, blowen, puffed vp.

Sóplo, breath, a blast.

Soplodóra, that may be blowen.

* Soplón, a great blast.

Soporífero, the bringeth sleepe.

* Soportádo, supported, vpholden.

* Soportál, a supporter or vpholder.

Soportár, to support, to vphold, to main­
taine.

* Sóppa, vide Sópa, a soppe.

Sópplo, vide Sóplo, a blast, a breath.

* Soprecéjo, vide Sobrecéjo, the eie­
brow.

* Sórbas, a fruite called Saruices.

* Sorbér, yo Suérbo, to sowpe vp.

* Sórbo, a sowping.

Sordecér, yo Sordésco, Sub. Præs.
Sordésca, to be deafe.

Sordedád, vide Sordéz. 

* Sordéz, f. a deafenes.

* Sordésca, Sordésco, vide Sordecér. 

* Sordescér, vide Sordecér, to waxe
deafe.

Sórdo, deafe.

Sorteár, to cast lots.

* Sortéro, a teller of fortunes, a caster of
lots.

* Sortíja, a lot, a round hoope ring, a
kinde of weapon.

* Corrér la sortíja, to run at the ring.

* Sortijón, m.a great hoope ring.

Sórva, a Saruis fruite.

Sorvér, yo Suérvo, to sowpe vp.

Sorvible, that may be sowped vp.

* Sorvído, sowped.

Sorvíto, a little sowpe.

Sórvo, a sowping.

Sórze, a rat.

* Sosacár, to seduce, to entice vnder
hand.

Sosedád, f. vnsauorines.

Sosláyo, a swash, thwarte, aslope.

Sóso, vnsauorie.

* Sosobrár, to ouerwhelme.

Sospécha, suspicion.

* Sospechádo, suspected.

Sospechár, to suspect.

Sospechosaménte, suspiciously.

Sospechóso, suspicious.

Sospirár, to sigh.

Sospíro, sighing.

Sossacádo, seduced, deceiued.

Sossacár, vide Sosocár, to deceiue, to se­
duce, to vndermine.

Sossegadaménte, quietly, peaceably.

* Sossegadillo, somewhat quiet, some­
what calmed.

Sossegádo, quiet, calme, pacified.

Sossegár, Præs. yo Sossiégo, 1. Præt. yo
Sossegué, to pacifie, to quiet, to make
calme or still.

Sossiégo, m.quietnes, calmenes, stilnes.

* Sossiégo, vide Sossegár. 

* Sossegue, vide Sossegár. 

sosTenér, Præs. sosTéngo, sosTié­
nes, sosTiéne, 1. Præt. sosTúve,
sosTuvíste, sosTuvo, Fut. sosTer­
ne, or sosTendré, ás, á, Sub. Præs. 
sosTénga, Imperfect. sosTuviéra,
sosTernia, or sosTuviésse, Fut.
sosTuviére, to sustaine, to main­
taine, to vphold.

* Sosténga, Sosténgo, vide sosTenér. 

Sostenído, sustained, vpheld.

Sostenimiénto, sustaining.

* Sosterne, Sosternia, vide sosTenér. 

* Sostitución, substituting, putting of
another vnder him.

* Sostitúto, substituted, set vnder ano­
ther.

* Sostituýdo, idem. 

Sostituýr, to substitute, to make his de­
putie, to set another in his place.

* Sostrádo, a bolt to shoote withall.

* Sostúve, Sostuviéra, Sostuviésse, vide 
sosTenér. 

Sóta, the knaue at cardes.

Sóta de Navio, the place in a ship where
the balast is.

* Sótano, a caue or place vnder ground
to keepe wine coole in sommer.

* Sotaviénto, the lee side vnder the
winde.

Soterráño, a vault vnder ground.

Soterrár, yo Sotiérro, to burie vnder
ground.

* Sotiérre, Sotiérro, vide Soterrár. 

* Sotíl, or Sutíl, fine, subtile, craftie,
slender.

Sotiléza, subtilitie, slendernesse, craft,
finenesse.

Sotilménte, subtilly, craftily, slenderly,
finely.

Sóto, or Séto, a hedge.

* Sovádo, kneaded as dough.

Sovadúra, kneading of dough.

Sovajadúra, idem. 

* Sovajamiénto, idem. 

Sovajár, to knead dough, to beat with the
hands.

Sovár, idem. 

Sovár la mássa, to knead the dough.

* Sovérvia, vide Sobérvia, pride.

* Sovérvio, vide Sobérbio, proud.

Sovína, a wooden pin to pin boords, a
swallow taile to ioyne timber.

* Sóy, I am, vide Sér.


S P
* Spargoíl, a kinde of sea fish almost like
a breame.

* Sparzído, spread.

* Sparzír, to spread abroad.

* Spélta, beere corne.

* Spétto, a fish called a spitfish, or sea pic­
krell.

* Sphéra, a sphere or round forme, a cir­
cle, a rundell, a bowle.

* Spígo, or Langúda, Lauender spike.

* Spinál, a thornie place.

* Spléndido, bright, cleere, shining, fa­
mous, notable, excellent, honorable.





* Spónja, a spunge.

* Sponjóso, spungie, light, full of holes.

* Spudár, vide  Escupír, to spit.

* Spúrio, a bastard.


S T
* Stafféro, one that helpeth his Lord to
horsebacke.

* Státua, f. a statue or image.

* Statúto, an ordinance, a statute, a de­
cree.

* Statuýdo, appointed, decreed, set downe
at a law.

* Statuýr, to appoint, to decree, to deter­
mine.

* Stéril, barren, fruitlesse.

* Stópa, hurds of flaxe.

* Stráça, as Papél de stráça, waste pa­
per to winde vp ware in, browne pa­
per.

* Sturión, a fowle called an Ostrich.

* Stýge, the infernall lake, Styx neere hel,
as Poets faine.


S V
* Su, a pronoune signifying yours or his, as
Su pádre de vuéstra Álteza, your
fathers highnesse.

Suáve, sweete.

Suaveménte, sweetly.

Suavidád, sweetnes.

* Suavissaménte, most sweetely.

* Subcessivaménte, vide Successiva­
ménte, successiuely, by order of succes­
sion.

* Subdelegádo, substituted, one that ser­
ueth another mans turne.

* Subdelegár, to set vnder him, to appoint
in his roome.

Súbdito, a subiect.

* Suberáno, vide Soberáno, a soue­
raigne, or head Prince.

Subída, f. a going vp, an ascending.

* Subída de quilátes, a pure thing that
will holde touch and triall with the
best.

* Subidissimo, most loftie or proud.

Subído, loftie, proud.

* Subidór, one that getteth vp.

* Subjécto, subiect, bound vnto, beholden
or in debt vnto.

Subiénte, going vp.

* Subjetádo, subjected, brought vnder.

* Subjetár, to bring vnder.

Subír, to goe vp.

* Subír la véla, to hoise saile.

Subitaménte, suddenly, on a sudden.

Súbito, sudden, vnlooked for.

* Sublimádo, lifted vp, extolled.

Sublimár, to extoll, to lift vp.

* Sublíme, loftie, hautie, high, that is a­
boue vs.

* Subornár, to suborne, to mislead to euill,
or to beare false witnes.

* Subpeditár, to put vnder feete.

* Subrepticío, that commeth by stealth,
counterfaited.

* Subrogár, to set as deputie.

* Subscripción, a writing vnder.

* Subscrípto, subscribed, written belowe.

* Subsídio, aide, helpe, releefe.

* Substentár, to vphold, to maintaine.

* Substituýr, to substitute as his deputie,
to set vnder him.

* Subtiléza, f. subtilitie, craft.

* Súçio, vide Súzio, fowle, filthie.

Sucedér, to succeede, to go forwarde, to
prosper.

* Sucedído, succeeded, prospered.

* Succudimiénto, a shaking backe.

Succudír, to shake again, to beate backe.

Successión, succession, posterity, following
on by course.

* Successivaménte, successiuely, one af­
ter another, as sonne after father, &c.

Sucessívo, successiue, by course.

Sucésso, successe, posteritie, issue, some­
what to follow.

Sucessór, a succeeder, one that followeth
another in place, either in office, heri­
tage, or possession of goods.

* Suçiedád, or Suziedád, f. fowlenes,
sluttishnes.

Sudadéro, a sweating place.

* Sudádo, hauing sweate.

Sudário, a handkerchiefe.

Sudár, to sweate.

Súdito, m.a subiect.

Sudór, m.sweate.

Suégra, the wiues mother, or husbandes
mother, a mother.

Suégro, the wiues father, or husbands fa­
ther, a father in law.

Suéla, the sole of a shooe.

* Suélas de çapátos, the soles of shooes.

Suélda, an herbe called Comferie.

* Suelle, Suello, vide Sollár. 

Suélo, the grounde or soyle of a place, a
floore, the bottome, a court yarde to a
house.

Sueltaménte, freely, lightly, nimbly.

* Suéltas, staies, or fetters of cordes for
horse feete in the stable, to keepe them
from striking one another.

* Suelte, Suelto, vide Soltár. 

Suélto, loose, free, at libertie, nimble,
quicke, lustie.

* Suéne, Suéno, vide Sonár. 

* Sueñe, Sueño, vide Soñár. 

* Suénho, vide Sueño. 

Suéño, sleepe, a dreame.

Suéño subér, a kind of swouning dream.

* Suerbe, Suerbo, vide Sorbár. 

Suéro, whey.

Suérte, f. a lot, a chance.

Suéz, base, filthie, naughtie.

Suficiénte, or Soficiénte, sufficient, a­
ble enough.

Súfre, m.brimstone.

Sufráble, tollerable.

Sufrído, patient.

Sufrimiénto, sufferance, patience.

Sufrír, to abide, to suffer, to endure.

Sugeción, or Sujeción, subiection.

Sugetár, vide Sujetár, to bring vnder.

Sugéto, vide Sujéto. 

Sugóso, full of iuice.

* a la Suiça, after the Switzers fashion.

* Suíço, m.a Switzer or a man of Swit­
zerland.

* Sujeción, or Sugeción, subiection.

* Sujetár, or Sugetár, to bring vnder, to
make subiect.

* Sujéto, subiect.

Sujusgár, vide Sojuzgár, to subdue, to
make to yeeld.

* Súl, or Súr, south.

* Sulcádo, made into furrowes.

Sulcár, Præs. yo Súlco, 1. Præt. yo
Sulqué, to make into furrowes.

Súlco, a furrow, a gutter on a house.

Sulfonéte, m.a match with brimstone.

* Sulfúreo, belonging to brimstone.

* Súllo, vide Sólho. 

Súma, a summe.

* Sumaménte, summarily, all togither.

* Sumáque, or çumaáque, a kinde of
herbe that curriers vse to thicken their
leather with.

Sumár, to summe vp.

* Sumariaménte, briefly.

Sumário, the grosse summe, the effect, a
breefe.

* Súmbra, vide Sómbra. 

* Sumidéro, a sinke, an ouerwhelming
place.

Sumído, ouerwhelmed, drenched.

* Sumiénte de nábos, a place where
turneps doe growe.

Sumír, to ouerthrow, to drench.

* Summária, a summarie or breefe
matter.

Summaménte, especially, excellently.

* Súmmo, highest, excellent.

* Súmo, vide Súmmo. 

* Súmo, vide çúmo, iuice.

Sumptuosaménte, costly, sumptuously,
stately, pompously.

Sumptuosidád, sumptuousnesse, costli­
nesse.

Sumptuóso, sumptuous, stately, costly.

* Súpe, vide Sabér. 

* Superár, to ouercome.





* Supeditár, to giue or minister suffici­
ently, to be enough or sufficient, to fur­
nish with. Also to subdue and ouer­
come, to tread vnder.

* Supercherías, ouermuch, superfluitie.

* Supérbo, vide Sobérvio, proud.

* Superficie, the outside of any thing, the
superficies.

* Superficionário, one appointed by an
other, to dispatch busines for another.

Superfluaménte, superfluously, exces­
siuely.

Superfluidád, superfluitie, excesse, too
much.

Supérfluo, superfluous, more than inough.

* Superlatívo, the superlatiue or cheefe
degree.

* Superiór, the vpper, the ouermost.

* Superstición, superstition, standing
too much vpon points.

* Supersticiosaménte, superstitiously.

* Supersticióso, superstitious, standing
too much vpon points.

* Supiéra, Supiésse, vide Sabér. 

* Supitaménte, vide Subitaménte. 

Suplicación, earnest intreatie, supplica­
tion, beseeching.

* Suplicádo, beseeched, earnestly in­
treated.

* Suplicánte, a suppliant, one that in­
treateth earnestly.

Suplicár, Præs. yo Suplíco, 1. Præt. yo
Supliqué, Sub. Præs. Suplíque, to
intreat, to beseech.

* Suplildo, id est Suplídlo, beseech him.

Suplimiénto, a supply, a making vp.

* Suplique, vide Suplicár. 

Suplír, to supplie, to make good that which
lacketh.

* Súpo, vide Sabér. 

* Suppleménto, vide Suplimiénto. 

* Supponér, to put vnder, to put in place
of another.

* Suppuésto, put vnder, put in place of
another, suborned, vnderset.

* Suprémo, supreame, chiefe.

* Súr, or Súl, the southwinde.

* Surcár, to cut through waues of the sea,
as a ship doth.

* Surcir, vide Surzír. 

* Surgído, risen, come to anchor.

Surgír, yo Súrjo, Sub. Præs. Súrja, to
arise, to come to an anchor.

* Súrja, Súrjo, vide Surgír. 

* † Surrón, vide çurrón, a leather scrip.

* Surtír, to rise, to rebound.

* Súrto, risen or come to an anchor.

Surzidéra, a woman botcher.

Surzidór, a botcher, a mender of clothes.

* Surzidúra, f. a botching, a mending of
old clothes.

Surzír, to amend, to botch, to stitch vp.

* Sus, as, Sus vámos, vp, vp let vs goe.

* Sus, as, álto Sús, vp, let vs goe.

* Suscitár, to raise, or rouse vp.

Súso, vp, aboue.

* de Súso, aboue.

* Súsodicho, aboue saide.

Suspención, doubt, want of resolution.

Suspendér, to suspend, to doubt.

* Suspendído, suspended.

Suspentión, vide Suspención, doubt,
suspending.

Suspénso, suspense, doubte.

* Sussuradéro, vide Susuradéro. 

Sussurár, vide Susurár, to murmur, to
mutter, to mumble.

* Sussúrro, vide Susúrro. 

Sustantia, substance, matter, goods, ri­
ches.

Sustantiál, substantiall, materiall, of
some woorth.

* Sustenér, vide Sostenér, to sustaine, to
maintaine, to vphold, to nourish.

Susténgo, sustenance, nourishment.

* Sustenído, sustained, vpheld, main­
tained.

Sustentamiénto, sustaining, holding vp,
sustenance.

Sustentár, yo Sustiénto, to sustaine, to
prop vp, to maintaine, to nourish.

* Susténto, a sustayning.

* Sustiénte, Sustiénto, vide Susten­
tár. 

* Susurradéro, a place where Bees keepe
a humming.

* Susurradór, m.a whisperer, a mutterer,
a mumbler.

Susurrár, or Sussurrár, to murmur, to
mutter, to mumble.

* Susurrído, or Sussurrído, a muttering,
a whispering, a humming of Bees.

* Susúrro, or Sussúrro, idem. 

Sutil, or Sotil, subtill, craftie.

* Sutiléza, or Subtiléza, subtiltie, craft,
finenes.

* Sutilezár, to make fine.

* Sutilménte, subtily, finely.

* Súya, hirs, his.

* Suýço, a Switzer.

Suýo, his.

Suziaménte, filthily, fowly, sluttishly.

Suziedád, f. filthines, fowlenes, slouenli­
nes.

Súzio, m. fowle, filthie, slouenly, durtie.

* Suzuélo, somewhat fowle, or filthie,
somewhat slouenly or durtie.



* Sylvéstre, wilde, of the wood.


 
T

* TÁba, vide Táva. 

* T Abáco, m.the herbe Tobaco.

* Tábano, or Abispón, a horse flie, a
hornet.

* Tabáque, a little basket, a basket wher­
in women put their needle worke.

* Tabaquéra, the place where Tobaco
groweth, or a place where Tobaco is
kept.

Tabaquíllo, a little basket.

Tabardillos, plague tokens, blew spots, 
called Gods markes. Also another kinde
of disease.

* Tabárdo, vide Tavárdo. 

Tabárro, a hornet.

* Tabellário, a carrier of letters, a car­
rier of newes.

* Tabérna, or Tavérna, a tauerne.

Tabernáculo, tabernacle, a tent.

* Taberneár, vide Taverneár. 

* Tabernéro, vintner.

† Tabíque, a thin wall of rods, a wat­
tle-wall.

Tábla, a boord, a planke. A table or re­
cord written for a memoriall, a table to
play on. The table or index of a booke.

* Tablachina, a kinde of bucklar made
in China, vsed in Italy.

* Tabladíllo, a little boord, a little
planke, a little floore of a house.

* Tabládo, planked, boorded, a planke, a
boord.  The boording, or planking of a
house, a flooring or floore of a house.

* Tabláge, m.the play at tables. Also a 
dicing house where they play at tables,
cards, and dice.

Tabláje, m.idem. 

* Tablajéro, or Tablagéro, the owner,
or master of a dicing house. Also one
that vseth much play there.

Táblas, f. tables to play at.

Tabléro, m.a chesse boord, playing tables.
Also any boord or planke, such as tay­
lers  or men of occupation cut their
worke out on.

* Tabléro, as Ponér, or Metér la vída
al Tabléro, to put his life at hap-ha­
zard.

* perdér en los Tabléros, to loose at
play or games.

* Tabléta, a little table or planke, a horne
booke, such as children learne their
A, b, c, in. Also a kind of confection that
Apothecaries vse, verie cordiall.

* Tablíca, f. idem. 

* Tablétas, an apothecarie receit or drug,
verie cordiall.

Tablílla, the signe of an Inne. Also a
trencher. Also a writing slate or ta­
bles.

Tablón, or Tablónes, large boords.

* Tabúrno, a mountaine of Campania in
Italy, abounding in Oliues.

Táça, or Taçón, a cup of siluer, or such
like to drinke in.

Tacañería, f. lewdnes, villanie.

* Tacáño, a lewd villanous fellow.





* Taceadór, a drinker vp of many cups, a
quaffer, a tossepot.

* Taceár, to quaffe, to carowse.

Tácha, a fault.

Tachár, to finde fault with.

Tachonádo, m. studded, nailed.

Tachónes, studs, a kind of nailes.

* Tachuélas, f. little studs or nailes.

Tacitaménte, secretly, without making
any words.

* Tácito, still, quiet, husht, silent.

* Táco, that which is put in betweene the
powder and bullet in a peece, whether it
be paper or hurds, or such like.

* Táco de madéra, a wooden stopple
that is put in the mouth of ordinance to
keepe out the moisture of raine from
the powder.

Taçón, a great cup of siluer, or such like
to drinke in.

* Tácto, the sence of feeling.

* Tafetán, m.taffeta silke.

* Tafuéra, vide Tafuréa. 

Tafuréa, f. a horse boate, a boate to ferrie
ouer horses with.

* Tagálo, vide Regálo. 

* Tagarmína, a kinde of thistle sweete
to eate.

Tagaróte, m.a kinde of hauke.

* Tahéño, abourne browne colour.

* Tahóna, f. a horse mill, Bridewell.

* Tahónes, or Atahónes, horse milles.

† Tahur, m.a Barretor, a gamster, a di­
cer.

† Tahurázo, m.a great gamster, an vn­
thrift or great dicer.

Tája, f. a score, a tallie.

Tajáda, f. a cut of flesh, a sliue or slice of
bread, a sliue or cutting of any thing,
a shred, a peece.

* Tajadéro, vide Tajadór. 

Tajádo, cut, skored, tallied vp.

* Tajadór, or Tajadéro, a trencher, a
chopping boord.

Tajánte, cutting, skoring.

Tajár, to cut, to skore.

* Tajéte, a small cut, gash or slice.

Tájo, m.a cut, a slice. Also the riuer Ta­
gus in Spaine. Also the chopping boord
or stocke that butchers vse to cut out
their flesh on.

Tajón, a boord to cut flesh on, a dresser.

Tajoncillo, m.a little boorde to cut flesh
on, a dresser boord.

* Tajonzillo, idem. 

Táita, or Táyta, m.a worde vsed of little
children, as in English Dad.

Tal, such, such maner.

Tal quál, such as.

Tála, forraying, spoiling.

Talabárte, m.sword hangers.

Taladrár, to boare through.

Taládro, m.a wimble, a pearcer, anie
thing to boare with, an instrument to
helpe off the ordinance.

* Talága, vide Taléga. 

Tálamo, m.a bedde chamber where the
bride and bridegroome do lie.

* Talanguéra, vide Talenquéra, the
place where people are beholding stage
plaies.

Talanquéra, f. a gallerie or railes about
a beare baiting place, or about a plaie
house.

Talánte, desire, will, lust, voluptuous af­
fection.

Talantóso, wilfull, desirous, lustfull, gi­
uen to voluptuous pleasure.

Talár, to spoile, to forray, to cut downe.

* Talavárte, vide Talabárte. 

Taléga, or çurrón, a wallet, a scrip, a
shepherds pouch, a knapsacke.

Talegón, m.a budget, a pouch, a scrip.

Taleguílla, f. a little budget, a little
wallet or knapsacke.

* Talénto, a talent, a summe of money
among the Greekes, whereof were
two sorts, the greater talent of 80. mi­
nas, euery mina of 100. drachmas, or
groates sterling, the same conteining
133. pound odde money starling, the
other 60. minas.

Talión, m.the punishment of equall losse
for a wrong done.

Tálla, f. a grauing, a caruing.

* Tálla que sáca el buríl, the chippings,
the toole heweth out in caruing or gra­
uing.

Talládo, carued, fashioned.

* bien Talládo, well proportioned, of a
good shape, stature, or proportion.

Tallár, to carue, to cut out.

Tálle, m.shape, proportion, stature, fa­
shion.

Tallecér, yo Tallésco, to growe to a
stalke.

* Tallér, a place where free masons or
engrauers worke.

Tállo, m.a stalke or stem of herbe, a yong
sprig or bough of a tree beginning to
growe.

* Talpáire, a sea fish being of huge great­
nes in the forepart, and very small in
the hinder part.

* Tallón, m.a great stalke or stem of an
herbe. Also a kinde of tribute or sub­
sidie.

Tallúdo, m.growen to a stalke.

Talón, m.the ankle.

Tálque, clay to make goldsmithes pots.

Talvína, water and bran, or froth and
fome.

Tamáño, the bignesse, bulke, stature or
proportion. Also so great.

* Támaras, or Dátiles, dates.

Tamaraviénto, an herbe called hore­
hound.

* Tamarguéira, f. a shrub called Tama­
riske.

Tamaríndos, an Indian date.

Tamarís, Taráy, or Tarahé, a shrub
called Tamariske.

Tamaríz, idem. 

Tambien, as well, well, also, alike.

* Tamboréte, m.the crosse peeces of wood
where the flag is fastened in a ship.

* Tamboriléro, m.one that playeth on
a taber.

Tamborín, m.a taber.

* Támo, m.strawe worne so short as
when it is come to dust. Als chaffe.

Tampóco, as little.

Tamprésto, as soone, so soone.

* Tan, vide Tánto, as, as much.

* Tánda, a lot, a chaunce, a turne.

* Tañár, vide Tañér. 

Tañedór, a plaier on instruments, a
sounder on instruments.

Tañér, to sounde, winde, or play vpon any 
instrument.

* † Tanjár, a citie in Africa.

* Tan póco, as little.

Tan solaménte, onely.

Tántas vézes, so often, so many times.

Tanteár, to account, to rate, to sesse or
taxe, to reckon how many he is at any
game at cardes, deriued of Tánto.

Tánto, as much, so much.

Tánto mas, so much the more.

Tánto ménos, so much lesse.

Tánto que, as much as.

* Tapadéro, a stopple, a couering.

* Tapádo, stopped.

Tapadór, a stopper, a stopple.

* Tapadúra, stopping.

Tapár, to stop, to couer a cup, &c.

Tapetádos, m.the inside of leather tur­
ned outward in shooes or ierkins, and
made blacke.

Tapéte, m.carpet worke, tapestrie.

* Tapezería, arras, tapestrie.

* † Tápia, f. a mud wall.

* Tapiadór, m.a maker of mud wals.

Tapiál, boords betwixt which they make
mud wals, a mawle to beate downe
earth.

Tapiár, to make a mud wall.

* Tapiár los médios cuérpos, to set
out and ram him fast in the ground
vp to the middle, and so to let him die.

* Tapiçádo, hanged with Arras.

Tapicerías, or Tapizerias, tapistrie,
arras.

* Tapicéro, a maker of arras or tapi­
strie.

Tapíces, m.arras cloth, tapistrie worke.

* Tapiéro, m.a maker of mud wals.

Tapión, or Tapiño, a stopper, or stop­
ple.





* Tapíno, vide Tapión. 

* Tapón, m.a stopple, a bung of a bar­
rell.

Taponcíco, m.a little stopple.

* Táque, knocking at a dore.

* † Taraçána, a docke or place where
ships are made.

* Taracéa, the enchasing of checker worke
one with another.

Taraçónes, m.peeces, fragments.

Taragoncía, f. an herbe called Dragons.

* Taragontia, vide Taragoncía. 

Tarahé, Tamaríz, or Atárfe, a shrubbe
called Tamariske.

Tarántola, f. a little serpent called a
Swifte, an Este, or an Euet.

Tarásca, f. a giant made of clothes and
thinges, such as they vse in Pageants
and May games. Also a hobbie horse
such as they daunce withall in a Maie
game.

* Tarbéa, a square trencher.

Tardadór, one that staieth or delayeth
the time.

* Tardamudár, to stammer or stutter
in speaking.

Tardamúdo, m.a stammerer, a stutte­
rer.

Tardánça, staie, tarriance, delay.

Tardár, to staie, to stop, to delay, to de­
murre, to driue off.

Tárde, late, the euening.

Tardiaménte, slowly, slackly, late.

Tardio, m.late, late in the euening, after
due time.

Tárdo, slow, slacke.

Tardón, m.a slow fellowe, a dullard, a
heauie sluggard.

* Taréa, f. a taske, a quantitie of labour
or worke prescribed within a prefixed
time.

* Tarénto, a principall citie of Greece
called Tarentum.

* Targa, f. vide Dárga, a targuet.

† Tárja, f. a peece of money woorth nine
marauedies, three halfe pence English.

* Tarjéta, f. a greate long dagger, or a
short sword.

* Tarjete, m.a little shield.

* Tarífa, f. a hauen towne of Andaluzia
so called.

* † Taríma, a Moores bed made of wood.

* Tarína, f. a worme that eateth timber.

* Tarpéia, the name of a vestall virgin,
who sold the chiefest fort and castle of
Rome to the Sabines for the bracelets
that they did weare, of whom when she
demanded the bracelets, she was slaine,
& of her castle was called Tarpeia.

* Tarpéio, or Tarpéyo, one of the sea­
uen hils about Rome so called.

Taréñas, Sonájas, or Tañéres, bels, or
rattels for children to play with.

Tárto, m.a paile, a bucket.

† Tarrúgo, or Tarúgo, a swallow taile
to ioine timber, a woodden pin.

* Tárta, vide Tórta, a cake.

Tártago, m.an herbe called fiue leafed
grasse. Some say it is the herbe Spurge.

* Tartajóso, one giuen to stammering or
stuttering, a stammering fellow.

Tartamudeár, to stutter, to stammer.

Tartamúdo, one stammering, or stut­
ting.

* Tartáreo, y infernál, hellish, belonging
to hell.

* Tartária, the countrey Tartaria.

* Tártaros, the Tartarians.

* Tartaxeár, vide Tartamudár. 

* † Tarúgo, a certaine fastening of
planks in a ship called a Swallow taile,
a woodden pin.

* Tása, vide Tássa. 

* Tasación, vide Tassación. 

Tascár, Præs. yo Tásco, 1. Præt. yo
Tasqué, Sub. Præs. Tásque, to play
on the bit as horses doe in champing it.

Táscos, tow, flockes, lockes shorne or clip­
ped off.

* Tasque, vide Tascár. 

* Tas por tás, like for like, one good turne
for another.

* Tássa, vide Tassación. 

Tassación, f. taxing, rating, sessing.

* Tassadaménte, ratably, taxingly, li­
mitingly.

* Tassádo, taxed, sessed, limited, rated.

Tassadór, a sesser or taxer, a setter of
rates, an appointer of prices.

Tassájo, m.a cut or slice of flesh.

Tassár, to taxe, to rate, to sesse, to value.

* Tasseadór, vide Taceadór, a drinker
of many cups, a quaffer, a tospot.

* Tasseár, vide Taceár, to drinke many
cups, to quaffe, to carowse.

Tassúgo, m.a little kinde of beast.

* Táta, out, alas! Also a riuer in Chile.

Tataniéto, a nephew of the fourth
degree.

* Táva, f. a buckle bone in a sheepe wher­
with children vse to play at cocke and
blanke, or cocke and all.

Távano, a horse flie, a hornet.

* Taváque, a little basket that women
put their worke in.

* Tavaquéra, vide Tabaquéra. 

* Tavaquillo, vide Tabaquillo. 

* Tavardillos, vide Tabardillos. 

* † Tavárdo, m.a kinde of garment like
a coate.

* Tavárro, or Tabárro, a hornet.

Tavérna, f. a tauerne, a tipling house, an
inne.

* Tavernáculo, vide Tabernáculo. 

Taverneár, to keepe a tauerne, to keepe a
victualing house. Also to haunt the ta­
uerne much.

* Tavernéra, an hostesse or woman kee­
per of a tauerne.

Tavernéra cósa, any thing belonging to
a tauerne.

Tavernéro, a vintner, a keeper of a ta­
uerne or inne.

* Tavíque, vide Tabíque, a wattle wal
of rods.

* Taxár, to taxe, to sesse tribunes or sub­
sidies.

* † Taxía, worke in wood or iron.

* Taxón, vide Tajón. 

* Taxoncíllo, vide Tajoncíllo. 

* Taymáda raméta, a close cunning
harlot.

Taymádo, a close subtill fellow.

* † Tazmia, casting of accounts.


T E
Téa, f. the middle of the hart of the pine
tree when it is growen to be so fat and
full of liquor, that being kindled it
burneth like a torch. Also taken for
any match or peece of wood dressed
with brimstone and rosin, to burne like
a torch. Also a torch.

Teátro, m.a theater, a place for publike
shewes or plaies.

Techár, or Tejár, to couer a house with
tiles.

Técho, Téche, Téja, or Téjo, a roofe
or couering of a house.

* Técho de pája, a roofe of a house that
is thatched.

Techúmbre, vide Açotéa. 

* Técla, as Música de Técla, musicke of
organes, virginalles, clauicordes or such
like.

* Tégoda, a ticket or warrant for to haue
lodging, victualls, apparell, &c.

Téja, a linden or tillet tree, that beareth
fruit, as great as a beane, in which are
seeds  as great as anise seeds. ALso a
tile, a slate, to couer houses with.

Téja de Tejádo, a tile.

* Téja de huévo, an egge shell.

* Téja de péce, a shell of fish.

Tejádo, or Técho, a roofe of a house.

Tejár, to tile, to couer with slate, &c.

Tejéro, a tiler, a slater. Also a maker of
tiles or brickes.

Téjo, m.a tile, a couering or roofe.

Tejuéla, a peece of a tile. Also a little
tile.

Téla, a web, a tilt, the hart string, a web
of linnen most properly.

* Téla de iuizio, the web of iustice or
iudgement, the which to passe thorow,
will refine the partie.





* Téla de la granáda, a filme diuiding
one graine of a Pomegranate from ano­
ther.

* Telamón, the name of a certaine king
of Salamin son to Æacus, brother to
Peleus, father to Aiax. Also a bird so
called.

Telár, a weauers loome, wherein he wea­
ueth his cloath.

Telaráña, f. a cobweb.

* Telarañiénto, full of cobwebs.

* Telarañóso, idem. 

* Télas de coraçón, the hart strings.

Telíca, f. a little web.

* Telílla, a kinde of striped canuas or
sackecloth, a border.

* † Tellíz, a saddlecloth.

Téma, wilfulnes, earnestnes in his pur­
pose, peruersenes. Also a theame to be
spoken on or written on.

* de Téma traér la gótta, to weare the
hat or cap on one side of the head fan­
tastically.

* Temático, contentious, obstinate.

* Tembládo, trembled.

Tembladór, one that trembleth, a feare­
full fellow.

Temblár, yo Tiémblo, to tremble, to
shake for feare.

Temblór, m.trembling, shaking or qui­
uering for feare.

Temedéra cósa, a fearefull matter.

Temér, to feare.

Temerário, rash, harebrained.

* Temeridád, f. rashnes, vndiscreete ha­
stinesse in dealing, foolehardinesse, vn­
aduisednes.

Temerosaménte, fearfully.

Temeróso, fearefull, timerous.

* Temído, feared, dreaded.

Temór, m. feare, dread.

* Temóso coráje, one of a peruerse na­
ture or spirit.

† Témpano, m.a bung or couer of corke
to stop withall.

Tempéro, temper, season, ordering a­
right.

Tempestád, f. blustering, foule weather,
a tempest, a storme.

Tempestóso, stormie, tempestuous, foule
weather.

* Tempestuóso, idem. 

* Tempinéque, vide Diézmos, the
tenth penny.

Témpla, f. temper, temperature, mode­
ration.

Templadaménte, temperately, mode­
rately.

Templádo, temperate, moderate, not ex­
ceeding, seasonable, modest, sober.

* Templadór, a temperer, moderator or
causer of modest sobernesse and tempe­
rance.

* Templánça, f. temperance, sobernesse,
moderation.

Templár, yo Tiémplo, to temper, to
rule, to moderate, to order.

* Templário, a kinde of religious man
called a Templar.

Témple, vide Témpla, temperature,
moderation, order.

* Templezíllo, m.a little church or
temple.

Témplo, m.a temple, a church.

* Temporáda, f. a time, space, a tract of
time.

Temporál, temporall, for a time, that is
but for a season, worldlie.

* Temporalidád, f. promotion or liuing
not belonging to the church.

* Temporizár, to serue the time, to doe
as may best like those with whom hee
dealeth at that time, to follow the fa­
shions of times.

Tempráno, earely, soone ripe, in good
time.

* Tén, hold thou, the Imperatiue of Te­
nér.

* Tén púnto, stay, stop, pawse, holde a
while, giue me leaue a little.

* Tenáça, or Tenáza, f. a paire of tongs
or pincers.

* Tenacidád, f. holding fast, keeping
still.

Tenáda, f. a hay loft.

* Tenáz, couetous, a holdfast.

Tenazádas, pluckes with pincers.

* Tenáza, or Tenáça, a paire of tongs or
pincers.

Tenazár, to plucke with pincers.

Tenázas, pincers, tongs.

* Tenazeár, to plucke with pincers.

* Tenazícas, little pincers.

* Tenazidád, vide Tenacidád. 

* Tenazuélas, little pincers.

* Ténca, f. a fish called a Tench.

* Tendál de pópa, the sterne castle of a
galley, or small barke.

* Tendaléte de pópa, idem. 

* Téndara, a tent or tilt to keepe off the
raine.

Tendedéro, a place for a tent. Also a
place where one layeth out or stretcheth
cloath.

Tendejón, m.a tent, a tabernacle.

Tendér, yo Tiéndo, to bend, to stretch.

Tendéro, a shop keeper, a keeper of a
tent.

* Tendído, stretched out.

Tenebregóso, darke, obscure.

* Tenebróso, idem. 

* Tenedón, m.a strong towre in Troy.

Tenedór, m.a forke to eate meate with­
all. One that holdeth in possession.

* Tenédos, an Ile in the AEgean sea
ouer against Troy.

Tenénçia du fortaléza, holding or kee­
ping of a fort or strong place.

Tenér, Præs. Téngo, Tiénes, Tiéne,
1. Præt. Túve, Tuvíste, Túvo. Fut.
Tendré, or Terné, ás, á. Sub. Præs. 
Ténga. Imperfect. Tuviéra, Ten­
dria, Tuviésse. Fut. Tuviére, to hold,
to apprehend, to keepe in, to know, to
perceiue.

Tenér el móço, to haue fifty and one, at
primero.

* Tenér las novénas, to bee in the
chuch nine daies togither praying and
fasting.

Tenér en póco, to esteeme little.

Tenér de yr, to be bound to a place, to
haue busines, to be come.

* Teneria, f. a house where they tanne
leather, as in Spaine is vsed. And those

houses stand from the citie.

* Ténga, Téngo, vide Tenér. 

Teniénte, he that holdeth, a lieutenant.

Teñído, dyed in colour.

Teñidúra, dying of colour, tincture.

Teñir, yo Tiño, to die colours.

Tenór, the tenor, sound, tune.

Tentación, triall, temptation, proofe.

Tentadór, a tempter, one that tempteth.

Tentár, yo Tiénto, to proue, to trie, to
assay, to feele.

* Ténte vn póco, hold thy peace awhile,
or stay a while.

* Tenúra, the holding or keeping.

Teologia, f. diuinitie.

Teólogo, a diuine.

* Teórica, or Theórica, f. brokerie, mediation, or wor­
king by meanes.

Tercéro, m.a broker, a third man, a me­
diator betweene two other, an vmpier,
one that gathereth the Tercias, id est, 
the tithes.

Terceról, the hinders most rower in a gal­
ley.

* Tércia, f. a kinde of taxe, three quarters
of a yard or measure, the third part of
any other thing. Also three of the clock,
also a place where they lay vp the tithes
of the church.

Terciádos, short arming swords.

Terciána, f. a tertian, or second day ague.

Terciár, to plough the ground, to shake a
launce. Also to play the broaker.

* Terciár la píca, to shake or brandishe
a pike, to come to pushe of pike with the
enemy.

Terciazón, or terciaçón, ploughing of
the ground, fallowing the land.

* Tércio, a regiment of souldiers, or as
many companies as were leuyed vpon
seruice out of one country, a tierce, a





kinde of measure.

Terciopélo, m.veluet.

* Terciopélo ríso, vncut veluet.

Térco, a sower fellow, a boysterous per­
son.

* Teréra, f. a kinde of bird.

* Teréro, vide Terréro. 

* Tergiductór, a leader of the rere­
ward or hinder part of the battell.

Terícia, vide Iterícia. 

Terliz, f. tissue made of three threeds of
diuers colours.

* Térmas, f. a place or kinde of theater
in Rome where they held their feastes.

* Termentína, f. turpentine.

Término, m.an ende, a bound.

* Terná, vide Tenér. 

* Terné, vide Tenér. 

* Ternéra, a little calf.

Ternéro, idem. 

Ternéza, or Tenúra, tendernes.

Ternezuélo, or Terneçuélo, somwhat
tender.

* Ternía, vide Tenér. 

Ternilla, f. a gristle.

Ternillóso, full of gristles.

Ternúra, or Ternéza, tendernes.

Terrádo, m.a fiat couering of a house.

* Terraplenádo, rammed vp with
earth.

* Terraplenár, to ramme vp with earth.

* Terrapléno, a ramming with earth for
defence, a rampire of earth within the
wall, as is vsed in the low countries.

Terregóso, cloddy.

Terremóto, an earthquake.

Terrenál, earthly, belonging to the earth.

* Terréno, idem. 

* Terréno, as Quádro de Terréno, a
geometricall instrument, a square.

* Terréra, f. a kinde of bird.

Terréro, m.a but to shoote at. Also a
banke, a walking place or mount of
earth higher than the other ground.

* Terrezuéla, or Tereçuéla, a little
plot of ground.

Terríble, terrible, dreadfull, to be feared.

* Terribleménte, terribly, fearfully.

* Terripléno, vide Terrapléno. 

Território, the bounds or limits of a ci­
tie how far their iurisdiction may ex­
tend.

Terrón, m.a clod.

Terroncíllo, a little clod.

* Terronóso, full of clods.

Terrór, terror, feare, dread.

Terrúño, a veine of earth, a layre.

* Térso, cleane, pure, neate.

* Terziána, vide Terciána. 

* Terziár, vide Terciár. 

* Tesário, vide Maéstro. 

† Tesbique, or Tezbique, m.a wall
made of rods, a wattle wall.

* Tesgustádo, vide desGustádo. 

* Tesgustár, vide desGustár. 

* Tésno, vide Tézno. 

Téso, stiffe, rough, wilfull, headstrong.

Téson, m.obstinacie, wilfulnes, conten­
tion.

Tesonería, idem. 

Tesorár, to heape vp treasure.

* Tesorería, f. a treasurie.

Tesoréro, a treasurer.

Tesóro, m.a treasure.

* Tessón, m.wilfulnes, contention, obsti­
nacie.

Testadór, m.a testator, one that maketh
a will.

Testamentário, belonging to a will or
testament.

Testaménto, a last will or testament.

Testár, to make a will or testament.

* Testéra, f. armour for the forehead of a
horse.

* Testicúlos, stones of man or beast.

* Testificación, testifying, witnessing.

* Testificádo, testified, witnessed.

Testificár, Præs. yo Testifico, 1. Præt.
yo Testifique, Sub. Præs. Testifi­
que, to testifie, to beare witnes.

* Testifique, vide Testificár. 

* Testigár, vide Testiguár. 

Testígo, m.a witnes.

Testiguár, to witnes.

Testimónio, a testimonio or witnesse
bearing.

Tésto, the text, a writing of authority, an
authors owne wordes without glossing.

* Testúz, m.the head of a hogge.

Téta, f. a dugge, a pappe.

* Tetílla, the nipple of the dug.

* Tétricos penáscos, craggie rough
mountaines and rockes.

* Tetta, vide Téta. 

Tetúda, one that hath great dugges.

* Téucros, the Troians.

* Teutónicos, Dutchmen.

* Texa, vide Teja. 

* Texádo, vide Tejádo, couered ouer,
or the roofe of a house.

† Texbíque, vide Tesbíque, a wall of
rods, a wattle wall, a trench or fortify­
ing against the enimie.

Texedór, or Tejedór, a weauer.

Texedúra, or Tejedúra, weauing.

Texéndo, by weauing.

Texér, to weaue.

* Texéro, vide Tejéro. 

Texído, weaued.

* Texidór, or Texedór, a weauer.

Texíllo, m.a girdle that is weaued.

Téxo, or Téjo, an ewe tree. Also a tile.

† Texón, or Tejón, m.a beast called of
some a badger, of other a grey, of other
a brocke.

* Téz, f. the outmost part of the skin.

* Téz liza y lustrósa, a fine smooth skin.

* Tezbíque, or Tesbíque, a wall made
of rods, a fortifying against the e­
nimie.

* Tézno, or Tésno, a worme called a
tike that annoieth sheepe, calues, and
other beasts.

* Tézo, vide Téso. 

* Tezón, or Tesón, obstinacie, wilful­
nesse.


T H
* Thália, the name of one of the nine
muses.

* Tháma, a certain sea fish like a pearch.

Thápna, an herbe like ferula, but hauing
leaues like fennell, with a yellow flow­
er, growing in tuftes like dill, with a
flat round seede and white roote, out
of which being cut, commeth a iuice as
white as milke.

* Théatro, vide Téatro. 

* Theología, f. diuinitie.

* Theólogo, vide Teólogo. 

* Theórica, vide Teórica. 

* Theosopíno, id est, Theóso píno, a
pine hauing in it much fattie or clam­
mie matter which will burne like a
torch.

* Theriáles diálogos, talke in praise of
women.

* Thesoréro, a treasurer.

* Thesóro, treasure.

* Thetís, the mother to Achilles, daugh­
ter to Nereus, and wife to king Peleus.


T I
Tía, an aunt.

* Tiára, f. a popes crowne or miter, an
emperors or kings crowne, properly a
round attire for the head vsed in Per­
sia of princes, priestes and women, such
as the Turks now vse.

Tibár, as óro de Tíbar, fine pure gold,
gold thoroughly fined.

Tibiaménte, luke warmely.

Tibiéza, luke warmenesse.

Tíbio, luke warme, blood warme.

* Tiburónes péces, a sea fish of bignes
more then a mastiue dog, great deuou­
rers of any thing. Als eating mans
flesh.

* Tíço, vide Tízo. 

* Tiçón, vide Tizón. 

* Tiémbla, vide Temblár. 

* Tiémble, Tiémblo, vide Temblár. 

* Tiémple, Tiémplo, vide Templár. 

Tiémpo, time.

* quánto Tiémpo ha ? how long is it
since?





* mal Tiémpo, fowle weather.

* Tiémpo que está assi y assi, indiffe­
rent faire weather.

Tiénda, f. a tent to abide in, a shop.

* Tiénda por attendár, a shop that is to
be let.

* Tiénda, Tiénde, Tiéndo, v. Tendér. 

* Tiene, vide Tenér. 

Tiénta, a  searching instrument, a tent to
put in a wound, heede or carefulnes.

Tiénte, Tiénto, vide Tentár. 

Tiénto, assaying, gessing, heedfulnes.

* a Tiénto respondér, to answere by
gesse or aime.

* Tierna cósa, a tender thing.

Tiernaménte, tenderly.

Tiérna virgen, a yoong and tender maid.

Tiérno, soft, tender.

Tiérra, f. the earth.

Tiésso, stiffe, tough.

* Tiésta, f. vide Cabéça. 

Tiésto, m.a potsheard.

Tigéras, Tijeras, or Tixéras, sheares,
scizers.

Tigerétas, Tijerétas, or Tixerétas, 
small sheares, scizers, sniffers.

Tigerétas de la vid, or Tixerétas de la
vid, tendrels of a vine, the smal strings
that tie the branches to the poles or sup­
porters.

Tigeruélas, Tijuerélas, or Tixeruélas, 
little scizers.

Tigre, m.a beast called a tigar.

* Tigris, m.a riuer so called.

* Tijéras, Tigéras, or Tixéras, sheares,
scizers.

* Tijerétas, vide Tigerétas. 

Tijeruélas, or Tixeruélas, vide Tigeruélas. 

Tilde, f. a tittle, a little pricke.

Tilla, f. the hatches of a ship.

* Timáno, a riuer in the prouince of Ve­
nice, now called Brenta.

* Timído, m.fearefull, timorous.

Timón, the sterne wherewith a ship is
guided, the long peece of tymber in a
coach or wagon running before betwixt
the horses, whereto they are tied.

Timoneár, to steare at the rudder or
helme.

* Timonéro, a steares man, he that gui­
deth the helme of a ship, as the master or
pylot.

Tina, f. a Diers copper or cauldron. Also
any tub, or great vessell.

Tiña, f. a moth.

* Tiña de la cabéça, the scurffe or
white scaule.

Tináda de léña, a woodpile, or wood­
stacke.

* Tinagíca, or Tinajíca, f. a little tub, a
finall vessell.

Tinája, a barrell, a tub, a steane.

* Tináxa, vide Tinája. 

* Tinaxica, vide Tinagíca. 

* Tinca, a fish called a tench.

* Tinélo, a dyning or supping place for
seruants in a house.

* Tinéta, a fish called a Hore or Spring­
wall, which casteth water abundantly
out of his head: some say it is a kinde
of whale.

Tiniéblas, f. darknes.

* Tiniéblas, f. certaine praiers or euen­
songs, saide in the night, the wednes­
day, thursday, and friday night next
before Easter day in mournefull tune,
and after euery Psalme to put out a
light till all be put out, and so to saie or
sing Miserére in the darke, and then
depart.

* Tiniénte, m. a lieutenant.

Tiña, a moth.

* Tiña, vide Teñir. 

* Tiñe, Tiño, vide Teñir. 

Tiñóso, scuruie, scalde.

Tino, m.gesse, coniecture.

Tinta, f. inke.

* Hója Tínta, a leafe of reddish and
blackish colour.

* Tinta de çapatéro, blacking for shoo­
makers.

Tinte, m.a Diers house, or a die house.

Tintéro, m.an inkehorne.

* Tintinábulos, little belles.

* Tinto, died.

* víno Tinto, a blackish wine in Spaine.

Tintór, vide Tintoréro. 

* Tintoreria, f. dying, diers crafte.

* Tintoréro, a Dier.

Tintúra, dying.

* Tinuéla, or Guzanuélo, a little moth.

Tinuélo, a little moth in flaxe.

Tío, m.an vncle.

* Típhis, or Týphis, the first Pilot, who
went in the ship Argos in company of
Iason, for to steale away the golden
fleece.

* Típle, as Cantór tiple, one that singeth
small, the treble voice.

* Típle de la yglésia, he that singeth the
treble voice in the church.

* Tipocosmía, a tipe or figure of the
whole world.

* Tipografia, the arte of printing bookes.

* Tipógrafo, a printer of bookes.

Tira, f. a gard or welt of cloath or other
stuffe, a drawing out of some thing.

* Tíra de ráso, a gard or welt of sat­
tin.

Tira braguéra, a trusse for one that is
broken in the bellie.

Tirádo, drawen as an arrow, shot, cast,
throwen, hurled.

* Tirádo óro, gold wire drawen.

* Tiradór de óro, a drawer of golde
wire.

* Tiradór, an archer, a shooter, a hurler.

* Tiranaménte, tyrannouslie.

Tirania, f. tyrannie, ruling by lust and
wilfulnes, rather than by reason.

* Tiránico, cruell, tyrannous, tyranni­
call.

* Tiranizádo, tyrannized.

Tiranizár, to tyrannize, or rule wilfully,
rather as he lust, than by law or rea­
son.

Tiráno, vide Tyráno, a tyrant, a cruell
imperious ruler.

Tirár, to plucke, to throw, to hurle, to
shoote.

* Tirár la bárra, to throw the bar.

* Tirár vn árco, to shoote in a bow.

* Tirár de camarada, to discharge, or
shoote a volley of shot.

* Tirasól, or Quitasól, a kind of hat vsed
in China verie broad, which the princi­
pall men carrie ouer their heads, with a
short pole or staffe like a canopie, to
keepe the extremitie of the sunne from
them.

* Tirár, vide Quitár. 

* Tiréño, vide Tyráño. 

* Tiricia, vide Iterícia. 

* Tiriciádo, vide Itericiádo. 

* Tirilla, a little gard or welt.

* Tirillo, a small peece of ordinance.

* Tiritár, to tremble, to quake.

* Tirizia, vide Tiricia. 

Tíro, a cast, a throwing a dart. Also a
serpent called a Dart. Also a haling,
drawing or pulling, a plucking. Also a
feate, a pranke. Also a stroke, a blow.
Also a taunt, nip, or quip. Also a shoote
out of a bowe, a cast at dice, or shot of
ordinance.

* Tiro de arcabúz, a hargabuz shot.

Tirónes, plucks, puls. Also vsed sometime
for yoong souldiers.

* Tíros de espáda, sword hangers.

* Tírsos, or Týrsos, launces or speares
wound about with vine branches, borne
in sacrificing to Bacchus.

* Tirte a fuéra, away, be packing.

* Tisana, Ptisan water.

* Tiséras, vide Tigéras. 

* Tiserétas, vide Tijerétas. 

* Tiseruélas, vide Tijeruélas. 

Tisica, or Treséda, a disease called the
Ptisicke, when the lungs are so stopped
as hardly a man can fetch his breath.

Tisico, one diseased with the Ptisicke,
short winded, purfie.

* Tisiphóne, or Tysiphóne, one of the
three furies of hell, as Poets fained.

* Tisnádo, vide Tiznado. 

* Tisnamiénto, vide Tiznamiénto. 

* Tisnár, vide Tiznár. 

* Tisne, vide Tizne. 





* Titán, a  sonne of Cælum and Vesta, so
called, as Poets saide, the sunne.

* Titolo, vide Titulo. 

* Titubár, to folter in his speech.

* Titubeár, to stumble.

Titulo, a title, the inscription of a booke,
dignitie, honor, praise, a monument, or
remembrance.

* Señór de Titulo, a Lord of a great
honor or title, a principall noble man.

* Tivár, vide Tibar. 

* Tiviaménte, luke warmely.

* Tiviéza, luke warmenes.

* Tivio, luke warme.

* Tivurónes, vide Tiburónes. 

* † Tixéras, or Tijéras, sheares, scizars.

* Tixeréta, or Tijeréta, f. a paire of smal
scizers.

* † Tixeruélas, or Tijeruélas, little sci­
zers.

Tiznádo, smeared, soote, sullied.

* † Tiznamiénto, besmearing, or sully­
ing with soote.

† Tiznár, to smeare with soote.

† Tizne, vide Hollin, soote of a chimney,
&c.

* Tizo, vide Tizón. 

† Tizón, a firebrand being quenched.


T O
Toája, a towell.

Toálla, or Toválla, a towell.

* Toallíca, a little towell.

* Tóba, vide Tóva. 

* Tobéra, vide Tovéra, f. the nose of a
paire of bellowes.

* Tobíllo, vide Tovíllo. 

* Tóca, or Tocádo, a womans kerchiefe
or coife, a vaile for the head.

Tóca de camíno, a kinde of muffler
that both men & women weare (when
they trauell) in Spaine, to keepe the
dust from their faces, it is commonly of
very fine linnen.

* Tóca de réd, a caule, such as women
vse to weare on their haire.

Tocáda, vide Tóca, or Tocádo. 

* Tocadíllo, m.a game at tables called
ticke, tacke.

* Tocádo, or Tóca, a kerchief, a coife.
Also the little tuffe of feathers or cop
on birds heads.

* Tocádo, touched.

* Tocadór, a night coife or night ker­
chief. Also one the toucheth.

Tocamiénto, m. touching.

Tocánte, touching, appertaining to.

Tocár, Præs. yo Tóco, 1. Præt. yo
Toqué, Præs. Sub. Tóque, to touch,
to sound a trumpet, horne, or any winde
instrument, to play vpon a drum or
any musicall instrument, to appertaine
vnto, to come vnto.

* que me Tócas, what are you to me?
what haue I to do with you?

* Tocár a létta, to sound alarme.

* Tocár árma, idem. 

* Tocár úno Tocádo, to put one a ker­
chiefe.

* Tócar trompéta, to sound a trumpet.

* Tocar cuérno, to winde a horne.

Tocíno, bacon.

Tóco, or Tocadór, a kerchiefe, a night
coife or night kerchiefe.

* Toçuélo, m.a kinde of hauke. Also the
thicknes or fatnes in the necke.

Tóda via, neuerthelesse, notwithstan­
ding.

* Todésco, or Tudésco, a Dutch man.

Tódo, all, the whole.

Tódo poderóso, almightie.

* Tódos, all.

* Tóga, f. a gowne.

* Togádo, apparelled with a gowne,
which among the Romans was holden
for an honor.

* Toilandálo, vide Limáda. 

Toláno, a disease of horses or kine called
the lampas.

Toldádo, hanged with clothes.

Tóldo, a pauilion, a tent.

* Toledáno, a man of Toledo.

* Tolédo, m.the chiefe citie of Spaine so
so called in new Castile.

* Toleración, sufferance, permission, to­
leration.

 Tolerár, to suffer, to tolerate.

Tollído, vide Tullído, one lame of a
limme.

Tóllo, a kinde of fish.

* Tollondrón, a swelling, a bunch.

* Tólva de molina, the bin of a mille out
of which the corne runneth by a tunnell
into the milstones, & so is ground.

Tóma, f. taking, accepting.

* Tómo pára tu ójo, vide Hígas. 

* Tomádo, taken, accepted, taught.

Tomadór, a taker, catcher, or accepter.

Tomamiénto, taking, accepting.

* Tomaní, an herbe called French La­
uender.

Tomár, to take, to accept, to get, to winne,
to cope with.

Tomár por ésta párte, to go this way.

* Tomár la máno de respondélle, to
take vpon him to answere him.

* Tomár a mános, to take in hande to
fight.

* Tomár sus baráços, y ýrse con Di­
os, to packe vp and away.

* Tomár cásças de villa Diégo, to
runne away like a coward.

* Tomár el nómbre, to take the watch
worde in warre.

* Tomár prestádo, to borrow.

* Tomár la vóz, to take part with one.

* Tombre de ármas, vide Hombre de
ármas. 

* † Tomices, hempen cordes vsed about
horses trace.

Tomillo, m.the herbe called Thyme.

* Tomin, a kind of weight weighing the
quantitie of a reall in Spaine, neere
sixe pence English.

† Tomiza, a kinde of small coarde made
of Spart.

† Tomizas, idem. 

* Tómo, substance, waight, the terme or
body of a booke.

* No tenér Tómo, to haue no sub­
stance or weight.

* Tondidór, a sheareman.

Tonél, a tunne, a pipe vessell.

* Toneládo, idem. 

Toneléro, a maker of tunnes.

Toñíno, a great fish called a porpuis.

* Tóno, m.a tune.

* Tonsura, f. shauing.

* Tonteár, to be foolish, doltish, astoni­
shed, amazed.

* Tontecér, to waxe or become foolish,
doltish, astonished, amazed.

Tontedád, f. foolishnes, follie, doltish­
nes.

Tónto, a foole, a dolt.

* Tópa, or Garrúchas, tackling of a
shippe.

Topár, to meete.

* Tópe, a meeting, the top of a mast or of
any thing.

Topetár, to push with the head as a ram
doth.

Tópo, m.a little black beast liuing in the
earth called a Mell, or a Want.

* Toque, vide Tocár. 

* Tóque del atambór, a sounding or
striking vp of a drum.

* Torbellino, or Torvellíno, a whirle­
winde.

* Torbísco, vide Torvísco. 

* Torbulénto, vide Turbulénto. 

* Torçál, a little string vnder the hat
bande, to keepe the hat in fashion, or
other like lace.

* Torcása, a woodculuer, a ring doue.

Torcáza, idem. 

Torcecuéllo áve, a birde called a wrie­
necke.

* Torcedór, a wrester of a matter, a
bender, bower, or wrester any way.

* Torcedúra, wresting, bending, bow­
ing.

* Torcélla, id est, Torcér la, to wrest or
wrie it.





Torcér, yo Tuérço, to wreath, to wrest.

* Torcida, or Mécha, a tent to put in a
wound.

* Torcidaménte, wrestingly, howingly.

Torcído, wreathed, wrested.

* Torciéndo, wresting, wreathing.

Torçón, or Toroçón, griping in the
belly, wringing of the guts.

Torçonádo, one that is troubled with
griping in the belly.

† Torçuélo, a musket or tassell of any
hauke.

Tordíllo, flea bitten colour.

Tórdo, m.a bird called a stare or star­
ling, a thrush also, or (as some say) a
gnat snapper.

* Toreadór, a bull baiter.

* Torear, to play with a bull. Also to bait
the bull.

* Toréro, a bull baiter.

Toril, an oxe stall.

* Toríllo, a little bull.

Toriónda, a cow that is with calfe.

* Tormár, vide Tomár. 

Torménta, f. a tempest, a storme.

Tormentár, to torment, to punish grie­
uously.

Torménto, m.a torment, a grieuous pu­
nishment.

* Tórmes, m.a riuer at Salamanca in
Spaine so called.

Tornabóda, f. an after banket at a mar­
riage.

Tornáda, f. a returne, a comming againe.

* Tornadiza, a woman turnecoate.

Tornadízo, a turnecoate, a runnagate.

Tornadúra, a kind of measure of ground
being about ten foote.

Tornár, to turne, to returne, to restore.

Tornasól, an herbe called Turnesol, so
called because it turneth with the sun.
Also changeable silke.

Tornatíles, turning vp.

Torneádo, turned as turnes make
round by turning.

* Torneadór, m.one that sigheth at
turney or barriers.

Torneár, to turne as a turner doth.

* Tornéo, a iusting, a turney, a running
at tilt.

* Tornér atras, to returne backe againe.

* Tornéra, vide Tronéra. 

Tornéro, a turner.

Tornillo, a little turne, a skrew, vice
or winch of any weapons or other
things.

Tornillo de fuénte, the winch of a well.

* Torníllo de mosquéte, the skrew of a 
musket.

* Torniscón, m.a blow on the eare with
the backe of the hand.

* Tornizuélo, m.the ankle neere the
foote.

Tórno, a  turne, a winch for to presse, a
presse.

Tórno de hilár, a wharle to spin with.

Tóro, m.a bull.

* Tóro, a citie of old Castile in Spaine so
called, where the wine called Víno de
Tóro doth growe: it is like the claret
wine of Fraunce.

* Tóros corrér, to baite buls.

Toroçón, or Torçón, griping in the
bellie, wringing in the guts.

Torondón, vide Tolondrón. 

† Torongil, vide Abijéra, balme.

Torónja, f. a kinde of limon, a citron, an
orenge.

Torónjo, m.a citron tree, an orenge or
limon tree.

Tórpe, dull, slow, soule, a loute, a varlet.

Torpedád, f. lowtishnes, filthines, dol­
tishnes, heauie dulnes.

* Torpeménte, fouly, slothfully, low­
tishly.

* Torpéza, f. dulnes, heauines of spirit,
filthines.

* Torpéza de léngua, slownes of speech,
rudenes of speech.

Torpígo, a crampfish.

* Torrádas, slices of bread spread with
honie and so fried.

Tórre, f. a tower.

Torreádo, full of towers.

Torreár, to make towers.

* Torrecilla, vide Torrezílla. 

* Torrejón, a towne neere Toledo in
Spaine.

* Torrejonçuélo, m.a little prettie
tower.

* Torrénte, forcible and vehement,
rough, & flowing like waters that fall
downe by mountaines or rockes, a tor­
rent or swift streame.

Torréon, m.a turret on a wall. Also a
strong hold or castle.

* Torrésno, vide Torrézno, a peece of ba­
kon fried or broiled, a rasher on the
coales.

* Torrezílla, a spurre or turret in a fort.

Torrézno, or Torrésno, a peece of ba­
kon fried or broiled, a rasher on the
coales.

* Tórrida zóna, the burning circle, or
clime inhabitable for heate.

* Tórrido, drie, scorched, burnt.

Torrijas, slices of bread spreadwith ho­
nie and so fried.

* Toríxas, idem. 

Tórta, or Tárta, a cake, a tarte.

* Tortáda, f. a kinde of fritters.

* Tortarósa, f. a kind of herbe.

Tortedád, f. crookednes, wrines.

Tortélla, f. a certaine kinde of herbe good
against the stinging of a scorpion.

Tortéro, he that wresteth, or wreatheth.
Also one that maketh cakes or tartes.

Tortéro de húso, the wharle of a spin­
dle.

Tortílla, a little fine cake.

* Tórtola, a turtle doue.

* Tortolílla, a little turtle doue.

Tórtora, f. a turtle doue.

Tortorílla, f. a little turtle doue.

Tortúga, vide Gallápago, a tortuys.

Torvellíno, or Viénto remolinádo, a
whirlewinde.

† Torvísco, m.a kinde of shrubbe where­
upon Coculus Indie doth grow.

* Torzicuéllo, m.a birde that vseth to
wrie her necke aside.

* Tós, f. or Tósse, the cough.

* Toscána, or Tuscía, a prouince of Ita­
lie called Tuscia, where the best Itali­
an is spoken.

* Toscáno, or Túsco, one of Tuscanie.

Tósco, or Grosséro, rude, grosse, vn­
wrought.

* Tósco sin limár o acabár, rude, and
vnfiled, or vnfinished.

* Tósigo, m. poyson, intoxication.

Tosquedad, f. rudenes, grossenes.

Tósse, f. or Tos, the cough.

* Tósse séca, the cough of the lungs.

Tossér, to cough.

* Tossicóso, full of coughing, still cough­
ing.

* Tossigióso, one that cougheth much.

* Tóssigo, or Tóxigo, poyson, intoxica­
tion.

Tossigóso, vide Tossicóso, subiect to
the cough, still coughing.

Tostádo, toasted.

* Tostáda pica, a pike toasted or harde­
ned in the fire, to make the yron more
hard.

Tostadór, a toasting yron.

Tostár, to toast, to parch with heat.

Tóva, f. the ruste or corrupting of the
teeth, a Pumice stone. Also a kinde of
white Thistle bearing a head like a
Artichoke.

Toúaja, vide Toálla, a towell.

* Tovéra, or Tobéra, a place where the
white Thistle hauing a head like a
Artichoke groweth.

Tovíllo, m.the ankle.

* Tovimos, or Tuvímos, we haue hol­
den, or we held, vide Tenér.

* Tóxico, or Tóssigo, intoxication, poi­
son.

* Tóxo, or Táxo, an Ewe tree.


T R
* Trabádo, or Travádo, ioyned, or knit
togither.





Trabajádo, or Travajádo, trauelled,
payned, grieued.

Trabajadór, or Travajadór, a trauel­
ler, one that laboureth, or taketh
paines.

Trabajár, or Travajár, to trauell, to la­
bour, to take paines, to be grieued.

Trabájo, or Travájo, m.trauell, labour,
paine, griefe.

* Trabár, or Travár, to ioyne or close to­
gither.

* Trabáxo, vide Trabájo, labour, tra­
uell, &c.

Trabucár, Præs. yo Trabúco, 1. Præt.
yo Trabuqué, Sub. Præs. Trabú­
que, to cast downe, to ouerthrow, to o­
uerturne.

Trabúco, m.a sling, a kinde of ordinance,
a crosse-bow.

* Trabuque, vide Trabucár. 

* Tráça, f. a trace or tract, a marking out,
a foot-step, a token or signe.

* Traçádo, tracked or traced out, follo­
wed by foot-step, marked out, striked
out.

* Traçadór, a tracer, a follower by foot, a
marker out.

Traçár, to marke out, to strike out, to fol­
low by foote, to trace.

* Tracholláno, the plat forme of a buil­
ding drawen in paper.

Tráço, marking or drawing out of any
thing.

* Traductór, or Tradutór, m.a transla­
tor.

* Tradúxe, Tradúxo, vide Tradu­
zír. 

* Tradúzga, Tradúzgo, vide Tradu­
zír. 

* Traduzído, or Trasládo, translated,
drawen aside.

* Traduzidór, or Trasladór, a transla­
tor.

Traduzír, yo Tradúzgo, 1. Præt. Tra­
dúxe. Sub. Præs. Tradúzga, to tran­
slate, to draw aside.

Traér, Præs. Tráygo, Tráes, Tráe. Im­
perfect. Traía, or Traýa. 1. Præt. 
Trúxe, or Tráxe, Truxíste, or Tra­
xiste, Trúxo, or Tráxo. Fut. Traeré,
rás, rá. Sub. Præs. Tráyga. Imperfect.
Truxésse, or Traxésse, Traería, or 
Truxéra. Fut. Truxére, to draw, to
fetch, to carrie, to bring, to weare.

* Traér al Retortéro, to bring one into
a Labyrinth.

Trafagár, Præs. yo Trafágo. 1. Præt. yo
Trafagué. Sub. Præs. Trafágue, to
traficke, to borrow of one for to pay an­
other.

Tráfago, m.traficke.

* Trafague, vide Trafagár. 

* Tragadéro, m.the throat boll, or wind­
pipe, a gulfe, a deepe water.

* Tragádo, swallowed downe, deuou­
red.

* Tragadór, m.a deuourer, a swallower
downe.

Tragár, Præs. yo Trágo. 1. Præt. yo
Tragué, Sub. Præs. Trágue, to de­
uour, to swallow downe.

Tráge, or Tráje, m.apparell, a fashion of
a garment.

Tragédia, or Trajédia, f. a tragedie.

* Tragediár, or Trajediár, to act a tra­
gedie, to make a tragedie, to become
tragicall.

* Tragenéro, a carrier, a packeman, dri­
uing horses with packes.

* Trágico, tragicall, dismall.

* Tragicomédia, a trage-comedie.

* Traginár, to transport by packhor­
ses.

* Tragítos, vide Traguítos, small de­
uouring, pettie gluttonies.

Trágo, m.a swallowing, a draught.

Tragón, a glutton.

* Tragóna béstia, a deuouring beast.

Tragonía, f. gluttony.

* Traguítos, small deuourings.

Tragúncia, an herbe called taragon.

* Trahér, vide Traér. 

* Traía, Traýa, vide Traér. 

Traición, vide Trayción, f. treason.

Traído, vide Traýdo, drawen.

Traidór, vide Traýdor. 

* Tráje, or Tráge, apparell, &c.

* Trajédia, or Tragédia, a tragedy.

Trailla, vide Traylla, a slip or leashe for
a dog.

Tráma, the owse in weauing of cloath, a
quill of ouf yarne. Also by a metaphor
a subtill deuise, plotte or tricke, contri­
ued to deceiue one.

* Tramádo, a cunning plot layed, a vaile
of white silke, or Cypres.

Tramár, to weaue, to warpe. Also to
worke some subtill fetch.

Tramontána, or Ciérço viénto, the
north winde, the sun set.

* Tramontánas, vide Trasmontános. 

* Tramontár, to hide ones self, or to be
hidden by the interplacing or comming
betweene of some hill, turret, house or
other high place, but properly of a
mountaine, whereof this word commeth
of Tras monte, id est, behind the
mountaine or hill, to goe downe or set as
the sun doth.

* Trasmontár, idem. 

* Al Trasmontár del sól, at the sun set,
when she goeth vnder the mountaynes
to hide her selfe.

† Trámpa, a trap to catch with.

† Trampáles, myery places, durty pud­
dles.

Trampeár, to delay payment, to driue
one of with delaies.

* Trampílla, f. a little trap.

* Trampéro, vide Trampóso. 

* † Trampóso, deceitfull, full of delayes
in paying, a shifter, a coosener.

* Tramúse yérva, an herbe.

Tránca de puérta, a barre, or bolt to
make fast a doore or gate with, a doore
barre.

Trançáda, f. a fillet, a hairelace.

* Trançádo, a fillet or hairelace.

Tránce de ármas, a single combat of one
to one, a battell.

* Tranchería, vide Ranchería. 

Tranchéte, m.a shoomakers paring knife.

Tránco, a pasing as wide as one can
stride. Also a lifting vp the feete.

de Tránco andár, to pase, & go as wide
as one can step one stride from another,
to lifte vp the feete.

* Trándo, a difficult matter.

Tranquilidád, f. a calme, quiet.

* Tranquíllo, calme, quiet.

* Transación, f. the manner of pleading
a matter.

* Transferído, transferred.

* Transferír, yo Transfiéro, to trans­
ferre or carry ouer.

* Transfiére, Transfiéro, vide Trans­
ferír. 

* Transído, passed ouer, gone with hun­
ger or thirst, almost dead with hunger
or thirst.

* Transfiguración, a transformation or
changing of shapes.

* Transfigurár, to change from one shape
into an other.

* Tránsito, m.a passage ouer from one
place to an other, a traunce.

* Transitório, transitory, fraile, soone
passing awaie, fading.

* Transnochádo, vide Trasnochádo, 
watched all night.

* Transparéncia, the shewing thorow as
water, ayre, glasse.

* Transparénte, vide Diáphano. 

* Transuersál, ouertwart, not the right
waie.

* Transúnto, vide Trasúnto. 

* Tránze, vide Tránce. 

* Tranzído, very thirsty, almost dead
with thirst, gasping with drines.

* Tránzito, v. Tránsito, a passage ouer.

* Tranzitório, that which hath but a
time.

* Trapáça, f. a trap, a catching, and ouer­
reaching in buying and selling.

* Trapaçár, to catch or ouerreach in buy­
ing or selling.

* Trapájo, a clout, a shooe clout to wipe
shooes.

Trápala, vide Estruéndo, a noise.





* Trápala de palábras, a noyse of words.

* Trapáza, vide Trapáça. 

* Trapazár, to catch or ouerreach in buy­
ing or selling.

Traperia, f. drapers trade.

Trapero, m.a draper, a seller of woollen
cloth.

* Trapiche, m.the art of making sugar.
Also the place where it is made.

Trápo, m.a clout of any cloth.

Traqueár, to crie as a storke doth. Also
to make a noise as the drum when it is
strooken vp.

Traquido, the noise of the blow of a
peece, the noise the drum maketh when
it is plaied on.

* Traquitántos, id est, Tráe aqui tán­
tos, bring hither so many, the name of
a giant.

Tras, behinde, after.

* muy atrá, much behinde.

* Trasaguélo, or Trasabuélo, a great
grandfather.

* Trasañár, to passe the yeere.

Trascordádo, forgetting, mistaking.

Trasdobládo, made triple or threefold.

Trasdóble, triple or threefold.

* Trasegádo, m.passed or conceiued from
one vessell to another.

* Trasegár, to passe from one vessell to
another.

* Traséra cósa, any thing behinde the
hinder part.

Traséro, the hinder part, the latter.

* Trasfiguraménte, transformedly.

Trasfigurar, to transforme, to change
shape or fashion.

* Trasformádo, transformed, altered in
shape.

* Trasformár, to alter in shape.

Trasgo de nóche, or Duénde, hobgob­
lin, Robin goodfellow.

* Trasgueár, to goe by night like a hob­
goblin or Robin goodfellow.

* Trashoguero, m.a woodstacke remai­
ning behinde.

Trasijádo, lanke, thin bellied.

Traslación, translating.

* Trasladadór, or Traduzidór, a tran­
slator or copier out.

Trasladár, to copie out or write out of
one booke into another.

Trasládo, copied, a copie of a writing.

Trasladór, vide Trasladadór. 

* Trasluzga, Traslúzgo, vide Tras­
luzír. 

* Trasluzído, shined through.

Trasluziénte, shining through.

Trasluzír, yo Trasluzgo, to shine
through.

Trasmañána, the next day after to
morrow.

* Trasmiéra, a prouince in Spaine.

* Trasmontános, people dwelling be­
yond the mountaines.

* Trasmontár, vide Tramontár. 

* Trasnochádo, watching all night.

Trasnochár, to watch, to stay all night.

Traspallár, or Traspalár, to pale, to cast
from one place to another.

Trasparénte, vide Diáphano. 

* Traspasamiénto, passing ouer.

* Traspassádo, ouerpassed, ouergone.

Traspassár, to ouerpasse, to ouergo, to
trespasse or doe amisse.

Traspie, trapping, supplanting.

* Transplantár, to transplant or set a
plant in another place.

Trasponér, Præs. Traspóngo, Tras­
pónesj, Traspóne, 1. Præt. Traspu­
se, Traspusiste, Traspuso, Fut.
Trasporné, or Traspondré, ás, á,
Sub. Præs. Traspónga, Imperfect.
Trapusiéra, Traspornia, or Traspu­
siésse, Fut. Traspusiére, to remooue, to
set ouer, to bring into order, to vanish
away.

* Traspónga, Traspóngo, vide Tras­
ponér. 

* Trasporna, Trasporne, v. Trasponér 

* Traspornia, vide Trasponér. 

* Trasportádo, carried ouer, transpor­
ted.

* Trasportár, to transport, to carry ouer.

* Traspuésto, transported.

* Traspuse, vide Trasponér. 

* Traspusiéra, Traspusiésse, vide 
Trasponér. 

* Trasquiládo, polled, shorne, the haire
or wooll cut off.

* Trasquilamiénto, a polling, a clipping
off of haire or wooll.

* Trasquilár, to pull or cut off the haire,
to sheare sheepe, or cut off the haire or
wooll of any other thing.

Trasquilónes, notches in the haire.

Trassegadór, he that straineth, he that
powreth from one vessell to another.

Trassegár, Præs. yo Trasségo, 1. Præt. 
yo Trassegué, Sub. Præs. Trasségue,
to straine thorow a strainer, to poure
out of one vessell into another.

* Trassegue, vide Trassegár. 

Tráste, m.lumber of houshold, or the fret
of an instrument.

Trastejadúra de cása, tyling of a house.

Trastejár cása, or Trastechár, to tile a
house. Also to rob, filch, steale: a bor­
rowed speech from the going on the tops
of houses, to breake in and rob.

* Trastexár, idem. 

Trástes de laúd, the frets of a lute.

* Trastocádo, vide Trastrocádo. 

* Trastocamiénto, vide Trastroca­
miénto. 

* Trastocár, vide Trastrocár. 

Trastornádo, ouerthrowen, turned vp­
side downe.

* Trastornadór, one that turneth vpside
downe.

Trastornadúra, f. ouerthrowing, turning
vpside downe.

Trastornár, to ouerthrow, to turne vpside
downe, to turne hay with a forke.

* Trastravádo, ouerthwarted, crossed.

* Trastrocádo, remooued, chopped, or
changed.

* Trastrocádas palábras, wordes tur­
ned, the cat into the pan.

Trastrocamiénto, remoouing, chopping,
and changing.

Trastrocár, Præs. yo Trastruéco, 1.
Præt. yo Trastroqué. Sub. Præs. 
Trastróque, to remooue, to chop and
change.

Trastroque, vide Trastrocár. 

* Trastruéco, vide Trastrocár. 

* Trastumbar, to fall ouer and ouer.

* Trasudar, to sweat with paine, to sweat
much.

Trasúnto, the counterfaite, the pourtrai­
ture.

* Trasvénga, Trasvéngo, vide Tras­
venír. 

* Trasvenír, Præs. Trasvéngo, tras­
viénes, trasviéne. 1. Præt. Trasvíne,
trasviniste, trasvino, Fut. Trasverné,
ás, á, Sub. Præs. Trasvénga. Imper­
fect. Trasviniéra, trasvernia, trasvi­
niésse, Fut. Trasviniére, to varie, to
disagree.

* Trasviéne, vide Trasvenír. 

* Trasvíne, Trasviniésse, Trasviniéra,
vide Trasvenír. 

* Tratádo, handled.

Tratamiénto, dealing, handling.

Tratánte, one that vseth dealing.

Tratar, to handle, to deale with.

Tráto, m.traficke, trade.

Tráto de cuérda, a kinde of torment by
tying the thumbs to make confesse.

* Tráto dóble, double dealing.

Tráva de paréd, the ioints of a wall.

Travádo, ioyned, knit togither.

Travajár, vide Trabajár, to trauell, to
take paines.

Travajo, vide Trabájo. 

* Travaquéntas, f. interchange of recko­
nings from one to another.

Travár, to knit, to ioine battell, to
crosse, or clinch one within another.

* Travár con graváto, to clinch or catch
hold with a grapple.

* Travár palábras, to be at wordes one
with another.

* Travár amistád, to be in league one





with an other.

Trávas de béstia, shackles for a horse.

* Traváxo, vide Trabáxo. 

Travazón, m.the ioyning of timber work
in wals.

* Travérs, vide Través, ouerthwart.

Través, crosse, ouerthwart.

* La náo dió al Través, the shippe was
cast away.

* Travesáño, crossing or thwarting one
thing with another.

Travesár, or Travessár, yo Traviésso, 
to lay ouerthwart, to lay crosse the
way.

Traveséros, bolsters, transoms.

Travesia, vide Travessia, crossing.

* Travesseár, to crosse the way, to plaie
the wagge.

* Travesséro, or Traveséro, a bolster to
lay vnder the head.

* Travessía, or Travesía, crossing of the
way. Also a waggish part.

Travessúra, frowardnes, vntowardnesse,
waggishnes, wantonnes.

* Travéz, or Través, ouerthwart, crosse.

* Travezón, or Travazón, ioyning
close of timber worke, crossing one thing
with another.

Traviésso, frowarde, vntowarde, wag­
gish, wanton.

Travílla de górra, the knot of a hatte
band.

* Tráxe, vide Traér. 

* Traxéra, Traxésse, vide Traér. 

* Traxín, carriage, the office of a carrier.

* Tráxo, vide Traér. 

Trayción, f. treason.

Traýdo, drawen, also betraied.

Traydór, a traytor.

* Tráyno, a traine, or following.

* Traýlla, a leash or slip for a dogge.

* Tráza, vide Tráça, a tract or trace, a
footestep, a token or signe.

* Trazár, vide Traçár. 

* Trázo, vide Tráço. 

* Tréba, or Hálda, a skirt of a garment.

* Trebejár, to interdeale by tugging one
with another. Also to dandle and play
with a childe.

Trebéjo, chesse men to plaie at chesse.
Als a childes rattle or such like, to
play withall, &c.

Treból, m.an herbe called Trifoly, r
three leafed grasse.

Trébol reál, sweete Trifoly, or garden
Trifolie.

* Trécha, vide Trécho. 

Trécho, m.space of time or place.

Tréfe, one troubled with the ptysicke.

Trefedád, or Tisica, the disease called
the ptysicke.

Trégua, a truce or peace made for a time.

* Tremblór, trembling.

† Tremedál, a durtie place.

† Tremetína, turpentine.

* Tremér, to tremble.

Tremesíno, three moneths old.

Tremiélga, a crampfish that benum­
meth the handes of him that meddleth
therewith.

* Tremiélgo, or Entormeciménto, 
heauie dulnes, or vnaptnes to anie
good exercise.

* Tremiénda, a trembling, a quaking.

* Tremolánte, vide Tremulánte. 

* Tremolár, vide Tremulár. 

Trémpo, vide Tiempo. 

* Tremulánte, quiuering or wauering.

* Tremulár, to wauer or quiuer.

Tréna, or Trénça, a lace, a pointing ri­
band.

Trénca, vide Trença. 

Trénca de víd, the prop of a vine.

* Trençádo, platted with riband or such
like.

* Trençár, to plat with ribands, &c.

* Trénçe, vide Tránce. 

* Trenchádo, the parting of the haire.

* Trenchár, to part the haire of the
head.

* Trenchéa, f. a trench.

* Trenéa, a cord wouen of three.

* Trénza, vide Trença. 

* Trenzádo, vide Trençádo. 

Trépa, the border of a garment, the
traine of a gowne, dauncing on a rope,
tumbling.

* Trépa négra, an ill sauored tumbling
cast, a foule disgrace.

Trepádo, a  garment embrodered. Also
nimble, strong.

Trepadór, a vaulter, a tumbler, a daun­
cer on ropes.

Trepár, to daunce on ropes, to climbe.

Trépido, fearfull, timorous.

Tres, three.

* Tres tánto, three times as much.

* Trespontíne, a wooll packe, or a bolster
stuffed hard.

* Tresquiladéro, m.a place where they
sheare or clip, a sheepeshearing place.

* Tresquiladizo, a thing that may be
shorne.

Tresquiládo, clipped, shorne, notted the
haire.

† Tresquiladór, a shearer, a clipper.

† Tresquilár, to clip, to sheare, to notte, to
crispe or trim the haire.

* Tresquilár a crúzes, to notte & scotch
the haire making him like a foole.

Tréta, a venue at fence.

* Treudes, a treuet to set on the fire.

Trévede, idem. 

* † Trevejár, to dandle as nurses vse to
daunce their children. Also to enter­
deale one with another.

* † Trevéjos, the chessemen, a childes
rattle.

* Trévol, three leafed grasse.

Tréynta, thirtie in number.

Treyntenário, the thirtieth in order of
account.

Treynténa, f. idem. 

Tréze, thirteene in number.

* estárse en sus Tréze, to be in his thir­
teenes, to be obstinate, to stand still in
his purpose.

* Tréze mil, thirteene thousand.

Trezéno, the thirteenth.

Treziéntos, three hundred.

Triáca, f. treacle.

Triángulo, or Triángolo, a triangle, a
forme that is three square.

* Triános, footemen in the rereward.

Triaquéro, he that maketh treacle.

* Triários, vide Triános. 

Tribulación, f. trouble, anguish, vexa­
tion.

Tribunál, a iudgement seate.

Tributário, tributarie, one that liueth
vnder tribute.

Tribúto, tribute, taxe, poll money.

Tríça, Trísa, Tríxa, a certaine coard in
a ship called a halliard.

* Tridénte, a threefold mace, an instru­
ment with three teeth.

* Trifáuce, that hath three throates or
three chaps, as poets fained Cerberus to
haue.

Trigáço, m. pertaining to wheate.

* Trigázo, idem. 

Trígo, m.wheate.

* Trigo candiál, fine white wheate.

* Trigo tremesino, sommer wheate,
wheate of three moneths.

Triguéra, vide Alpíste. 

Triguéro, m.a sparrowe that vseth to
wheate.

* Trilíngues, skilled in three toongs, ha­
uing skill in three toongs.

Trilla, f. threshing.

* Trillaçón, f. threshing.

* Trilláda matéria, f. a common ordina­
rie matter.

Trilládo, m.threshed.

* Trilladór, a thresher.

Trillár, to thresh corne.

Trillazón, f. threshing.

Trillo, m. a flaile to thresh with.

* Trinácria, f. the Ile Sicylie.

* Trínca, as Ponér la véla a la trínca, 
to put a ship that the edges of the sailes
may be to the winde, to hull with the
shippe.

* Trincár, to hull vp and downe with a
shippe.

Trinchánte, a caruer.

* Trinchádo, carued as meate is car­
ued.





* Trinchadúra, f. a caruing of meate.

* Trinchánte, a caruer.

* Trinchár, to carue meate.

Trinchéa, f. a trench.

Trinchéo, m.idem. also a cutting boord,
a trencher.

* Trinchéra, f. a trench.

* Trinchéte, m.a minsing knife such as
cookes vse.

Trínco, m.a sledde, a draie.

* Trinidád, the holie trinitie, the number
of three.

Trinquéte, m.the foremast, the fore­
saile.

* Tríno, threefold.

* Triónes, m.the starres called Charles
waine being in the north.

Trípa ciéga, the paunch.

Tripas, f. the guts.

* Tripería, f. the tripe market.

* Tripidación, f. a threefold motion.

* Tripies, a tressle to lay a table on.

* Trípodas, f. tables of three feete in the
temple of Apollo, vpon which went the
prophetesses to their oracles.

Tripón, m.a great gorbelly, a grand­
panch.

* Triquéte, m.a corner or bench in a
brothell house where the queanes
practise their filthines.

* Trísca, f. a iesting withall, a toying
withall.

Triscár, Præs. yo Trísco, 1. Præt. yo
Trisqué, to iest, to gibe, to toy with.

* Trisillabo, of three sillables.

* Trisque, vide Triscár. 

Triste, sadde, heauie, sorrowfull.

† Tristél, Cristél, or ayúda, a clyster to 
purge with.

 Tristéza, f. heauines, sadnes, sorrow.

* Tristúra, f. vide Tristéza. 

* Tritónia, a surname giuen to Pallas, of
the lake Tritonia, where she was first
seene.

* Trívia, a name giuen to Diana.

* Tríud, vide Trévede. 

* Triumfál, or Triumphál, triumphant,
victorious.

Triumfár, to triumph, to carrie away the
victorie.

Triúmfo, or Triúmpho, a triumph, or
reioicing vpon victory, a game at cards
so called.

* Triumvirál, of, or belonging to the of­
fice or triumuirs.

* Trivúto, vide Tribúto. 

* Tríza, or Tríça, a coard in a ship called
a halliard.

Tróba, f. a rime, a verse.

* Trobádo, made in rime.

Trobadór, a rimer, a versifier.

Trobár, to rime, to make verses.

* Trocádo, m.chopped, changed, bar­
tered.

Trocár, Præs. yo Truéco, 1. Præt. yo
Troqué, Sub. Præs. Tróque, to
change, to barter one thing for another.

Trocatínte, changeable silke.

Trócha, vide Trécho. 

Trochísco, a little round ball flat in the
end, of sundrie powders, any kinde of
medicine made round like a ring or
loafe of bread, the apothecaries call it a
trochiske.

* Trócho, or Rodéte, a womans wire.

Tróço, m.a truncheon, a planke.

* puénte de Tróço, a timber bridge or
a planke bridge.

Troféo, or Trophéo, m.a trophee, a 
signe of victorie.

* Tróga, Fróga, Argamásca, or Més­
cla, f. morter, a mixing of lime and
sand.

* Trómba, f. a trumpet, a round instru­
ment of brasse.

Trómpa, a trumpet, an elephants trunke,
a top for a childe to play withall.

* Trómpa de París, a Iewes harpe.

* Trómpa pára trompár, a childes top to
play withall.

* Trompeár, to play at top and scourge.

Trompeçadéro, a stumbling blocke.

Trompeçadúra, f. stumbling.

Trompeçár, yo Trompiéço, to stum­
ble.

* Trompeçón, m.a great stumbling.

Trompéta, a trumpet, a trumpeter.

* Trompéta de buéltas, a sagbut. Also
a trumpet with manie windings and
turnings.

Trompeteár, to sound a trumpet.

Trompetéro, m.a trumpeter.

* Trompezadúra, vide Trompeça­
dúra, f. 

* Trompezár, vide Trompeçár. 

* Trompezón, vide Trompeçón. 

* Trompicár, Præs. yo Trompíco, 1.
Præt. yo Trompíque, Sub. Præs. 
Trompíque, to stumble apace, to
stumble headlong.

* Trompíco, m.a top for a childe to
whip.

* Trompiéce, Trompiéço, vide Trom­
peçár. 

Trompillár, to throwe downe, to fall
downe, to cast downe.

* Trompíque, vide Trompicár. 

Trómpo, or Peónça, a top to play with.

* Trompón, m.idem. 

Tronár, yo Truéno, to thunder.

* Troncál, belonging to a stocke or
trunke.

Tronchádo, m.broken as boughes from a
tree.

Tronchár, to breake downe bowes of a
tree, and such like.

Tróncho, m.the stalke of a colewoort or
other herbe.

Trónco, m.a stocke, a trunke. Also a bo­
die without a head. Also a truncheon.

* Troncón, a stocke or trunke without
boughes.

Tronéra, f. a loope hole to lay out ordi­
nance at, or a loope hole for small shot
to shoot out at.

Tronído, or Truéno, m.thunder.

* Tróno, m.a throne, a kingly seate.

* Trópa, f. a troupe.

Tropeçár, yo Tropiéço, to stumble.

* Tropeçón, a stumbling blocke.

* Tropeçóso, giuen to stumble.

Tropel de génte, a band or companie of
folke.

Tropelládo, ouerthrowne.

Tropellár, to ouerthrow.

* Tropezár, vide Tropeçár. 

* Trophéo, a marke or token of timber
or stone set vp in a place where enimies
were vanquished, with their harnesse
or other spoile hanged thereon.

Trópico, a tropicke, whereof be two, one
of Cancer, another of Capricorne. Also
a disease so called.

* Tropiéce, Tropiéço, vide Tropeçár. 

Tropiéço, stumbling.

* Tróque, vide Truéco, exchange, bar­
tering.

* Troque, vide Trocár. 

* Tróta convéntos, a gadder abroad, a
staier in no place.

Trotár, to trot as a horse trotteth.

Tróte, m.trotting.

* Trotón, a horse that trotteth, a trot­
ter.

* Trovádo, vide Trobádo. 

* Trovár, or Trobár, to rime, to make
verses.

* Trovellín, or Trovéllio, vide Tor­
vellín. 

* Trovéllio, vide Torvellín. 

* Tróx, f. a garner to keepe corne in.

Tróxe, f. a granier to keepe corne in.

* Trózo, vide Tróço. 

* Truán, or Truhán, m.a parasite, a
pratling fellowe, a iester, a knauish
foole.

Trúcha, f. a fish called a Troute.

* † Truchamán, vide Faráute, an in­
terpreter.

Truéco, change, bartering one thing for
another, chopping and changing.

* Truéco, I change, vide Trocár.

* Truéne, Truéno, vide Tronár. 

Truéno, m.thunder. Also a handgun.

* Trueque, vide Trocár. 

* Trúfa, f. a gibe, a iesting or ieering.





* Trugíllo, a kinde of great red wheate.
Also the name of a citie in Spaine.

Truhán, m.a parasite, a iester, a knauish
foole.

* Truhána, a shee parasite, a knauish
foole.

* Truhaneándo, by playing the iester.

Truhaneár, to iest, to play the foole for
aduantage.

Truhanería, f. iesting, playing the foole
and knaue withall.

† Trujamán, or Truchamán, m.an in­
terpreter of a language.

† Trujamaneár, to interpret in his na­
turall speech what a stranger saith.

* Trúlla, a rout of people.

* Trúles, a people in the Indies.

* Truxe, Truxésse, Truxéra, vide 
Traér. 

* Truxíllo, a kinde of great red wheate.
Also the name of a citie in Spaine.

* Trúxo, vide Traér. 


T V
Tu, thou, thy selfe.

* Tubrír, to stop chinkes or cliftes, to en­
uiron, to fill vp, to compas, to defende or
guard.

* Tudésco, or Todésco, m.a Dutch
man.

* Tudído, bound streight.

* Tudír, to binde or tie.

* Tuérce, Tuérço, vide Torcér. 

Tuéro, vide Tizón, a firebrand.

Tuérto, crooked, awrie, one eied.

* Tuésta, Tuéste, Tuésto, vide To­
stár, to burne, to toaste.

Tuétano, or Tútano, marrow. Also the
kernell of nuts or such like.

* Tuetónico, a Dutchman.

Túfo, m.the smell of the stomach after
wine.

Tullído, benummed, taken lame or num.

Tullimiénto, a benumming.

Tullír, to benumme, to waxe lame or
numme.

* Tullóse, or se Tulló, he became num.

Túmba, a tombe, a burying place, a place
where they burned dead bodies.

Tumbadéra réd, a toyle to ouerthrowe
deere with.

* Tumbándo venían, they came tum­
bling.

* Tumbár, to tumble.

* Túmbo, a tumbling.

Túmulo, a tombe, a heape of stones, &c.
a sepulchre.

* Tumúlto, a tumult, a hurliburlie, an
vprore, a sedition, a stirre, a broile, in­
surrection of people.

* Tumultuaménte, with much adoo, or
with an vprore.

* Tumultuár, to raise sedition, hurlibur­
ly, or tumble.

* Túmva, vide Túmba. 

Tumvár, vide Tumbár. 

* Túna, a kind of herbe with very broad
leaues & marvellous thicke with pric­
kles in them, a kinde of docke or thistle.

* Tundído, dressed, shorne as cloth.

Tundidór, a clothworker, a shearer of
cloth.

Tundidúra, a shearing of cloth.

Tundír, to sheare cloth at the clothewor­
kers.

* Túnes, a citie of Africa the lesser so
named.

Túnica, f. a coat of a fryer. Also cloth to
cast ouer the beere to carrie a dead bo­
die to church.

* Tupído, wouen thicke, or made thicke
by fulling.

Tupír, to weaue thicke or make thicke.

Túra, durance, lasting, continuance.

Turár, to endure, to laste.

* Túrba, f. seacoale. Also turfe of earth.
Also multitude, a rout or crue of com­
mon people, the rabble, the rout.

Turbación, trouble.

Turbadaménte, troublesomely.

Turbádo, troubled, molested, grieued.

Turbamiénto, trouble, much adoe.

Turbár, to trouble.

Túrbio, thicke, troubled, pudly.

Turbión, m.a storme, a tempest, a whirle
winde.

Turbít, a roote, called Turbith, good to
purge flegme.

* Turbulénto, troublesome, seditious, full
of contention.

* Túrco, a Turke.

* Túrdo, a certaine sea fish like a Breame.

* Turín, the chiefe citie in Piemont so
called.

Túrma, a goates stone, a rams stone. Also
the stones of other beastes.

Túrma de tiérra, a puffe, a bull fiste: a
kinde of round roote of russet colour, of
the bignes of a Turnep growing vnder
ground, verie daintie to be eaten, and is
found out by the bulking out of the
earth where he groweth, as by the herbe
Turmera, growing by it.

* Túrmas, vide Cojónes. 

* Turméra, f. the place where the Puffe
groweth. Also the herbe called Tur­
méra, growing by the Túrma, vide 
Túrma de tiérra.

Túrnio, m.goggled eied.

* Túrno, a course or turne, as Por su túr­
no, by his turne.

Turón, m.vide Turrón, a field mouse.
Also a kinde of cake of hony, Almonds,
grated bisket, &c.

Turonéro, a maker of cakes of honie, Al­
monds, grated bisket, &c.

* Turvación, vide Turbación. 

* Turvár, vide Turbár. 

* Turvíno, m.Turpentine.

* Túrvio, squint-eied, one that loo­
keth awry. Also vide Túrbio, trou­
bled, pudley.

* Turvión, vide Turbión. 

* Turvít, vide Turbít. 

* Turvulénto, vide Turbulénto. 

Tusár, to poll the haire.

* Túscia, or Toscána, a Prouince in Ita­
lie so called, where is spoken the best
Italian.

* Túsco, or Toscáno, a man of Tusca­
nie.

* Tusón, as Tusón de óro, the golden
fleece.

* Tutár, vide Tutelár, to take charge of
bringing vp a yoong bodie.

* Tutelár, to take charge of bringing vp a
yoong child or person.

Tutéla, f. tutorship, charge to bring vp
some youth, protection and defending
another mans cause.

Tutía, f. an apothecarie drug, called Tut­
tie, good for bruses.

Tutór, a tutor that taketh charge of some
youth, a protector of another mans
right.

* Túve, vide Tenér. 

* Tuviéra, Tuviésse, vide Tenér. 

* Tuviéron, they haue held, vide Te­
nér.

* Tuvímos, we haue held, vide Te­
nér.

* Túvo, vide Tenér. 

Tuyo, thine.

* Túzia, vide Túscia. 

* Tuzón, vide Tusón. 


T Y
* Týgre, a beast called a Tiger.

* Tygrís, the riuer Tigris.

* Typhis, the name of the first Pilot, who
went guide to Iasons ship, called Ar­
gos, when he stole the golden fleece.

* Tyranizár, to play the tyrant, to rule
too imperiously, rather by will, than by
law or reason.

Tyráno, or Tiráno, a tyrant, one that
ruleth by will, rather than by lawes or
reason.

* Tyrrheno, or Toscáno, belonging to
Tuscanie.

* Týrso, or Tírso, a launce or speare
wound about with vine branches, borne
of the sacrificer to Bacchus.

* Tysiphón, one of the three furies of hell,
as Poets faine.







V

* VAbór, vide Babór. 

* Vabórda, vide Babórda. 

* Váça, vide Báça. 

Váca,  a cow.

Vacación, f. vacation, leisure, idle time,
emptines.

* Vacáda, a heard of cowes.

* Vacádo, void, emptie, at leisure.

* Vacaláos, vide Bacaláos. 

* Vaçán, vide Baçán. 

* Vacáncia, or Vacántia, vacation
time, holly day, time of rest.

Vacánte, voide, at leisure.

Vacár, Præs. yo Váco, 1. Præt. yo Va­
qué, Sub. Præs. Vaqué, to be voide, to
haue little to doe, to be at leisure.

* Vachára, vide Bachára. 

* Vachílla, vide Vaquílla, a heifer.

* Vachillería, vide Bachillería. 

* † Vacía, f. a barbers basen.  Also a basen
of earth, pewter, tinne, or siluer, of the
fashion and making of a barbers ba­
sen.

* Vacillánte, staggering, fickle, waue­
ring, vnconstant, reeling.

Vacillár, to stagger, to wauer in thoughts,
to be inconstant, to stagger, to reele.

* Vacín, vide Bacín, m.

* Vacinéte, a little basen, or basenet.

* Vacinilla, idem. 

* Váco, void, vacant.

* Váço, vide Báço. 

* Váctros, vide Báctros. 

* Vacuno, of or pertayning to cowes.

* Vadajáda, vide Badajáda. 

* Vadájo, vide Badájo. 

* Vadána, vide Badána. 

* Vadeándo, wading.

* Vadéha, vide Badéha. 

Vadeár, to wade.

* Vadil, vide Badil. 

Vádo, a shallow place in a riuer, a foorde,
where men or beasts may go ouer with­
out danger.

Vadóso, full of shadowes, or foords.

* Vaéça, vide Baéça. 

Vagabúndo, or Vagamúndo, a vaga­
bond, one that wandereth vp and
downe.

* Vagáje, vide Bagáje, m.luggage, lum­
ber, baggage, trumperie.

Vagár, Præs. yo Vágo, 1. Præt. yo va­
gué, Sub. Præs. Vágue, to wander vp
and downe, to be idle, to stray.

* Vagaróso, spatious, large.

* † Vagél, or Bagél, a vessell, a boate, a
skiffe.

Vágo, wandering.

* Vague, vide Vagár. 



* Vagueár, to wander or gad, vp and
downe.

Váguido, m.turning of the braines, swou­
ning.

* Vaharí, a kinde of hauke.

* Vaheár, to reeke, to fume, to smoke, to
vent, to exhale.

* Vaía, let him goe, let it goe.

* Váia, vide Baya, a bay, a creeke.

* Vajél, Vagél, or Vaxél, a vessell, a
boate, a skiffe.

* Vajéles, or Vaxéles, skiffes, boates,
vessels.

* Vailár, or Vaylár, vide Baylár, to
daunce with clacking the fingers.

* Váile, vide Báile. 

* Váio, vide Báio. 

* Vájo, vide Bájo. 

Vál, vide Válle. 

* Vála me Dios, God helpe me.

* Valadi, any thing of little or no worth,
light, hauing no substance in it.

* Vála lo el Diáblo, the diuell take him.

* Valadrón, m.a prater, a cogging com­
panion.

* Valadroneár, to prate, to cog.

* Válago, vide Bálago. 

* Valançár, vide Balançár. 

* Valancia, vide Balancia. 

* Valándo, vide Balándo. 

* Valáx, vide Baláx. 

* Valázo, vide Balázo. 

* Valbuciénte, vide Balbuciénte. 

* Valcón, vide Balcón. 

* Válde, vide Bálde. 

* Valdia, vide Baldía. 

* Valdio, vide Baldío. 

* Valdón, vide Baldón. 

* Valdonádo, vide Baldonádo. 

* Valdrá, Valdre, vide Valér. 

* Valdrés, vide Baldrés. 

* Valdroneár, vide Baldroneár. 

* Valedór, an intercessor, a mediator, a
defender of another mans cause, a part­
taker, a man of worth.

* Valéncia, f. a citie in Spaine so called.

* Valéna, vide Valléna, a whale fish.

Valentón, a fencer, one that maketh him­
selfe valiant.

Valér, Præs. yo Válgo, Fut. Valdré, ás,
á, Sub. Præs. Válga, to be worth.

Valeriána yérva, an herbe called vale­
rian.

* Valerosaménte, valorously, puissant­
ly, valiantly.

Valeróso, valorus, puissant, couragious,
valiant, magnanimous.

* Valésta, vide Vallésta. 

* Valestázo, vide Vallestázo. 

* Valestéro, vide Vallestéro. 

* Valga, Válgo, vide Valér. 

* Valia, I or he were of auaile.

Valia, f. the value or worth of a thing.

* Valico, vide Vallico, m.

* Válida, f. a matter of worth.

* Validación, the worth.

* Válido, of auaile, of force or to the
purpose.

* Valido, m.a bleating of sheepe.

Valiénte, valiant, strong, couragious, a
fencer.

Valienteménte, valiantly.

* Valíja, a male, a clokebag, budget, wallet
or portmanteaw.

* Valísta, a crossebowe.

* Valitár, to bleate as sheepe or fawnes.

* Valíza, vide Vallíja. 

Valladár, or Valládo, a hollow trench
made for defence, a rampier, a bul­
warke.

Valládo, idem. 

* Valladolid, a towne in old Castile in 
Spaine.

* Valladór, m.one that maketh val­
leys.

Válle, m.a valley.

Valléna, or Balléna, f. a whale fish.

* Vallésta, or Ballésta, f. a crossebowe.

* Vallestár, to shoote in a crossebowe.

* Vallestázo, m.the shot or blowe of a
crossebowe.

* Vallesteár, to shoote in a crossebow.

* Vallestéro, Vallestréro, or Ballestré­
ro, a crossebowe-maker, or one that
shooteth in a crossebowe.

* Vallestréro de máça, a kinde of bat­
tle axe.

Vallíco, a weede or noisome graine called
cockle.

* Vallija, or Valíza, f. a budget, a wallet,
a male, a clokebag or portemanteaw.

* Vallón, m. a great valley.

* Valón, or Balón, a Wallon, a Burgun­
dian.

* Valóna, Wallons fashion.

* Valónes calçónes, great Spanish
breeches.

* Valór, m.valor, worth, courage, for­
titude.

* Valtruéto, vide Baltruéto. 

* Valuación, the value.

* Valuárte, m.a bulwarke.

* Valúme, or Balúme, vide Valúmen. 

* Valúmen, m.any thing that is made to
shew great or huge.

* Vámonos, id est, Vámos nos, let vs
be going.

* Vámos, let vs goe.

Vanaglória, vaineglorie, ambition.

* Vanagloriárse, to be  vaineglorious, to
boast himselfe.

Vanagloriosaménte, vainegloriously.

Vanaglorióso, vaineglorious.

Vanaménte, vainely.

Vanásto, a pannier, a dorser.

Vánca, or Vánco, a bench, a settle or





seate to sit on.

* Vancál, m.a bench cloth.

* Vancaróto, a bankrupt.

Vánco, vide Bánco, a bench, a stoole, a
shelfe in the sea.

Vánda, or Bánda, a side, a band or com­
panie of men, a band or bend to tie
with.

* tenér a la Vánda, to hold or keepe on
one side.

* † Vánda, or Esquádra, a squadron of
soldiers.

* Vánda de cavalléro, a horsemans belt
or arming girdle.

* de la otra Vánda del río, on the other
side the riuer.

* Vandália, the prouince of Andaluzia
in Spaine.

Vandeár, to helpe a side, to follow a facti­
on, to become factious.

Vandéo, m.following of a faction, hel­
ping a side.

Vandéra, f. a banner, a streamer, an en­
signe, the flagge on a ship top, a stan­
dert.

* Vanderádo, m.an ensignes seruant to
carrie his banner or ensigne.

* Vanderílla, f. a little banner, ensigne,
or standart, a little flag on a ships top.

Vanderizaménte, factiously.

Vanderízo, one that leaneth to a facti­
on.

Vandéro, idem. 

* Vanderóla, vide Banderóla, a little
flagge or streamer, &c.

* Vandínes de Pópa, m.the sides of the
sterne in a galley.

* Vándo, m.a faction.

Vandoléro, m.he that followeth a fac­
tion.

* Vandújo, vide Bandújo, a pudding.

* Vandúxo, idem. 

* Vandúrria, vide Bandúrria. 

Vaneár en palábras, to trifle or talke
foolishly.

* Vanguárdia, the vangard or foreward
of a battell.

* Vanidád, f. vanitie.

* Vañádo, bathed.

Vañár, vide Bañár, to bathe.

* Vañil, m.a mason, a plaisterer.

* Váño, or Báño, a bathe.

Váno, vaine, naught woorth.

* Vanquéro, m.a money changer.

* Vanquéte, or Banquéte, m.a banquet,
a feast, good cheere.

* Vanqueteádo, banquetted, feasted.

* Vanqueteár, or Banqueteár, to feast,
to banquet, to make good cheere.

* Vanquillo, m.a little bench, a little
stoole, a footestoole.

Vapór, m.a vapor.

Vaporóso, vaporous.

* Vaque, vide Vacár. 

Vaquéro, a heardman that keepeth kine.

Vaquéta, f. a gunsticke, a heifer, neates
leather.

* Vaquílla, a little cowe, a heifer. Also a
kinde of creeping worme.

* Vaquína, f. idem. 

† Vára, a rod, a sticke, a yard, a cudgell, a
twigge.

* Vára de líga, a lime twigge.

* Vára de pescár, an angle rodde.

Vára reál, a mace of iustice, or sworde of
iustice caried before the magistrate.

* Varáça, vide Baráça. 

Varahustár, vide Barahustár. 

* Varája, or Barája, a shuffling of cardes,
a brabling.

* Varajár, or Barajár, to brabble, to
shuffle cardes.

Varál, a forked pole to thrust a bote from
shore with.

Varállos de héno, a swathe of grasse or
corne as it lieth new mowed.

† Varánda, f. a sieue to sift meale, &c. al­
so railes to leaue the brest on.

Varár, to set ships on land, to strike with
a ship on ground.

* Varatíja, f. small houshold stuffe, as
pots, pans, platters, spoones, &c.

* Varáto, good cheape.

* Varáton, one that selleth good cheape, a
broker.

* Varátro, vide Barátro. 

* Varávala, id est, Varáva la, vide 
Varár. 

* Varbechár, vide Barbechár. 

* Varbéro, vide Barbéro. 

* Várca, vide Bárca. 

* Várco, vide Bárco. 

* Várda de cavállo, vide Bárda de ca­
vállo. 

* Vardár, to couer mudde walles.

* Vardájo, a Ganimede.

* Vardáxo, idem. 

Vareár, to strike with a rod, sticke, or cud­
gell.

* Variación, difference, variation.

Variáble, variable, changeable, mutable
vnconstant.

Variádo, made diuers, varied, altered.

Variár, to vary, to alter diuersly.

Variedád, variety, diuersity of change.

Varílla, a little wand or sticke.

Varílla de cuéllo, the throate.

* Varníz, vide Barníz, f. 

* Varnizádo, vide Barnizádo. 

Vário, diuers, sundry, not all of one sort.

Varón, or Barón, a man, a baron.

Varonía, or Baronía, a barony or lord­
ship.

* Varónica, f. the holy varnicle, the pic­
ture of Christes face.

Varoníl, manlike.

Varonilaménte, manly, couragiously.

* Varquéro, or Barquéro, a boatman, a
ferriman, a bargeman.

* Varquéta, vide Barquéta. 

* Varquilla, or Barquilla, a little bark.

* Ducádo de la varquílla, a  ducate with
the signe of the barke on it, lesse weight,
then an another.

* Várra de líga, siluer mettall with his
mixture to make money of.

* Varráca, f. a cabbin of boughes or such
like, a cottage of boughes, &c.

* Varrachél, vide Barrachél. 

* Varragán, vide Barragán. 

Varraganéte, vide Barraganéte. 

* Varrán, vide Barrán. 

* Varránca, vide Barránca. 

* Varránco, vide Barránco. 

* Varraquíllo, vide Barraquíllo. 

* Varreádo, vide Barreádo. 

* Varreár, vide Barreár. 

* Varredéra, vide Barredéra. 

* Varredéro, vide Barredéro. 

* Varredór, vide Barredór. 

* Varredúras, vide Barredúras. 

* Varréna, a wimble, an awger, a pear­
cer.

* Varrenádo, boared thorow.

* Varrenár, to boare thorow.

* Varréno, a boaring thorow, a hole boa­
red.

* Varrér, to sweepe, to brush.

* Varréra, a barrier, a skaffold, to stand
and behold the bull-baiting: a clay pit,
the front of a wall.

* Varréta, vide Barréta. 

* Varrí, vide Barrí. 

* Varriál, vide Barriál. 

* Varrído, vide Barrído. 

* Varriénto, vide Barriénto. 

* Varríga, vide Barríga. 

* Varrigúdo, vide Barrigúdo. 

* Varril, vide Barril. 

* Varriléjo, vide Barriléjo. 

* Varriléro, vide Barriléro. 

* Várrio, or Bárrio, the ward of a pa­
rish.

* Várro, or Bárro, clay, earth.

* Várros de róstro, wheales or pimples in
the face.

* Varróso, vide Barróso. 

* Varrúchas, vide Barrúchas. 

* Varruntár, vide Barruntár. 

* Varvéro, vide Barvéro. 

* Varuntár, vide Baruntár. 

* Vasár, a cupboord to set vessell on, a
court cupboord.

* Vasállo, vide Vassállo, a vessel or sub­
iect.

Vásca, or Básca, a pang, a throng, a vehe­
ment inward passion, griping or pan­
ting within the bodie.

Váscas, pangs, throngs, extreme passions,





gripings or pantings within the bodie,
the pangs of death.

* Vascosear, vide Vasqueár, to be pan­
ged with throngs or vehement passions,
gripings, or hart beatings within the
bodie.

Vascosidád, skum or filth of any thing,

vide Suziedád.

* Vasija, or Basija, f. a vessell.

* Vasilisco, a serpent called a Basiliske, or
a peece of ordinance so called.

Vasillo, m.a small vessell.

Váso, a vessell.

* Vasqueárse, to be panged with throngs,
or extreme passions, gripings, or hart
beatings within the bodie.

* † Vasquíña, a womans petticoate, a kir­
tle.

Vassaláje, m.a vassall-ship, or duetie of a
vassall to his Prince.

Vassállo, m.a vassall, a subiect.

Vassúra, f. dust, rubbish.

* Vastáge, vide Bastáge. 

* Vastárdo, vide Bastárdo. 

* Vastón, vide Bastón, m.

* Vatanéro, vide Batanéro. 

* Vatél, or Batél, a skiffe, a ship boat.

* Vatería, or Batería, batterie with ordi­
nance.

* Vatído, vide Batído. 

* Vatír, vide Batír. 

* Vaxár, vide Baxár. 

* † Vaxél, Vajél, or Vagél, a vessell, a
skiffe or boat.

* Vaxillo, a small vessell, skiffe or boat.

* Vaxio, m. shallow, not deepe.

* Váxo, vide Báxo. 

* Vaya, f. let him go, a showing when men
go.

* Vaýa de már, a bay, a creeke of the sea.

Váyas, Bayberries.

* Vaybén, a swaying or rowling from one
side to another. Also the tossing of for­
tune.

* Vayéta, or Bayéta, baies or blacke
cloath frised, vsed for mourners in
Spaine.

* Vayladéra, a little toye that boyes set
vp with their fingers on a table as
a top. Also a woman dauncer.

* Vaylár, to daunce with snapping the
fingers.

Váyna, f. a sheath, a scabberd, the skin of
the stones.

Vayníca, f. a stitch in ruffes.

Váyo, or Báyo, hay coloured, a horse.

* Vayvén, Vaybén, or Baybén, vide 
Vaybén. 

* Vaziadizo, a molten image, any thing
emptied or hollow within.

Vaziaménte, emptily.

† Vaziár, to emptie, to make voide.

Vaziedád, emptines.

* Vazíja, vide Vasíja, a vessell.

† Vazio, emptie.


V B
&Vacute;bre, f. a dug, an vdder.

Vbréra, a soare in a childs mouth.


V E
* Ve, go, packe, be gon.

Vébra, f. vide Huébra, an acre of ground
a daies worke.

Vébra, f. the first figs a fig tree bea­
reth.

Vecindád, or Vezindád, f. neighbour­
hood.

* Vecino, vide Vezíno, a neighbour.

* Véco, vide Huéco, hollow.

* Véd, see ye, the Imperatiue moode of
Vér.

Vedádo, forbidden.

* Vedádos, m.seuerall grounds or pa­
stures to a man.

Vedamiénto, forbidding, letting of his
purpose.

Vedár, to forbid.

† Vedegámbre, an herbe called beare­
foote.

* † Vedíja, a locke of wooll. Also a shag of
haire.

* † Vedijóso, shagge-haired, or hauing
long shaggie wooll.

* Vedixóso, idem. 

Vedriéro, m.a glasier.

Vedrióso, glassie, brittle.

* Veedór, a seer, an ouerseer, a muster
master, a controller, a clarke of the
checke, a searcher.

* Veedór generál, a muster master ge­
nerall.

* Véga, f. ground or pasture running
along neere vnto the riuers side.

* Vega de Granáda, the pasture ground
of Granada running along the riuers
banck.

Vegáda, a turne, when a man taketh his
turne as yt falleth.

* Vegadilla, f. a little turne as it falleth
to a man, by taking his turne as it fal­
leth.

* Vége, vide Bége. 

* Vegés, or Vejés, f. old age.

* Vegetatívo, that hath life.

* Vegezuéla, or Vejezuéla, a silly olde
woman.

* Vegezuélo, or Vejezuélo, a poore olde
man.

* Veheméncia, vehemencie, earnest­
nesse.

* Veheménte, earnest.

Vejázo, an old fellow.

Vejedád, f. age, antiquitie.

Vejés, or Vejéz, age, old age.

Vejezuéla, or Vegezuéla, an old wret­
ched woman.

* Vejezuélo, or Vegezuélo, a sillie old
man.

* Veintequátro, twentie and fower. Al­
so an alderman.

* Véjo, olde, very auncient.

Véla, f. a vaile, a saile, a candle, a watch­
man.

* Véla maéstra, or Véla mayór, the
maine saile.

* Véla mezána, the misne saile.

* Véla del trinquéte, the fore saile.

* Véla mayór, the maine saile.

* Véla menór, the lesser saile.

* Velación, f. couering with a vaile.

Veláda, f. a watching.

* Veládo, a spouse or married man.

Veladór, a watchman. Also a socket can­
dlesticke.

Velár, to watch, to couer with a vaile, to
become a nouice in a house of religion.

* Velártes, a kind of black cloth very fine.

* Vélda, or Véldo, for Ved la, or Ved
lo, looke on it, see it, or see her.

Veléño, a noisome herbe called henbane.

* Veléro, m.a chandler, a maker or seller
of candles.

Velésa, f. an herbe growing in Spaine
called in Latine Gingidium.

Veléta, f. a vane for the winde, that stan­
deth on the top of churches and high
places to shew where the winde is. Also
the top of a fishing rod.

* Vélico, warlike.

* Velicóso, m.valiant in armes, fierce,
warlike.

* Velites, the Romanes in ancient time
called the shooters or darters Velites.

* Vélla, Vélle, Véllo, for Vér la, Vér
le, Vér lo, see her, to see him, to see it.

* Vellaría, vide Vellaqueria. 

* Vellacázo, m.a great knaue, a notable
villaine, a great rakehell.

Vellaco, a knaue, a villaine.

* Velladór, a watcher, a sentinell that
standeth wacth in the war.

Vellaquería, f. villanie, knauerie.

* Vellaquíllo, a little knaue, a little vil­
laine.

* Vélle, for Vér le, to see him.

Velleguín, m.a sargeant, a summoner, a
seruant attending vpon an officer.

Velléza, f. beautie.

Véllo, the haire of a mans bodie, the haire
or mossinesse of the beard, cotton or nap
on cloth. Also faire, beautifull.

Vellocíno, or Vellón, m.a fleece of
wooll.

* Vellón, a fleece of wooll.

* monéda de Vellón, copper or brasse
money.





Vellóso, hairie, mossie, woollie, rough.

Vellóta, or Bellóta, f. an acorne.

* Vellotéro, he that gathereth acornes.

* Vellutádo, made after the manner of
acornes.

Vellúda, or Villóso, shag haired.

* Vellúda de trípas, velure, fustian a
napes, tufted mocado.

Vélo, a vaile for a nunne, a kerchiefe.

* Velocidád, f. swiftnes, nimblenes.

* Velocissimaménte, most nimbly, most
swiftly.

* Velóx, or Velóz, swift, nible, actiue,
full of life.

Velóz, idem. 

* Ven, come thou.

Véna, a veine, the naturall disposition or
veine of a man, a pulse or arterie. Also
a veine of the earth.

* Véna cefálica, the head veine.

* Véna basilica, the liuer veine.

* Véna mediána, the common veine in 
the arme, the middle veine, the blacke
veine.

* Véna sagitália, a veine in the middle
finger.

Venáble, vide Venáblo. 

* Venáblo, m.a iauelin.

* Venáda, f. a thing hauing many veines.

* Venádo, deere, venison.

* Venadór, m.a hunter.

Venáge, the streame. Also many veines.

* Venaje, idem. 

* Venaizón, f. venison.

* Venál, any thing vendible or saleable.

Vencedór, a conqueror, an ouercommer.

* Vencedóra, f. a conqueresse, a woman
that ouercommeth.

† Vencéjo, a bird without feete called a
martlet or marten.

Vencéjos, straps to binde with, haukes
iesses.

Vencér, yo Viénço, to conquer, to ouer­
come.

Vencido, ouercome, conquered.

Vencimiénto, conquering, ouercom­
ming.

Vénda, a hend, a labell, a ribband.

* apretár la cabéça con Véndas y 
fáxas, to tie the head with ribbands
and fillets.

Vendabál, or Vendabár, the southwind
by west, the southwest.

Vendádo, bound with a ribband or fillet.

Vendár, to binde, to tie.

* Vendavál, or Vendabál, the south
winde by west.

Vendedór, a seller.

Vendér, yo Viéndo, to sell.

* Vendéra, vide Vandéra. 

* Vandéllo, id est, Vendér lo, to sell
it.

* Vendicár, vide Vengár. 

* Vendícho, vide Bendícho. 

* Véndida, or Vénta, a sale or selling.

Vendido, sold.

Vendimia, wine haruest, grape gathe­
ring time, vintage, the gathering of
grapes to make wine.

Vendimiadór, a wine maker.

Vendimiár, to gather grapes and to make
wine.

Venedízo, or Advenedízo, a stranger
come from another place.

Veneficio, vide Beneficio. 

Venéno, poyson.

* Venénos de las mános, wheales or
pustles in the hands.

Venenóso, venemous, full of poyson.

Venéra, f. a scallop shell, signes worne to
shewe that a man hath been on pil­
grimage.

Veneráble, worshipfull, woorthie of re­
uerence.

* Venerándo, idem. 

Veneración, worship, reuerence.

Venerár, to worship, to reuerence.

* Venéreo, luxurious, fleshlie, wanton,
lecherous.

* Venéro, a veine of mettall.

* Vénga, Véngo, vide Venír. 

* Vénga, as Que le Vénga, that which
may fit him.

Vengádo, reuenged.

Vengadór, a reuenger.

Vengadóra cósa, a wreakefull matter.

Vengánça, f. reuenge.

Vengár, Præs. yo Véngo, 1. Præt. yo
Vengué, Sub. Præs. Véngue, to reuenge.

Vengativo, reuengfull.

* Vengue, vide Vengár. 

* Vénia, reuerence, curtesy, leaue, licence,
fauor.

Venída, f. a comming.

* Veniál, pardonable, that may be pardo­
ned, veniall, remissible.

Venidéro, that is to come, that shall come.

* Venído, come.

* Venino, wheales, pustles or scabs.

Venir, Præs. Véngo, Viénes, Viéne,
1. Præt. Vine, Viniste, Vino, Fut.
Verné, ás, á, Sub. Præs. Vénga, Im­
perfect. Viniéra, Vernia, or Viniésse,
Fut. Viniére, to come, to fit as apparell.

* Venir a ménos, to become worse.

Vénta, f. a sale, an inne, a bayting place.

Ventája, f. vantage.

* Ventajár, to surpasse, to haue more.

Ventálle, f. a fanne.

* Ventallina, f. a little fanne.

Ventána, a window.

Ventána enrexáda, a lattice window.

* Ventánas de la nariz, the nostrels of
the nose.

* Ventanáge, or Ventanáje, a place full
of windows.

Ventanílla, a little window, a casement
of a window.

Ventár, to sell by retayle, to fan, to make
winde.

* Ventáxa, vide Ventája. 

* Venteár, to ayre abroade, to put into
the winde.

* Ventéra, a woman keeping an inne or
bayting place.

* Ventéra de alménas, the space be­
tweene the battlements of a wall.

Ventéro, an inne keeper, or keeper of a
lodging, inne, or alehouse in the coun­
try.

* Ventezíco, a little winde.

* Ventillár, to winnowe, to purge from
chaffe, to make pure and cleane.

Ventisquéro, a whirlewind, a blast of
winde, a storme of winde with haile.

Ventór, m.a bloodhound, a hound.

Ventósa, a gourd, windines, farting. Also
a vessell to let blood by boxing or cup­
ping, a cupping glasse.

* Ventoseár, to make winde, to farte, to
let bloud by cupping or boxing.

* Ventosidad, ventositie, windines.

Ventóso, windie, vaine.

* Ventriculo, the ventricle, whereto the
meate conueied by the stomacke is there
digested.

Ventrúdo, one that hath a great bellie,
gorbellied.

Ventúra, venture, lucke, chance, fortune,
happe.

Venturéra cósa, a matter that commeth
by chance.

Venturosaménte, fortunately, happilie,
by chance.

Venturóso, fortunate, happie.

* Veodéz, or Beodéz, f. drunkennes.

* Veódo, or Beódo, drunken.

Vér, to see.

* a mi Vér, in my opinion.

* Veraménte, truly, verily, indeede, ac­
cording to the truth.

* Verangénas, or Veranjénas, vide 
Berengénas. 

Veraniégo, of, or belonging to sommer.

Veráno, the sommer season.

Véras, earnest, good sooth, indeed.

* de Véras, in very deed, in earnest.

* con tántas Véras, so, in truth and ear­
nest.

* Verátro, vide Verdegámbre. 

* Verbásco, or Gordolóbo, an herbe
called woolfeblade or torchherbe, or the
great lungwoort.

Verbéna, or Vervéna, an herbe called
verueine.

* Verbi grácia, as for example.

* Vérça, a Colewort, a stalke of an herbe.





* Vercéra, a seller of colewoortes.

* Vercétas, small colewoorts or cab­
bage.

Verdád, f. truth.

Verdaderaménte, truly, verily.

Verdadéro, true, very right.

* Verdazúro, the Lazul stone.

Vérde, greene, yoong, fresh, in prime,
youthfull.

* Verdeár, to appeere greene.

Verdecér, yo Verdésco, to waxe greene.

* Verdeclara, a light greene.

* Verdegámbre blanco, niese pow­
der.

* Verdegámbre négro, blacke Elle­
borus.

* Verdegeár, to appeere greene.

Verdegueár, to seeme greene.

* Verdeguerár, vide Verdegueár. 

Verdescára, f. vide Verdescuro, a sadde
greene.

Verdescér, vide Verdecér, to waxe
greene.

Verdescúro, id est, Verde escúro, a 
darke greene.

* Verdinégro, brownish greene, blacke
and greene.

Verdolága, f. an herbe called Purslane.

Verdón, m.a Canarie birde.

* Verdugádo, m.a verdingall reaching
to the feete, along verdingall.

Verdugo, a hangman. Also a tucke or
rapier made fower square like a spit.

* Verdúgos estréchos, tuckes, swordes
or rapiers made square like a spit.

Verdúra, greenenes, freshnes, grasse for
horses.

* Verduricas, f. greene herbes, greene
places.

* Veré, I shall or will see, the future tense
of Vér, vide Vér.

* Verecúndia, shamefastnes, modestie,
bashfulnes.

* Verecúndo, bashfull, shamefull, mo­
dest.

Veréda, f. a path.

* Veréga, vide Vérga. 

Verengéna, or Berengéna, f. a kinde of
fruit eaten with beefe or mutton com­
monlie in Spaine, vide Berengéna.

* Verenjéna, idem. 

* Vérfano, vide Huérfano, an orphan, a
fatherlesse childe.

Vérga, a rod, a mans yarde, a measuring
yarde, a wande, a twigge. Also a saile
yarde.

Vergájo de Tóro, a buls pizell.

* Vergánte, a base fellow.

Vergantin, or Bergantin, m.a small ship
called a Brigandine.

* Vergél, m.a garden.

Vergonçosaménte, shamefully.

Vergonçóso, shamefull.

Verguénça, shame, shamefastnes.

Verguénças, the priuities.

Verguençosaménte, shamefully, foully.

* Verguençóso, shamefull.

* Verguére, m.an officer called a Vergier.

* Verguéro, an officer called a Vergier.

Vérja, a  lattice for a windowe, an iron
grate.

* Vericle, a kinde of steele glasse.

* Verificár, Præs. yo Verifico, 1. Præt.
yo Verifiqué, Sub. Præs. Verifique,
to verifie, to auouch.

* Verifique, vide Verificár. 

Veril, m.the berill stone.

* Verilóquio, a true tale, report, or
speech. Also the true exposition of a
worde.

* Verisimil, like to be so, very likely.

* Verissimo, most true.

* Vermegito, somewhat red.

* Vermejecér, to waxe reddish or red.

* Vermejito, somewhat red, ruddie.

* Vermejo, red coloured.

* Vermellón, or Bermellón, m.a li­
quor as red as bloud called vermillion,
brought out of Africa, red lead.

* Verná, Verné, vide Venír. 

* Vernegál, vide Bernegál. 

* Vernis, m.gumme of Iuniper, varnish.

* Verónica, or Varánica, the holy Var­
nicle, the picture of Christes face.

* Véros, id est Vér os, to see you.

* † Verráco, m.a barrow hogge, a bore.

* Verriondéz, vide Berriondéz. 

* Verrúca, vide Berrúca. 

* Verruéco, vide Berruéco. 

Verrúga, f. a wart.

* Verrugóso, full of warts.

* Vérsa, Vérza, vide Verça, a colewort.

* Vérse, id est, Vér se, to see him.

* Versificár, to make verses, to versifie.

* Versifico, that versifieth, one that ma­
keth verses.

Vérso, a verse.

* Vérsos, verses.

* Vertér, to spill ouer, to poure ouer, or
shedde.

* Vertído, powred out, spilled, scattered.

* Vertiénte, powring, spilling.

* Vertiénte del mónte, the pitch of a
hill.

* Vertiénte del rio, the sloping banks of
a riuer which turnes the water in the
chanell.

Vertír, yo Viérto, to conuert, to turne.

* Vertúd, vide Virtúd, f. vertue, valour,
worthinesse.

* Vervie paño, fine black cloth.

* Vérza, vide Vérça. 

* Vésle aquí, see him here.

* Véslo aquí, see it here.

* Véspa, f. vide Abispa, a waspe.

* Vespertíno, of the euening, pertaining
to the euening.

* Vésta, white apparell, the goddesse
Vesta.

* Véste, f. vide Vestidúra, clothing, ap­
parell.

Vestido, clothed, apparelled.

Vestidos, apparell, clothes.

Vestidúra, a garment.

* Vestidúra afeytáda, a new garment
made of an old.

* Vestidúra que ondéa, a garment of
chamlot.

Vestir, yo Visto, to cloath, to apparell, to
put on clothes.

* Vestuário, a place where apparell is
kept.

* Vesúgo, a kinde of fish much like a
gurnard.

Véta, a veine of metall running in the
ground. Also a beete.

* Veteráno, olde, ancient.

* Veteráno cavalléro, an olde trained
soldier.

* Véte, get thee hence.

* Véte, Véte de ay, be packing hence.

* Vetónica, an herbe called betonie.

* Vetúmen, vide Betúmen. 

* Vevér, vide Bevér. 

* Vexación, vexation, griefe, anguish,
trouble of minde.

* Vexámen, m.the triall or examina­
tion.

Vexiga, or Bexiga, f. a bladder.

* Vexiga de pérro, an herbe called alka­
kenge or winter cherries.

* Vexigázo, m.a blowe or stroke with a
bladder.

* Vexiguilla, f. a little bladder.

* Vexúco, a kinde of With.

Veýnte, twentie.

Veyntenál, of twentie yeeres.

* Veynténo, the twentieth.

* Veyntequátro, twentie and fower, an
alderman.

Véz, f. a time or turne.

* úna Véz, dos vézes, tres vézes, cien
vézes, once, twice, thrise, a hundred
times.

* a Vézes, at times, by turnes.

* a lás Vézes uno, a lás vézes otro, 
one while one, another while another.

* Vezádo, accustomed, taught, kissed.

* Vezár, to accustome, to teache, to kisse.

* Vezéro, one going by turne.

* Vezeríco, a little calf.

* Vezerillo, idem. 

* Vezérro, vide Bezérro. 

Vezindád, neighborhood, a row of houses
where neighbours dwell thicke.

Vezíno, a neighbor.

* Vézo, vide Bézo. 

* Vezúgo, vide Bezúgo, a fishe like a
gurnard.






V F
* † Vfanaménte, contentedly.

* † Vfanía, contentfulnesse, contented­
nesse, content.

† Vfano, content.


V I
Vía, f. a way.

Viáge, a voiage, a iourney.

* Viáje, vide Viáge. 

Viánda, f. victuall.

Viandánte, a wayfaring man.

* Viandéros, victuallers to a campe.

* Viático, all things necessary for a iour­
ney be it victuall or other things.

* Viáxe, vide Viáje. 

Vibrádo, brandished, shaken, cast with
violence.

Vibrár, to brandish, to shake threatening­
ly, to quiuer, to curle, to ruffle.

* Vicaria, f. a vicarage.

Vicário, a vicar, one that supplieth ano­
ther mans place.

* Viçárro, vide Biçárro. 

Vicio, a vice. Also ranknesse or super­
abundance.

Vicióso, vicious, fruitfull, ranke.

* Viciósos cámpos, fruitful fields, rank
fields.

Víctima, f. a beast killed for sacrifice, an
oblation, a sacrifice.

* Víctor, a conqueror, an ouercommer.

Victória, victorie, conquest, getting the
better.

Victorióso, victorious, one that conque­
reth or ouercommeth.

* Victu, m.sustenance.

* Vicúña, f. a beast in the Indies like a
mountaine goate, hauing the beuer
stone.

Víd, f. a vine.

* Víd parráda, a vine growing like a bo­
wer, arbor, or vault.

* Víd pasmáda, a vine that is blasted.

* Vid barváda con raýzes, a vine plan­
ted with the roote.

Vída, f. life.

Vidriádo, glased with glasse.

Vidriál, vitrioll, of or pertayning to glasse.

* Vidriéra, f. glasse for windowes, or
glasse made into quarrels or panes.

Vidriéro, a glasier.

Vidrio, m.glasse.

* Vídro, idem. 

Viduéño, a kinde of vine.

* Viéja, vide Véja, an old woman.

* Viejaménte, vide Vejaménte, oldly.

Viéjo, Viégo, vide Véjo, old.

Viéldo, a fanne.

* Viençe, Vienço, vide Vencér. 

* Viénda, Viénde, Viéndo, vide Ven­
dér. 

* Viéne, vide Venír. 

* Vientár, to fan, to gather winde, to win­
now corne.

* Viente, Viento, vide Ventár. 

Viénto, the winde.

* Viénto remolinádo, or Torvelíno, a
whirlewinde.

* Vientrázo, the paunche.

Viéntre, m.a bellie.

Viérnes, friday.

* Viérte, viérto, vide Vertír. 

Víga, f. a pile, a poste, a beame.

* Vigésimo, the twentieth in number.

Vigiláncia, watchfulnes.

* Vigilánte, vigilant, watchfull, wake­
full.

Vigilía, or Vigílias, dirges for the dead,
a holy day eauen, watches, fasten
eeuens, ember daies.

* Vigónes, small square peeces of timber,
called quarters.

Vigór, force, vigour, strength.

Vigoróso, forcible, strong, mightie, vigo­
rous.

Vigórnia de Albéytar, an anuile, such
as smithes beate their yron vpon.

* Vigóta, vide Bigóta. 

* Vigóte, vide Bigóte. 

Vihuéla, an instrument called a viall,
sometime a bandore.

* Vihuéla de árco, a viall de Gamba, r
a great viall that men set betweene
their legs to play on.

Víl, or Vile, vile, base, naught worth.

Vilecér, yo Vilésco, to be vile, to be
naught worth.

Viléza, f. vilenes, basenes, cheapnes.

Villa, a towne.

* Villanaménte, villanously, clownish­
lie.

* Villancíco, m.a song.

Villanía, villanie, lewdnes, clownishnes.

Villáno, a countrey man, a clowne.

* Villéta, a little towne. Also vide Vil­
lóta.

* Villéte, a little bill, a little letter.

* Villóso, or Villúdo, hairie, course
cloath, lining.

* Villótas, Acornes.

* Vilma, vide Bílma. 

* Vilménte, vilely, basely, abiectly.

Vimbre, or Mimbre, a band, a strap, an
osiar, a lythe willow twig, a withe to
binde withall.

† Vimbréra, the osiar stocke, vpon which
the osiars grow.

* Vinadéro, vide Viñadéro, a dresser of
vines, one that keepeth the vineyard.

* Vinagéra, a little glasse or bottle to
keepe the wine that is vsed in the masse.
Also a vinegar bottle.

* Vinageria, f. a place where they sell vi­
neger bottles, or Vinagéras, which are
little bottles to keepe the wine the priest
vseth at the masse.

Vinár barvécho, to breake vp ground.

Vinágre, m.vineger.

* Vinagréra, f. a vineger bottle.

* Vinagreria, a shop where they sell vi­
neger.

Vinagréro, a seller of vineger, one that
selleth vineger.

Vinatéro, a wine sellar, one that selleth
wine.

* Vinculádo, layde in fetters, laide in
bolts.

Vinculo, a band.

* Vindémia, vide Vendémia. 

* Vine, vide Venír. 

Viniébla, an herbe called hounds toong.

* Viniéra, Viniésse, vide Venír. 

Víno, wine.

* Vino de Manzánas, Sydar.

* Vino de ración, ordinarie wine, wine
for the meynie.

* Vino de aguapie, idem. 

* Vino tinto, Hullocke wine, blackish
wine.

* Vino, he came, vide Venír.

* Vinolénto, one giuen to drinke much
wine, a drunkard.

Víña, or Vinédo, a vineyard.

Viñadéro, he that keepeth a vineyard.

Viñéda, a vineyard.

Violáble, violable, that may be violated,
broken, or defiled.

Violádo, violated, broken, defiled.

Violár, to violate, to breake.

Violéncia, violence.

Violénto, violent.

Violéta, a violet.

* Violétas bláncas, stocke Gilliflowers.

* Violétas, or Violettas amaríllas, wall gilliflowers.

Víra, a turning, a pin, also a shaft.

* Virágo, a manly or stoute woman, a
mankinde woman.

Virár, or Birár, to turne.

* Viratalón, a fine double soaled shooe.

Viréy, a viceroy, a kings lieutenant.

* Virga, vide Vérga. 

Vírgen, f. a virgin, a pure maide.

Virginál, of a maide or virgin.

* Virgíneo, belonging to a virgin.

Virginidád, virginitie, maidenhood.

Vírgo, a filme in a maidens priuie mem­
ber, the maidenhead.

* Viril, manlike, meete for a man, stoute,
graue, substantiall.

* Viripoténte, ripe for marriage.

* Virlár, vide Birlár. 

* † Virotázo, a blowe with an arrowe,
shaft, or bolt.

† Viróte, or Biróte, m.a bolt, a shaft.





* Virréy, vide Virey, a viceroy.

Virtúd, vertue, force, valour.

Virtuosaménte, vertuously, valiantly.

Virtuóso, vertuous, well addicted.

Viruélas, or Vituéllas, a disease called
the small pockes.

* Visabuéla, or Bisabuéla, a great
grandmother.

Visabuélo, or Bisabuélo, or Visaguélo,
a great grandfather.

Viságe, the visage, the face or counte­
nance.

Visagra, the hinges of a table or of a por­
tall.

* Visaguéla, vide Visabuéla, a great
grandmother.

* Visaguélo, vide Visabuélo. 

* Visáje, vide Viságe. 

* Visárma, or Bisárma, a kinde of wea­
pon with two pikes on it.

* Viscáya, vide Bizcáya, the prouince
of Biskay in Spaine.

* Viscaýno, vide Vizcaýno, a man of
Biskay.

Vísco, or Líga, birdlime.

Viscócho, vide Biscócho, bisket bread.

* Viscónde, vide Vizcónde, a Vis­
count.

* Viscóso, viscous, clammie, tough like
birdlime.

Viséra, f. a vizard, a beuer of a head­
peece, a couering of the face.

* Visibilménte, vide Visibleménte, vi­
siblie.

* Visible, visible, to be seene, apparent.

Visibleménte, visiblie.

* Visiésto, or Bisiésto, the leape yeere.

Visión, a vision, an appearance.

Visita, f. visiting, going to see.

Visitár, to visite, to go to see.

* Visívo, to be seene visible, apparent.

Vislúmbre, f. the twilight of the eue­
ning.

* Visnága, or Bisnága, an herbe good to
make cleane the teeth.

Visnágra, idem. 

* Visniéta, a daughters daughters daugh­
ter, a grandchildes daughter.

Visniéto, or Bisniéto, a sonnes sonnes
sonne, a grandchildes sonne.

* Víso, the visage, looke, sight or face.

Visójo, squint eied.

* Visoñas, maide seruants that be newe
come.

Visóño, or Bisóño, a yoong soldier, a
fresh or yoong come.

* Visoréy, or Visey, a viceroy, a kings
deputie.

* Visperádas, f. things of the euening
tide.

* Visperas, euensongs. Also the eue of
eueryday following.

Vissiésto, or Bissiésto, leape yeere.

Vista, sight, beholding, view, presence.

* Viste, Visto, vide Vestir. 

* Visto, seene.

* Vistórta, vide Bistórta. 

* Vistóso, sightly, seemely, comely.

Vistuário, a wardrobe, a vestrie.

* Vitacula, vide Bitácula, a place where
the compas is kept in a ship.

* Vitál, vitall, that may liue, or hope for
life.

Vitima, vide Víctima. 

Vito, sustenance, liuing, feeding, victu­
als, prouision, necessaries to liue by.

* Vitor, vide Victor. 

* Vitória, victorie.

Vitorióso, victorious, triumphant.

Vituallas, victuals.

Vitualléro, vide Viandéro, a victualer.

Vituperáble, worthie to be despised.

* Vituperádo, found fault with, dis­
praised.

Vituperár, to dispraise, to reproch, to find
fault with.

Vitupério, dispraise, reproch, finding
fault.

* Vivace, quicke, liuely.

* Vivandéro, or Viandéro, a victua­
ler.

* Vivár, or Viváres, liuing or dwelling,
Also a warren for conies.

* Vivaro, vide Bivaro. 

* Viúda, or Biúda, a widow.

* Viudéz, f. widowhood.

* Viúdo, a widower.

* Viviénda, liuing or dwelling.

* Vivír, vide Bivír, to liue.

* Vivo, vide Bivo. 

* Vivora, or Bivora, a viper.

* Vivorézno, vide Bivorézno. 

* Vivoríno, vide Bivorino. 

* Vizárma, or Visárma, a staffe with
two pikes which with a shout forward
the pikes will come out.

* Vizarria, vide Bizarria. 

* Vizárro, vide Bizárro. 

* Viscáya, Biscáya, or Lepúscua, a pro­
uince in Spaine called Biskay.

* Vizcaýno, or Biscaýno, a man of Biskay.

* Vízco, or Vísco, hardlime.

* Vizcócho, or Biscócho, bisket bread.

Vizcónde, or Viscónde, a vicount.

* Vize, vide Bize. 

* Vizéra, or Viséra, a visard, a beuer of
a headpeece.

* Vizoréy, Visorey, vide Virrey. 


V L
* &Vacute;lcera, an vlcer, or impostumation of a
wound.

* Vlcerár, to grow to an impostumation.

Vlceróso, full of vlcers.

* Vltimádo, brought to the last.

Vltimaménte, last of all, lastly, to con­
clude.

&Vacute;ltima, the laste.

&Vacute;ltimo, the laste.

* &Vacute;ltra désto, moreouer than this.

* Vltráge, or Vltráje, outrage, violence,
furiousnes, madnes.

Vltrajádo, offered outrage, wronged by
violence.

Vltrajár, to commit outrage, to offer vio­
lence.

* Vltráje, or Vltráge, outrage.

Vltra maríno, beyond sea.


V M
Vmanaménte, gently, curteously.

Vmanidád, gentle vsage, curtesy, huma­
nity.

Vmáno, curteous, gentle.

* &Vacute;mbalo, a beast like an oxe, steere or
runt, a buffle.

Vmbrál, a threshold of a doore.

&Vacute;mbrio, vide sómbrio, shadowy.

* Vmbróso, vide Sombróso, idem. 

Vmedecér, yo Vmedésco, to moisten.

* Vmedecído, moistened, wetted.

* Vmedescér, vide Vmedecér. 

* Vméro, vide Huméro. 

Vmidád, moisture.

&Vacute;mido, moist.

Vmildád, humilitie, lowlines.

Vmilde, humble, lowly.

* Vmildeménte, vide Vmilménte, 
humbly, lowly.

Vmilménte, idem. 

* Vmilládo, or Humilládo, humbled,
made lowly, meeke, and gentle.

Vmillár, to humble, to make lowly.

Vmór, moisture, humour.


V N
Vn, or &Vacute;no, one.

* &Vacute;na, as a &Vacute;na, togither.

* en &Vacute;na, at one time, at once.

&Vacute;na véz, once.

* Vnámimes, being of one minde, or of
one accord, consenting in one.

* Vnánimos, idem. 

Vnción, annointing.

* Vndeár, vide Ondeár. 

* &Vacute;nga, vide Vñír. 

Vngido, annointed.

Vngír, Præs. yo &Vacute;njo, Sub. Præs. Vnja,
to annoint.

* &Vacute;ngo, vide Vñír. 

* Vngria, f. the countrey of Hungarie.

* Vnguenéco de &Vacute;mbres, the wilde
wine, or bindewith.

Vnguentário, an oyntment maker.

Vnguénto, oyntment.





* Vnha de ásno, an herbe called Foale­
foote.

* Vnja, Vnjo, vide Vngír. 

* Vnicaménte, alone, onely.

&Vacute;nico, one onely.

Vnicórnio, or Vnicuérno, a vnicorne.

Vnidád, vnitie, atonement.

* Vnifórme, vniforme, of one forme or
proportion.

* Vniformidád, f. vniformitie.

Vnigénito, the onely begotten.

Vnión, a vnion, an agreement in one.

Vniversál, vniuersall, generall ouer all.

Vniversalménte, vniuersally, general­
ly.

Vnivérso, vniuersall, generall to all.

&Vacute;ña, f. a naile of the finger or toe, a hoofe
of a beasts foote.

&Vacute;ña olorósa, a shell fish like the claw of
a birde.

Vñéro, parting of the flesh from the
nailes.

* Vñído, ioyned togither, vnited.

Vñidór, a ioyner togither.

Vñidúra, ioyning togither, yoaking.

Vnir, to vnite.

* Vñír, Indicat. Præs. &Vacute;ngo, &Vacute;nzes,
&Vacute;nze. Imperfect. Vnzia, 1. Præt.
Vnzí, íste, ó, 2. Præt. he Vnzído,
Fut. Vnziré, &c. to couple, or yoake to­
gither.

&Vacute;no, one.

* Vn póco, a little quantitie.

* Vntádo, annointed.

Vntadór, an annointer.

Vntár, to annoint.

* Vntáza, or Vntázo, an annointing.

&Vacute;nto, fat, grease, ointment.

Vntóso, fat, greasie, oylie.

* Vntúra, greasing, annointing.

* Vnturíllas, little ointments, or annoin­
tings.

* &Vacute;nze, vide Vñír. 

* Vnzído, yoaked or coupled togither.

* Vnzirá, vide Vñír. 

* Vnziré, vide Vñír. 


V O
Vo, id est Voy, I go, vide ýr.

Vocáble, vide Vocáblo, a word.

* Vocáblo, vide Vocábulo, a vocable, a
word.

Vocabulário, a dictionarie to shew the
signification of words.

Vocál, a vowell.

* Vocatívo, the vocatiue case.

* Vociferár, to crie out aloude, to make
exclamation.

* Vódas, vide Bódas. 

Vóga, rowing.

* Vogár, vide Bogár, Præs. yo Vógo, 1.
Præt. yo Vogué, Præs. Sub. Vógue,
to row.

* Vogavánte, vide Bogavánte. 

* Vogue, vide Vogár. 

* Vojár, vide Bojár. 

* Voladór, a flier, a fish called a Sea
swallow.

* Volánte, flying, going, running swift­
ly.

* Volár, or Bolár, to flie.

* Volatería, the flying of hawkes.

* Volátil, that flieth or passeth, or can flie
a fowle.

* Volcán, vide Bolcán. 

* Voleár, vide Volár. 

* Voléo, vide Boléo. 

* Volína, vide Bolína. 

* Volséos, the people of Tuscanie in Ita­
lie.

* Volteadór, a tumbler, a vauter.

* Volteár, to vaut, to tumble.

* Voltejadór, vide Volteadór. 

* Voltejár, vide Volteár. 

* Volúbile, vnconstant, mutable, volu­
ble, tumbled, rowled.

* Volvér, vide Bolvér, to turne, to tum­
ble, to rowle, to alter or change.

* Volvíble, vide Bolvíble. 

* Volúme, vide Volúmen. 

Volúmen, m.a volume, or part of a great
booke, a folding, turning, or rolling a­
bout, a tumbling and mutabilitie, a
bulke or bignes.

Voluntád, will, goodwill, minde, affecti­
on.

* Voluntariaménte, willingly.

Voluntário, willing, voluntarie.

Voluntariosaménte, willingly.

Voluntarióso, willing.

Vomitár, to vomit, to spue.

Vómito, vomiting.

* Vorágine, f. a gulfe.

* Vordár, vide Bordár. 

* Vordón, vide Bordón. 

Vos, or Vosótros, you.

Vósco, with you.

* Votádo, vowed, reported, declared.

Votár, vide Botár, to vow, to giue the
voice, to dispatch, to put foorth, to thrust
foorth, to giue ouer, to leaue off.

* Vóte, vide Bóte. 

Vóto, a vow, a voice.

* Vóto a Díos, I vow to God.

* tenér Vóto en concéjo, to haue a
voice in election, to be heard speake in
a matter of counsell.

* dezír su Vóto, to tell his opinions.

* dár su Vóto, idem, or to giue his voice.

* Vóz, or Bóz, f. a voice.

* dar vózes, to crie out, to make a noise.

* Vozeár, or Bozeár, idem. 

* Vozería, or Bozería, a noise.

* Vozína, vide Bozína. 

* Vozinéro, vide Bozinéro. 

* Vozinglería, a humming or noise f
many voices togither.

Vozingléro, or Bozingléro, one that
crieth out, one that maketh a noise.

Vozios, vide Bozíos. 


V R
* &Vacute;ra, vide Húra. 

* Vrbanidád, ciuill life, curtesie, ciuili­
tie.

* Vrbáno, ciuill, curteous, gentle in
speech.

* Vrdída téla, a web taken in hand or
warped.

* Vrdído, warped, begun.

Vrdiémbre, vide Ordiémbre, m.the
warp put into the loome, to be wo­
uen.

* Vrdílla, an instrument to beat or ham­
mer money.

Vrdír, vide Ordír, to take in hand, to goe
about.

* Vrdír la tráma, to warp a web of cloth,
or to put it into the loome. To plot or
practise a deceit.

* Vrgebáom, an herbe called Veruein.

* Vrgénte, vrgent, forcing.

Vrína, vrine, pisse.

* Vrinál, an vrinall, a chamber-pot.

* Vrinatór, one that maketh vrine.

* Vríve, m.a goldsmith or workeman of
gold plate.

&Vacute;rna, a pitcher, a pot, a vessell, wherein
the ashes of the dead, after they were
burned were kept.

* Vrráca, vide Hurráca. 


V S
Vságre, a tetter or ringworme.

* Vsánça, vsage, vse.

* Vsánza, vide Vsánça. 

Vsár, to vse, to enure, to accustome.

* Vsásse, Vsáce, vide Vsár. 

&Vacute;so, m.vse, vsage, wont, fashion, custome,
guise, manner or vre. Also the vse, pro­
fit, or occupation of any thing.

Vsofrúto, profit, and vse of a thing (but
not the proprietie.)

Vsofrutuário, he that taketh the profit,
and vse of a thing, but not the proprie­
tie.

Vsuál, vsuall, that is commonly vsed.

Vsúra, vsurie.

Vsurário, an vsurer.

* Vsuréro, idem. 

Vsurpádo, vsurped.

Vsurpár, to vsurpe.



* Vtensíllos, houshold stuffe.

&Vacute;til, profitable.

Vtilidád, profit.

Vtréro, a steere.







Úva, a grape.

* Úva crispa, a goosebery.

* Úva de pérro, the wild bay tree.

&Vacute;va pássa, or passáda, a raysin.

* Úvas de la ólla, gooseberies.

* Úve, vide Avér. 

* Vuéssa mercéd, id est. Vuestra mer­
céd, your worship, or worthines, or
mastership.

Vuéstro, yours.

* Uviéra, Uviésse, vide Avér. 

* Vulcánias, an yland in the Æolian
sea called Æolias.

Vulgár, common.

Vulgarménte, commonly.

Vúlgo, common people.

* Vulto, a countenance.

* Vultúrno, a riuer of Campania in
Italie.


V Z
* Vzúra, vsurie.

* Vzuréro, an vsurer.



X

† XAbón, m.sope.

Xabón oloróso, sweete sope.

* † Xabonádo, soped, washed with sope.

* † Xabonár, to sope.

† Xabonéro, a sope maker.

Xágua, a kinde of herbe in the Indies.

† Xaharrár, to plaister a wall with white
lime.

* † Xahartár, vide Xaharrár. 

* Xántho, m.a riuer of Troy, the drin­
king of which water maketh the sheepes
woll red.

* Xaporádo, vide Xaropádo. 

* † Xáque, m.a checke at chesse.

† Xaquéca, f. a kinde of disease called the
megrim.

* † Xaqueacon id est, Xaquéca con,
the megrim with, &c.

† Xáques, a checke at chesse, a budget of a
saddle.

* Xáquimas, f. halters.

† Xáquima, or Cabéstro, a headstall of
a horse.

† Xáquina, vide Xáquima, a halter.

† Xára, f. a bramble, a shaft.

* † Xarál, a place full of brambles.

* † Xaráma, f. a riuer falling into the ri­
uer Tagus in Spaine.

† Xaramago, wilde rape.

* Xarandilla, the proper name of a
witch.

* † Xaráva, vide Xaráve. 

† Xaráve, m.or Xarópe, a sirrupe, a po­
tion.

† Xárcias, f. the tackling or coardes in a
ship.

* Xardín, vide Jardín, m.

* Xarétas, carriages of great ordinance,
certaine networke of coardes or grates
of wood cast ouer the ship to let or keepe
out the enimie from boording or en­
tring the ship.

* Xaréte de navío, idem. 

Xarócho, vide Emxarócho. 

* † Xaropádo, prepared with sirrups.

* † Xarópe, m.or Xaráve, sirrupe, a po­
tion.

* Xauéga, f. a net to catch Tunnie fish.

* Xaveguéro, m.he that draweth a
draught for Tunnie fish.


X E
Xéme, m.a span.

* Xénabe, mustard seede.

† Xenáble, mustard.

* † Xerés, a towne in Andaluzia vpon
the sea coast neere Cadis.

† Xérga, f. sackcloth.

Xergón, a straw bed.

Xerguerito, a goldfinch.

* † Xerínga, an instrument to giue a
glister withall. Also a siring spout to
spout into the yarde of him that cannot
make water.

* † Xeringár, to spowt ones yard with a
siring. Also to giue a glister.

* Xervilla, f. a pumpe or pinsen to were in
pantofles.

* Xervilléta, f. a little pumpe or pinsen.



Xibia, f. a kinde of cuttle fishe.

Xibión, a cuttle bone or fishe.

* Xigóte, a gigot or leg of mutton rosted.

Ximia, f. a shee ape.

* Ximio, m.a hee ape.

* † Ximirias, f. apish trickes.

† Xíra, or comida plazentéra, good
cheere, dainty meate.

† Xiríngua, or Siringa, a siring, a glister,
vide Xeringa.

* † Xirón, m.the lappe of a skirte.


X O
* † Xo, as in English they say hoa, to hor­
ses when they wold haue them stand
still.


X V
* † Xuárda, f. the gresines or oyle in cloath
for want of good fulling at the mill.

Xúgo, m.iuice.

Xugóso, full of iuice.

* Xúrdia, f. an instrument to fish withall.




Y
* Y, and.

ya, now, already so.

Ya, Ya, now, now.

Yágo, as Sant-yágo, Saint Iames.

* Yanacónos, m.Indian boyes.

† Yantár, to dine.

* Yántar, a kinde of toll or custome.

* † Yáres, vide Yjáres, the small guts.

* Yáro, an herbe called Cuckopit or Calues
foote.

Yazér, to lie.

† Yazíja, f. lying, condition, estate, quali­
tie, or being.



* Ybéras tiérras, lande or grounds neere
the riuer Hiberia in Spaine, whereof
Spaine was called.



† ýça, ýça, a voice vsed of saylers one to
another in hoysing of saile.



* ýda, f. a going away, a parting.

* Ydéa, f. a forme or fashion, conceiued in
imagination, as it were a during sub­
stance, being a patterne of all other
like kindes.

* Ydiáques, a surname so called of a
house in Biskay descended of auncient
gentrie.

* Ydióta, a man or woman vnlearned, on
that is simple witted, an idiote.

* ýdo, gone, parted.

* Ydóneo, or Idóneo, meete, fit, conue­
nient.

* Ydrópico, one troubled with the drop­
sye.



* Yédera, vide Yédra. 

Yédra, f. Iuie.

* Yegarízo, a keeper of mares.

† Yégua, f. a mare.

† Yeguáda, a race or breed of mares.

† Yeguarízo, a keeper of mares to bring
foorth colts.

Yelár, to freese with colde.

Yélmo, or Capecéte, m.a helmet, a head
peece.

Yélo, or Eláda, frost.

* Yélo, as yo Yelo, I freese, vide Yélar.

Yéma, f. the yolke of an egge, the bud that
commeth before the blossome. Also the
first wine that commeth of the grape.

* Yénte, going.

* Yérma cása, a house that standeth a­
lone without a dweller.

* Yermár, to make waste or desolate.

Yérmo, m.a wildernes, a desart.

Yérno, m.a sonne in lawe by marrying
with ones daughter.

* Yerrár, vide Errár, to go astray, to doe
amisse.

Yéro, a kinde of tare.

Yérro, m.an error.

Yérro, m.I erre, vide Errár.

Yérto, rough, bristled, stiffe, standing vp
an end, starke.

* Yértos cuérpos, bodies starke or stiffe
either with colde or death.

Yérva, f. an herbe, grasse. Also poison.





* Yérva bendita, Valerian, or Set­
wall.

* Yérva puntéra, or Siemprevíva, Sin­
greene, Housleeke.

Yérva lombriguéra, Soothernwood.

* Yérva de balléstro, vide Verdigám­
bre blánco. 

* Yérva de la Bívora, wilde Buglosse,
neesing woort.

Yérva buéna, Mint herbe.

Yérva cána, an herbe called Ground­
swell.

* Yérva del múro, walwort.

Yérva estrélla, buck-horne plantaine or
harts-horne.

Yérva gatéra, cats mint.

* Yérva gigánte, an herbe called cowper­
snip or branck vrsine.

Yérva de golondrína, celandine.

Yérva lanaria, diers weed.

Yérva artética, ground iuy.

Yérva móra, broome rape.

* Yérva pagána, a herb with very broade
leaues.

Yérva pinuéla, orpine, liblong.

* Yérva Almiscléra, muske herbe.

* dar Yérvas, to poison.

Yerváto, vide Yervatún, Hartstrong.

* Yervatún, m.the comforting called
Hartstrong.

* Yervesíca, f. a little herbe or little
grasse.

* Yérvos, bitter tares.

* Yesádo, done with plaister or white
morter.

Yésca, f. tinders to kindle fire with. Also
baite.

Yésgo, or Yézgo, an herbe called Dane­
woort, or dwarfe Elderne.

Yésso, morter, plaister, pargetting stuffe
wherewith writing tables are done
ouer to make them beare writing.

* Yésso o sperjúgo, a kinde of plaistering
morter.


Y G
* Yglésia, f. a church.

* Ygrésia, vide Yglésia. 

* Yguála, f. a bargaine, a condition.

Yguál, equall.

* Ygualádo, made equall, compared.

Ygualár, to make equall, to compare.

Ygualdád, f. equalitie.

Ygualménte, equally.


Y J
† Yjáda, the small ribs, the collicke, the
flanke.

* Yjádas, ijádas, Hijádas, or Hijáres, 
the small ribs the flanke.

* † Yjadeár, or Hijadeár, to pant for
breath.

* † Yjáres, or Hijáres, the small ribs or
guts, the flanke.



* Yllúvias, vide Llúvias. 



* ýma, a roote great and white like a
turnep.

Ymágen, f. an image, a picture.

* Ymaginár, to imagine.

* † Ymán, a loadstone.

* Ymetalúm, to the mines.


Y N
* Ynchír, Inchír, vide Henchír. 

* Ynés, a proper name.

* ýngle, the groine aboue the thigh.

* ýngres, idem. 

* ýñigo, a proper name.

* Ynocéncia, innocencie, harmelessenes.

* Ynójo, the herbe Fenell.

* Hincárse de Ynójos, to kneele, to set
his knees to the ground.

Ynviérno, or Inviérno, winter.


Y O
Yo, I.

* Yójo, Darnell.



* Ypeléncia, a kinde of disease.

* Ypocrasía, hypocrisie, dissimulation.

* Yporquesía, vide Ypocrasía, hypo­
crisie.


Y R
ýr, Præs. Voy, Vás, Vá, Imperfest. ýva,
ývas, ýva, 1. Præt. Fuý, Fuíste, Fué,
Sub. Præs. Váya, Imperfect. Fuéra,
Yría, or Fuésse, Fut. Fuére, to go.

* ýra, or íra, f. anger.

* Yrá, he shall or will go.

Yracúndo, or Iracúndo, angrie.

* Yrlandés, one of Ireland, an Irish man.

* Yrlándia, f. Ireland.

* Yrritádo, prouoked, stirred vp, angred.

* Yrritadór, a prouoker to anger.

* Yrritamiénto, m.prouoking to anger.

* Yrritár, to prouoke to anger.

* Yrvesíca, f. a small grasse, a little
herbe.



* Ýsla, or Ísla, an yle, an yland.

* Ysléño, or Isléño, an ylander, or of or
pertayning to an yland.

* Ysléo, or Isléo, a little small yle or
yland.

* Ysléta, or Isléta, f. a little yle.

* Ysopeár, to be sprinkle, or cast water on,
to besprinkle with the holy water
sprinkle.

* Ysópo, m.the holy water sprinkle.

Ysquiérdo, vide Yzquiérdo, the left.


Y T
* Ytáta, m.the name of a riuer.


Y V
* Ýva, I went, he went,  vide Ýr.

* Yúca, a roote great and white like a
Turnep, with a blackish rinde ouer it:
the Indians grate it and straine it, and
so make their bread thereof.

Yugáda, an acre of ground, or as much as
a yoake of oxen can eare vp in one day.

Yúgo, m.a yoake.

* Yuguéro, m.a yoaker of oxen.

Yúnque, m.a anuile.

Yúnta, f. a yoake of oxen.

* Yúso, beneath, vnder.

* Dios en yúso, next vnder God, or God
excepted.


Y Z
* † Yzquierdaménte, awkly, vntowardly.

† Yzquiérdo, the left, awke.

Yzquiérda máno, the left hand.



Z

* ZÁbra, a kinde of small ship.

* † Zabullído, or çabullído, put
or ducked vnder water.

* † Zabullír, to diue or ducke vnder wa­
ter.

* Zafíro, m.a Saphire stone.

* Záfra, vide çáfra. 

Zága, vide çága. 

† Zagál, m.a shepheard.

* † Zagála, a she shepheard.

† Zágano, m.vide Zángano, a droane
Bee.

* Zaguán, çaguán, a perch.

* Zaguéra, vide çaguéra. 

* Zaguéro, vide çaguéro. 

* Zaharéño, vide çaharéño. 

* Zaherír, vide çaherír. 

* Zahínas, vide çahínas. 

* Zahíz, vide çahíz. 

* Zahondár, vide çahondár. 

* Zahónes, vide çahónes. 

* Zahórda, vide çahórda. 

* Zahúcho, vide çahúcho. 

* Zahumério, vide çahumério. 

* Zaléma, vide çaléma. 

* Zamarílla, an herbe called Poley (Jn­
chanters saie) being cast into an armie,
will cause the souldiers to be in feare.

* Zamárra, vide çamárra. 

Zamárro, vide çamárro. 

† Zámbra, a kinde of boate, a kinde of
daunce among the Moores.

* Zamóra, vide çamóra. 

* Zamotáno, vide çamotáno. 

* Zampóña, vide çampóña. 

* Zampuzár, vide çampuzár. 





* Zanahória, carret rootes.

* Zánca de piérna, v. çánca de piérna. 

* Zancadílla, vide çancadílla. 

* Zancajóso, vide çancajóso. 

* † Zánco, a stilt.

* Zançúdos, gnats with long legs.

* Zángo, or çángo, vide Zángano. 

† Zángano, a droue Bee.

† Zanges, or Zagues, a water bottle.

* † Zánja, a hollow banke where the wa­
ter passeth. Also the first foundation of
a house.

Zanjádo, vide çanjádo. 

* Zanqueár, vide çanqueár. 

* Zápa, vide Açáda. 

* Zapáto, vide çapáto. 

* Zaphíro, m.a Saphire stone.

* Zápo, vide çápo, a toade.

* Zapuzár, vide çapuzár. 

* Záque, a leather bucket.

* † Zaquizamí, or çaquiçamí, the space
or place betweene the plaistring and the
roofe, tyling or couering of a house.

* Zaráças, vide çaráças. 

* Zaragóça, vide çaragóça. 

* Zaraguélles, vide çaraguélles. 

* Zaránda, vide çaránda. 

* Zaratán, vide çaratán. 

* Zárça, vide çárça. 

* Zarçál, vide çarçál. 

* Zarcillo, or Zarzillo, vide çarcíllo. 

* Zárco, one that is grey eied.

† Zargatóna, an herbe called Felwoort
or Fleabane.

† Zarzaganíllo, a colde winde.

† Zarzahán, a kinde of cloth which the
Moores make.

* Zarzír, or Zarçír, vide Zurzír, to a­
mend.

* Zárzo de Vérgas, vide çárzo de
Vérgas. 


Z E
* Zébo, vide Cébo. 

* Zebólla, vide Cebólla. 

Zébra, f. a kinde of beast most swifte, in
Africa, his breath is smelling like
muske.

* Zebráta, vide Zebratána. 

Zebretána, a birding trunke to kill birds
with pellets of claie.

* Zeceár, vide Ceceár. 

* Zecérro, vide Cecérro. 

* Zecína, vide Cecína. 

* Zedacíllo, vide Cedacíllo. 

* Zedáço, vide Cedáço. 

* Zedibónes, vide Cedibónes. 

* Zedício, vide Cedício. 

* Zédro, vide Cédro. 

* Zédula, vide Cédula. 

* Zefálica, vide Cefálica. 

* Zefiro, the west winde.

* Zegagés, vide Cegagés. 

* Zegajóso, vide Cegajóso. 

* Zeguedád, vide Ceguedád. 

* Zeguejár, vide Ceguejár. 

* Zeguéra, vide Ceguéra. 

* Zegúta, vide Cegúta. 

* Zéja, vide Céja. 

* Zejúnto, vide Cejúnto. 

* Zejúnzo, vide Cejúnzo. 

* Zelár, vide Celár. 

* Zelemín, vide Celemín. 

* Zeléno, vide Celéno. 

* Zelício, vide Celício. 

* Zeladór, a zealous affectionate man.

Zélo, zeale, feruentnes in affection.

* en Zélos andár, to go on catterwral­
ling as cats do. Also as anie other beast
or liuing thing once a yeere go braying
or lustfull to the mate.

* Zelóso, or Zelózo, zealous, feruent in
religion.

* Zencerrár, vide Cencerrár. 

* Zéncio, vide Céncio. 

* Zendál, vide Cendál. 

* Zeñidór, any thing that girdeth about,
a girder about, one that girdeth a gir­
dle.

* Zeníth, the point of the firmament di­
rectly ouer ones head, wheresoeuer one
be, the verticle point.

* Zenténo, vide Centéno. 

* Zentória, vide Centória. 

* Zenzillo, vide Senzillo. 

* Zeperár, vide Ceperár. 

* Zephíro, or Zefiro, the west winde.
Also the southwest winde.

Zéro, a cypher.


Z I
Zifrár, vide Cifrár. 

* Zilíndro, vide Cilíndro. 

† Zimbório, m.a chappell.

* † Zímbro, m.Iuniper.

* Zimitárra, vide Cimitárra. 

* Zíza, a  birde that vseth to crie Ziza,
Ziza.

* Zizádo, vide çiçádo. 

Zizáña, f. cockle.

* Zizár, vide çizár. 


Z O
* Zóca, f. a place for to keepe a faire.

Zodiaco, m.the Zodiake, a crosse circle in
the firmament in which are the twelue
signes.

† Zohorí, one that seeth well, one that
findeth springs on the earth.

* Zóna, f. a zone or circle in the heauen,
a girdle.

* Zorçál, vide çorçál. 

* Zoríta, vide çorita. 

† Zórra, f. a shee foxe.

* † Estar hécho Zórra, to be drunke.

* † Caçár vna zórra, to be drunke.

* Zorrílla, a little foxe, a cubbe.

* † Zórro, m.a hee foxe.

† Zorzál, or Zorçál, a Thrush, a Fel­
fare.

* † Zorrerías, f. craft of a foxe.

* Zorzál, vide çorçál. 


Z V
Zuáne, m.vide Císne, a swan.

* Zuanéte, vide Juanéte, the top of a
maste in a ship. Also a yoong swan.

Zúfre, or çúfre, m.brimstone, Sulphure.

* † Zuín, a robin redbrest.

Zuíza, bulbaiting, a muster or shewe of
soldiers. Also Switzerland in Germa­
nie.

* Zumáque, vide çumáque. 

* Zumáya, vide çumáya. 

† Zumbár, to buzze, to humme.

† Zúmbas, buzzing, humming.

† Zumbído, humming, buzzing.

* Zúmbre, vide Açúmbre. 

* Zumíllo, vide çumíllo. 

* Zúmo, vide çúmo. 

* † Zúño, a becke, a nod with the head.

* Zúpia, wine of euill taste.

Zurana palóma, vide çurána palóma. 

* Zúrdo, vide çúrdo, left handed.

† Zúrra, a beating, a chastizing, a lam­
ming, a swinging, a cudgelling.

† Zurradór, a curriar.

* Zurrána, vide çurrána. 

* † Zurrápa, a tadpolle.

* Zurrár, vide çurrár. 

* Zurrón, vide çurrón. 

* Zurujáno, vide çurujáno. 

* Zurzír, or Zurcír, to patch, to mende,
to botch.

* Zutáno, vide çutáno, or Fuláno, such
a one.

* Zuzón, vide çuzón, an egging on.




 F I N I S.






