





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 7 6 5 9

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )



The
DICTIO­
NA­
RY
of syr Thomas Eliot
knyght.



Londini in ædibus Thomæ
Bertheleti typis impress.
Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum
solum.
{...}








THE COPIE OF THE KYNGES
GRACIOVS PRIVILEGE.


HENRY THE EYGHT, by the grace of God, Kynge of
Englande and of Fraunce, Defendour of the faythe lorde of Irelande, and supreme heed
in erthe immediately vnder God of the vniuersall Churche of Englande, To all prynters of
bokes within this our realme, and to all other officers, mynysters and subiectes, these oure
letters herynge or seinge, gretynge. we late you wyte, that we of our grace especiall, haue
gyuen priuilege vnto our well beloued seruant Thomas Berthelet, that no maner person with­
in this our realme, durynge the naturall lyfe of the sayde Thomas, shall printe any maner of
bokes, what so euer our sayd servant shal prynt fyrst or shall prynt agayne vpon other mens
corrections the same within the space of syxe yeres nexte ensuynge the pryntynge of euery
suche boke, so printed by our sayde seruant. wherfore we woll and commaunde you, that ye
nor none of you, presume to prynt any of the sayde bokes, durynge the tyme of this oure
priuilege, as ye intende to eschewe our displeasure.







TO THE MOSTE EXCELLENT PRINCE, AND OVR
moste redoubted soueraygne lorde kynge HENRY the. VIII. kynge of Eng­
lande, and Fraunce, defender of the faythe, lorde of Irelande, and Supreme
heed in erthe immediately vnder Christe, of the Churche of En­
glande, his humble and faythefull seruaunt, Thomas
Elyot knyght desyreth perfite felicitie.


TRVELY I am, and euer haue bene of this opynion, mooste
noble, moste puissaunt, and moste vertuouse Prynce, that the
Royall astate of a kynge here in erth, next vnto god, is of men
moste to be honoured, loued, and feared in an incomparable
degree and facion. For no man hauynge the free vse of rea­
son, beholdynge at his eien the disposition moste wonderfull
sette by diuine prouydence in thynges aboue vs, aboute vs, and vndernethe
vs, with the sondry alternations of tyme, wyll denye, to be of those thynges
one principall ruler and moderatour, by whose eternall sapience all thynges
ben gouerned. Unto that office of gouernance is (as it were by the generall
consent of al people) one name appropried, in the which although by diuer­
sitie of langages, the letters and syllables are oftentymes chaunged, yet the
worde spoken hath one signification, which implieth as moche as a KINGE 
in englyshe, as it may appere to them, which do rede holy scripture, and will
marke howe often god is there callid kinge, and also the prophetes do so fre­
quently name hym. More over the paynims beinge onely ladde with natu­
rall affections, callyd Iupiter, to whome above other their goddis, they re­
serued the power vniuersall, kynge of goddis and of men: as who saythe,
there may be no greatter name gyuen vnto hym, whome they supposed to be
the gyuer of lyfe vnto creatures. To the whiche example, for the similitude
of that diuine office men dyd attribute vnto their soueraygne gouernours
that excellent denomination, calling them semblably kynges, and assigning
to them the commune distribution of Iustyce: Wherby the people vnder their
gouernaunce, shulde be kepte and preserued in quiete lyfe, not exercysed in
bestiall appetite, but passed forth in all partes of honestie, they fynally shuld
of god be rewarded with immortalitie. This wel consydred, it shall be to all
men apparant, that they, whiche rebell agaynst kynges, be emmenies to god,
and in wyll confounders of naturall order and prouidence. But aboue all
thinges, I haue in mooste admiration, the maiestie of you, whiche be verye
kynges raygnyng in Iustice, whan I consyder, that therin semeth to be a
thynge supernaturall, or (if it may be spoken without derogation vnto god­
dis honour) a diuine influence or sparke of diuinitie: whiche late appered to
all them that behelde your grace syttyng in the Throne of your royal astate,
as supreme heed of the churche of Englande nexte vnder CHRIST, about
the descision and condemnation of the pernicious errours, of the moste de­
testable heretyke John Nicolson, callyd also Lambert, at the whyche tyme
your hyghnesse, more excellently than my tunge or penne can expresse, decla­
red to be in your royall persone the perfite image of kyngely maiestie, com­




pacte of these excellent qualities, trewe Religion, Sapience, Iustice, and
Mercy, all men reioycinge at the manifeste and most honorable declaration
of your euangelicall faythe: meruaylynge at the fulmination of the moste
vehement argumentes procedyng from your hyghnes in the confutation of
abhomynable heresyes: extollynge the iuste reprehencions of the peruerse
opinions and interpretations of the arrogant masters of the said Lambert, 
in whose writynges, and his owne propre wytte, he more trusted (as your
hyghnesse trewely alledged agaynste hym) than in the playne context of ho­
ly scripture, and the determinate sentence of holy and great lerned doctours:
Inioyenge also as well at your gracis mooste wonderfull pacyence, in the
longe sustayninge of the folyshe and tediouse obiections of the sayde Lam­
bert, as also at your most christian charitie, in mouynge and exhortynge so
stubborne an heretike with the most gentyll and perswasible langage, to re­
cant and forsake his myscheuouse heresies. This maiestie your true and lo­
uynge subiectes beholdynge, and than herynge the spirite of god speakyng
in you, his enoynted Kynge, and mynister elected: they were with ioy so re­
plenyshed, that whan they desyred to expresse eche to other the comforte, whi­
che they than receyued, the same comforte was of suche importaunce, that it
mought none otherwyse be declared, but by abundance of teares, sent out of
theyr eyen by vnspekable gladnes. More ouer the presence of you, whyche
are kynges, do minyster to them that be inferiours vnto you, an amplifica­
tion of powers callyd naturall, contayned as well in the wytte and senses,
as in the force or puissance of corporall membres. to the confirmation wher­
of, howe many men haue ben knowen, whyche er they haue attayned to the
familyar acquayntaunce of kynges, haue bene demed to be, some but of a
meane wytte and knowlege, some but of a base courage or prowesse, whiche
afterwarde haue exceded in wytte or courage all mens expectations, and fy­
nally bene of all men allowed for honourable and notable personages.
Of this wonderfull maiestie in your royall person, most gracious souerayn
lorde, I haue my selfe, in my selfe, late founde a meruaylous experience. For
about a yere passed, I beganne a Dictionarie, declaryng latine by englishe,
wherin I vsed lyttell study, beinge than occupied about my necessarye busy­
nes, whiche letted me from the exacte labour and study requisyte to the ma­
kynge of a perfyte Dictionarie: But whyles it was in printyng, and vneth
the half deale performed, your hyghnes being informed therof, by the repor­
tes of gentyll maister Antony Denny, for his wysedome and diligence wor­
thily callyd by your highnesse into your priuie Chamber, and of Wyllyam
Tildifley, keper of your gracis Lybrarie, and after mooste specially by the
recommendation of the most honourable lorde Crumwell, lorde priuie seale,
fauourer of honestie, and next to your highnesse chiefe patron of vertue and
cunnyng, conceyued of my labours a good expectation, and declaryng your
moste noble and beneuolent nature, in fauouryng them that wyll be well oc­
cupied, your hyghnesse in the presence of dyuers your noble men, commen­
dynge myne enterprise, affirmed, that if I wolde ernestely trauayle therin,




your highnes, as well with your excellent counsaile, as with suche bokes as
your grace had, and I lacked, wold therin ayde me: with the which wordes,
I confesse, I receiued a newe spirite, as me semed: wherby I founde forth­
with an augmentation of myn vnderstandynge, in so moche, as I iuged all
that, whiche I had writen, not worthy to come in your gracis presence, with
out an addition. Wherfore incontinent I caused the printer to cesse, and be­
ginninge at the letter M, where I lefte, I passed forth to the last letter with
a more diligent study. And that done, I eftesones returned to the fyrst letter,
and with a semblable diligence performed the remenant. In the whiche my
proceding, I well perceyued, that all though dictionaries had ben gathered
one of an other, yet nethelesse in eche of them ar omitted some latin wordes,
interpreted in the bokes, whiche in order preceded. For Festus  hath manye,
whiche are not in Varros Analogi: Nonius  hath some, whiche Festus  lac­
keth: Nestor  toke nat all that he founde in them bothe. Tortellius  is not so
abundant as he is diligent: Laurentius Valla  wrate only of wordes, which
are called elegancies, wherin he is vndoubtedly excellent: Perottus  in Cor­
nucopie, dyd omitte almost none that before him were written, but in wordis
compounde he is to compendiouse: Fryere Calepine (but where he is aug­
mented by other) nothyng amended, but rather appaired that which Perot­
tus  had studiousely gathered: Nebressensis  was both well lerned and dili­
gent, as it appereth in some wordes, which he declareth in latin: but bicause
in his dictionarie wordes are expounde in the spainyshe tunge, whiche I do
nat vnderstand, I can nat of hym shewe myn opinion: Budeus  in the exact
triall of the natiue sence of wordes, as well greke as latine, is assuredly right
commendable, but he is moste occupied in the conference of phrasis of bothe
the tunges, whiche in comparison are but in a fewe wordes: Dyuers other
men haue written sondry annotations and commentaries on olde latine au­
thors, among whom also is discorde in their expositions. Whan I consydred
all this, I was attached with an horrible feare, remembryng my dangerous
enterprise (I being of so smal reputation in lernyng in comparison of them,
whom I haue rehersed) as well for the difficultie in the true expressynge the
lyuely sence of the latine wordes, as also the importable labours in serching
expending and discussing the sentences of ancient writers. This premedita­
tion abated my courage, and desperation was euen at hand to rent al in pie­
ces that I had written, had nat the beames of your royal maiestie entred in­
to my harte, by remembraunce of the comforte, whiche I of your grace had
lately receyued, wherwith my spirite was reuyued, and hath set up the sayle
of good courage, and vnder your graces gouernance, your highnesse being 
myn onely mayster, and styrer of the shyppe of all my good fortune, I am
entred the goulfe of disdaynous enuie, hauynge fynished for this tyme this
symple Dictionarie, wherin I dare affirme, may be founde a thousande mo
latine wordes, than were togither in any one Dictionarie publyshed in this
royalme at the tyme whan I fyrste began to write this commentarie, which
is almost two yeres passed. For beside the conference of phrases or fourmes




of speakynge latin and englishe, I haue also added proper termes belon­
gynge to lawe and phisike, the names of diuers herbes knowen among vs;
also a good number of fishes founden as wel in our occean, as in our riuers:
Moreouer sondrie poysis, coyne, and measures, sometyme vsed among the
auncient Romaynes, Grekes, and Hebrues, whiche knowlege to the reders
not only of histories and orations of Tullie, but also of holy scripture, and
the bokes of auncient phisitions, shall be founde pleasant and also commo­
diouse. Nor I haue omitted prouerbes, callyd Adagia, or other quicke sen­
tences, whiche I thought necessarie to be had in remembraunce. All be it for
as moche as partely by negligence at the begynnynge, partly by vntrue in­
formation of them, whom I trusted, also by to moche trust had in Calepine, 
some fautes may be founden by dilygent redynge, I therfore most humbly
beseche your excellent maiestie, that where your hyghnesse shall happen to
doubte of any one worde in the fyrste parte of this warke, or perchance do
lacke any worde, whiche your maiestie shall happen to rede in any good au­
thor, that it maye lyke your grace to repayre incontinente vnto the seconde
parte, whiche is myn addition, sekyng there for the same worde in the letter,
wherwith he begynneth, trustynge veryly, that your highnes there shall be
satisfied. And for as moche as by haste made in printyng, some letters may
happen to lacke, some to be sette in wronge places, or the ortography nat to
be truely obserued, I therfore haue put all those fautes in a table folowing
this preface: wherby they may be easily corrected: and that done, I truste in
god no manne shall fynde cause to reiect this boke, but rather thankefully
to take my good wyll and labours, gyuynge to your maiestie mooste hartye
thankes, as to the chiefe author therof, by whose gracious meanes menne
beinge studious, may vnderstande better the latine tunge in syxe monethes,
than they mought haue doone afore in thre yeres, withoute perfyte instruc­
tours, whyche are not many, and suche as be, are not easy to come by: the
cause I nede not to reherse, sens I ones declared it in my booke called the
Gouernour, whiche about. viii. yeres passed, I dydde dedicate vnto your
hyghnesse. And for my parte, I render most humble thankes vnto your ma­
iestie, for the good estimation that your grace retayneth of my poore lerning
and honestie, promysynge therfore to your highnes, that duryng my lyfe
naturall, I shall faythfully employe all the powers of my wytte and
body, to serue truely your maiestie in euery thynge, wherto your
mooste excellent iudgement, shall thynke my seruyce conue­
nient & necessary, In the meane tyme and alway, as your
bounden seruant, I shal hartily pray vnto god, to pro­
spere your hyghenes in all your uertuouse proce­
dynges, grauntynge also that your maie­
stie may longe raigne ouer vs, to the in­
comparable comforte and ioy of 
all your naturall and lo­
uynge subiectes.
AMEN.







THO. ELIOTA EQVES LEC­
TORIBVS VERE DOCTIS.


ETSI NIHIL DVBITO DE VESTRO candore, pru­
dentia, ac benignitate lectores candidissimi, metus tamen
liuoris alieni me uehementer cogit, ut in huius operis prin­
cipio uos aggrediar præoccupatione quadam, non tamen
artificiosa, sed perquem simplici ac uerecunda: qua solum er­
ratula, perpauca nimirum deprecando, morsus inuidorum, qui nusquàm
non sunt, facilius euitarem. Nostis optumi uiri quem periculoso certamine,
lis adhuc pendeat inter huius ætatis medicos de re herbaria: qua, me her­
cle, ut nihil extet humanæ saluti conducibilius, si probe cognoscatur: ita
nihil penè deterius, aut magis noxium, si quicquem in ea, male intelligendo,
quod lectori futurum sit fraudi, perperam committatur: quod cum ipse
cognorim, alio qui cupidus redigendi in hos commentarios quorumcunq:­
uerborum que apud latinos authores reperiantur, sensus integros ac ge­
nuinos: cœpi cum quibusdam herbariis ac pharmacopolis agere, quos
existimaueram ea in re perquem gnaros fuisse, ac perdiligentes, ut stirpium
non solum nomina, uerum etiam figuras ipsas mihi scribenti suppedita­
rent. at homines uel improbe suam ignorantiam dissimulantes, uel ut
mihi imponerent (quod magis existimo) turpiter mentienter, alias figuras, 
aliaque nomina mihi pr&ecedil;buerunt, quam earundem herbarum fuisse, quas ego nosse
cupiebam, postea diligentius inuestigando per me ipsum comperi: quo
factum est, ut ab his delusus, uel potius proditus, aliquot herbas ac arbo­
res aliena fide male deceptus, huic Dictionario sub falsis nominibus in­
seruerim: quod tandem cum ex solidioris doctrinæ uiris, sero propemo­
dum consultis, tum ex inquisitione perdiligenti, tam in libris Dios cori­
dis et Galeni, quem in ipsis styrpibus a me iam uisis ac multo penitius consyde­
ratis deprehendissem, adeo tant&ecedil; negligenti&ecedil; me certe pœnituit, ut eo no­
mine tot mensium labores (ut mihi uidebatur inaniter exhaustos) flammis
consumpsissem: ni me potentissimi, ac longe sapientissimi Principis no­
stri Henrici octaui Regis Angli&ecedil; numen, interpellasset: cui meam fidem
in perficiundo hoc negotio paulo ante obstrinxeram: facturum igitur me
satis existimabam uobis uestrique similibus, uiris utique bonis æque atque do­
ctis, si in tabellam, appendicem huic epistol&ecedil;, herbarum uocabula uel a
me perperam interpretata, uel non satis cognita diligenter coegero, quo
minore cum periculo lectores quicquid mihi deciderit imprudenti resar­
cire possint. Abest enim quem plurimum, ut huius ce rei me quicquid pudeat,
cum in manibus tractentur cottidie, libri doctissimorum hominum, ter­
num aut quartum recogniti, nouis que additionibus iterum atque iterum in




lucem &ecedil;diti, quod hercle cur mihi tantum non liceat, neque moribus ne dum
legibus ullus quisquam pr&ecedil;iudicauerit. Sed mihi obiicient æmuli, multa
quidem uerba, qu&ecedil; apud Calepinum reperiantur, uel à me sponte pr&ecedil;ter­
missa, uel mihi nimium festinanti stolide dilapsa. Neutrum confitebor
hercle nam cum primum statuissem Dictionarium latino anglicum (ita
iam lubet rei nou&ecedil;, nouum nomen effingere) pro quodam meo nepote
conficere: in animo tum erat neque plureis gr&ecedil;cas dictiones aggerere, quem qu&ecedil;
uideri possent ualde necessariæ, ad eos authores intelligendum, qui latine
scribentes clarissimi reputantur. Igitur non alia gr&ecedil;ca uocabula desumpsi
mihi, quam ea qu&ecedil; uel in ciuitatem recept&ecedil; (ut dicere solent) locum quem­
piam apud probatum aliquem authorem adornassent, aut maiorem copi­
am, aut sensum illustriorem pr&ecedil;buissent. c&ecedil;tera quæcunque penes huius­
modi authores uel nusquem reperta, uel ab iis ipsis circumscripta, ne meam
operam in depingendis chartis nimium otiosis imprudenter luderem,
libenter pr&ecedil;termisi, quod scirem, gr&ecedil;cas literas nos ce cupientibus, aliorum
librorum, quos Lexica uocant, haud minorem copiam extare, nec mihi
duos parietes de una fidelia dealbare admodum uacabat: nam quid per
deum immortalem arrogantius dici possit? quid equidem stultius? quem in
latino Dictionario ex uerbis gr&ecedil;cis, aceruos ingentes colligere, miscella­
neasque consarsinare, cum ad rem literariam plæraque nihil faciant, imo non­
nunquem officiant cum inquirentem sedulo latinam aliquam dictionem, di­
utius quem par sit retineant. Denique pr&ecedil;termisi nimia uetustate iam obsoleta
uocabula, qu&ecedil; Terentii, Plautique uenerandam antiquitatem longe pr&ecedil;ce­
dere, aut plebeiorum sordes nimium olere uideantur. tum quod autho­
res quibus usui fuerunt eiusmodi uoces nusquem extent: tum quod nulla in
re, latine loquentibus utiles, plurimum stylo, puritatique sermonis officere
uehementer poterint. Si quis obscœna uocabula defyderet, quibus iacen­
tem uenerem inter legendum suscitare queat: alios dictionarios consu­
lat, meumque contemnat, hoc nomine (si lubet) quod eiuscemodi uocibus
careat. Noueram humani sensus quantum fuerint semper ad incendium
prompti, si delites centem igniculum ex lasciuius culis uerbulis uel mo­
dicè delibauerint: sciebam quam auidi sint homines tam fœde, ac demum
pœnitend&ecedil; uoluptatis illecebris animos perluendi, quam pr&ecedil;cipites fuerint ad
exequendum, quod libido suas erit. Pr&ecedil;terea non ignorabam ipsam Venerem
non tantopere solicitatam omnino quiescere: leuioresque impressiones
efficere. Malebam igitur (conscius futur&ecedil; rationis, quam apud Christum
iudicem initurus sum) uideri quibusdam gratum aliquid subtrahere, ob
id que male audire apud cinœdos quem libet procaces: quam damno cum meo
tum aliorum inexpiabili, facem sæuienti Cupidini, lasciua uerbositate




subministrare. Viculos quosdam, pariter atque riuulos et monticulos ad­
modum ignobiles, quos extra Cosmographorum tabulas, uel nusquem re­
perietis uel perquem raro, id tamen cum sui situs descriptione satis commoda
non curarim tantopere, ut in his uellem tempus & chartam inaniter deco­
quere, contemptus idem accidit in otiosis nominibus, qu&ecedil; neque tropum
afferant, nec in quopiam authore fabulam illustrent. Ceterum pro tam
inani farragine comparaui lectoribus suppelectilem longe commodio­
rem, ex his dictionibus, quæ in legendis authoribus, ob sensus diuersi­
tatem, haud mediocrem difficultatem afferant. A dieci pr&ecedil;ter herbarum
ac piscium cognomina, quorum nullus dictionarius ante hunc meminit
(ni fallor) mensuras ac pondera, tam ueterum gr&ecedil;corum atque latinorum
quem etiam Hebreorum. hanc equidem operam, cunctis hominibus qui in
literis tum facris, tum prophanis studiosè uersentur, me pulchre nauasse
iudicaueritis, quoties memineritis, quàm insigni uecordia ad lectionem
iucundissimam rei tam uulgaris ignorantia per docti homines c&ecedil;cutire ui­
deantur. Tandem ne nimis longa pr&ecedil;facione, uobis in rebus maioribus
atque grauioribus occupatis, potius fastidium quem benefitium afferam, id bre­
uiter a uobis impetrare cupio, ut meam uoluntatem in hac re æqui bonique
consulatis. cogitetis que apud uosipsos, id operis iam cœptum ab equite
britanno, barbarissimo scilicet, utpote in paternis tantum ædibus educato,
nec ab anno ætatis duodecimo ab altero quopiam preceptore literis
instructo, sibi ipsi nimirum duce tam in scientiis liberalibus, quem in
utraquè philosophia: quod procul abest, ut ostentando di­
cam uel arroganter: sed ut gratiis DEO OPT. MAX.
cum a me tum ab his, quibus hic meus liber fuerit
utilis, utrinq; redditis. alii musarum uberiori
benefitio freti, meo quidem exemplo, pa­
rem aut maiorem operam aggredi,
pro sua Republica non dubita­
rent. Vos ualete, memo­
res, primos conatus,
cuiquam scriben­
ti, uix un­
quam
feliciter cecidisse.







THE TABLE OF COR­
RECTIONS.




ACETABVLVM, rede a
saulcer, wherin vyneger or
other lyke sauce is put. Put
out the resydue, and reade
it in the table of measures.



Acinicula, rede Acuncula. 



Acus, rede it in the addition.



Aedilitas, litum, rede litium.



Agaranomus, rede Agoranomus. 



Ambrosia, rede in the addition.



Antista, reade Antistita. 



Apiastrum rede an herbe, whiche hath lea­
ues lyke to blacke horehound, but great­
ter, and more tender, and are nat so rough,
and smelleth lyke a cytron, some do take it
for Marche.



Appositus, iette to, rede sette to.



Archarius, rede in the Addition.



Assiptor, rede Ascriptor. 



Assecia, rede Assecla. 



BIothenatos, rede Biothanatos. 



Biremes, adde to, also shippes, hauing
ii. raunges of ores.



Boij, adde to, also the people of Beuar or
Berne, and the Marches therof.



Brabenta, rede Brabeuta. 



Buglossa, rede, to that herbe, whiche is com­
monly callyd Borage.



CAdus, rede in the Addition, and also
in the table of measures.



Calix, rede in the addition.



Calydonia, rede, It is also a countrey in the 
northe parte of Scotlande. 



Calta, rede in the addition.



Camerinam mouere, reade in the addition.



Carcritoma, rede Carcinoma. 



Cardinum, rede Cardamus.



Carpatine, put out okers, and rede cokars. 



Cerates, rede the foure score and sixtenthe
parte of an ounce.



Chameleopardus, rede lyke a panther.



Censio, rede Censeo. 



Chena, rede clena. 



Chœnix, rede in the table of greke mesures.



Chus, rede in the table of greke measures.



Climacterius, rede climactericus. 



Commeats, rede commeatus. 



Consuersco, rede consuesco. 



Coriarius, adde to, also a curriar.



Cura, car&ecedil; rede cur&ecedil;.



Cynomia, rede Cynomyia. 



Congius, reade in the Table of Romayne
measures.



DEcussis, rede in the addition.



Demeanculum, rede demeaculum. 



Demensum, rede in the addition.



Duellium, rede Duellum. 



H&ecedil;matices, rede h&ecedil;matites. 



Increpo, pere, adde to, uel pare.  



LApathos, rede in the addition.



Latico, rede latito. 



Legacitius, rede Legatitius. 



Leucantha, rede Leucacantha. 



Latum&ecedil;, rede Latumiæ.



Lonem radere, rede Leonem radere.



Lesbos, for Ageum, rede Aegeum. 



Lingua bula, rede Lingua bubula. 



Litem suam facere, there for oae, rede one.



Lucifigus, rede Lucifugus. 



MAlo, mauul, rede mauult. 



Marconiani, rede Marcomanni. 



Mastiche, adde to commonlye callyd
Mastix. 



Mater matrina, rede & hath a mother liuing.



Medimnus, rede in the table of measures.



Mediocris, dlcre, rede mediocre. 



Medius, a, um, in the myddell.



Melamirus, rede Melanurus.



Membraneus, rede of parchmyn or velum.



Merdo, oreur, rede ordure.



Metreta, & metretes, rede the greke table of
measures.



Mina, rede in the addicion and in the tables
of poyse and money.



Modius, rede in the table of measure.



Muralis, adde to the end pelitory of the wal



NEdum, after, for fundere, rede funde­
rem, Nihil cum fidibus graculo nihil cum
amacino fui, rede, cum amaracino fui. 



Nucamenta, thynges on the bowghes of
nutte trees or pitche trees hangyng down
lyke frynges, and be nat leaues.



Numeris omnibus absolutus, on euery parte
perfyte, put out ly.


¶ 


Olus atrum, for persely rede Alysander.



Ozinum, rede ozimum. 



PAralleli, for lon rede son. 



Patrizo, for lyke a father, reade lyke
his father.



Pectunculus, a lyttell fyshe, adde therto, I
suppose it is a cockyll.



Pharmacentice, rede Pharmaceutice. 



Pituita, for rowme rede rewme.



Puuia, rede pluuia. 



Pollex, rede a fynger bredth, and the third
parte of a fynger.



Polus, of extre, rede of an axe tree.






Pupugi, rede the pretertence of pungo. 



Putitius, a soole, rede a foole.



Qui, reade after the latine, wherfore was
Epicurus more happy that he lyued in his
owne countray, than Metrodorus whi­
che lyued at Athenes.



Quinarius, rede at the ende, whiche is of
our money. iii. pens farthing, or therabout.



REmuncop&ecedil;, for dryuen rede drawen.



Renones, rede after wherin the an­
cient Almaynes. 



SAlillum, rede a lyttell saltsellar.



Salinum, rede a saltesellar.



Saxatilis, pisces saxatili, rede saxatiles. 



Scytae, Scythia, putte theym out there, and
reade them after.



Scorpiuros, putte out all the description of
the herbe, and rede a lyttell herbe callyd
also Scorpioides, hauyng small leaues, and
the sede therof is like the tayles of Scor­
pions.



Sestertius, & Sestertium, rede them afterwarde
in the table of coyne.



Sextarius, rede in the table of measures.



Singillatim, for euery ouche rede eue riche.



Specimen edere, to shewe a profe. put oute
the residue.



Sprarchus, rede spirarchus. 



Spithama, reade after in the table of mea­
sures.



Squilla, rede at the laste ende, I suppose it 
a prane.



Sernunt se somno, rede sternunt. 



Struma, for whiche is, rede wherin is.



Sulcus, sometyme it is put of a dyche, rede
for a dyche.



TThysus, put out all, for as moche as
it is afore declared in Thyrsus.



Trachelum, reade for tho sayle, the
sayle.



Trulla, reade a treye.



Tucetum, reade at the ende. also a sausage.


¶ 


Vafer, for flye, reade slye.



Vlex, for to ti, rede to hym.

 



In the addition.



Adarca, for grownyng, rede growynge.



Aggerre, rede aggerere.



¶ Here endeth the Corrections.













A Sygnifieth of, or from.





Ab, and Abs, be of the
same sygnification, only
A, goth before a worde,
which begynneth with a
consonant: ab and abs goth
before a word that both
begyn with a vowell. 



Abatis, two wordes made of the preposi­
tion, a, & the ablatiue case plurell of Batus,
whiche in englysshe is a measure, signifieth
an officer, that hath the orderyng of mea­
sures, as a clerke of the markette 
Esdra.


Ab accidentibus, an officer, vnto whome it
belongeth to write such thing as do chance.



Abacti, officers deposed, or such as be con­
strayned to resygne their authoritie.



Abactores, theues that steale cattell.



Abacus, a countyng table, or cupborde.



Abaculus, of Plinie is taken for accompt.



Abalienatus, he whom a man putteth from  him



Abalieno, aui, are, to put or tourne away.



Abana, a ryuer in the countrey of Damaske
vnder the hyll called Libanus.



Hieron.


 

Abanec, a gyrdell that the priestes of Je­
wes dyd weare.



Abambulo, aui, are, to ascend or mount vp.



Abaphus, vndied or vncoloured.



Abauus, my great grandefathers father.



Abàx, abacis, a cupboorde, or dresser, also
an astronomers tables.



Abaci, the tables inbowed, wheron pylars
doo stande.



Abbas, atis, an abbott



Abbatissa, an abbesse.



Plinius.


 

Abarimon, a countreye in Tartari, where
men haue fete tourned backwarde, and be
wonderfull swifte, and be wylde.



Abaster, one of the horses of Pluto kyng
of Helle. 



Abdera, a citie in the realme of Thracia.



Abderita, a citesyn of Abdera.



Abdias, the name of a prophete.



Abdico, aui, are, to expell or put out of fa­
uour, or resygne an offyce, or to refuse his
sonne: or kynsman.



Abdicauit filium, He refused hym for his
sonne. Abdicauit se magistratu, He hath re­
sygned his offyce or dignitie. 



Abdico, ixi, cere, to denie or forsake.



Abdo, didi, dere, to hyde.



Abdómen, the fatte aboute the kydneyes.
It is also the vdder and teates of a sowe,
full of mylke, whiche is in Italy hadde for
a delycate meate.



Abdùco, xi, cere, to leade awaye, or leade
out, or pull away, or take with.



Abellin&ecedil;, fylberdes of Abellino, a citie in
Naples. 



Abemo, emi, ere, to take or putte of a gar­
ment. Abemito uestem,  Put of thy cote. 
Plau .cc.


Abeo, iui, uel ii, ire, to departe, or go away.



Aberceo, to forbid. Eam abercet domo,  He­
forbyddeth hir his howse.



Aberro, aui, are, to erre or wander very mo­
che, to depart ferre of, or a sonder.



Aberunco, aui, are, to wede out, or pluck out.



Abessa, the name of a Juge in Israel.



Abfore, to be awaye.



Abgrego, aui, are, to seuer or take oute of
the flocke, or to drawe sheepe.



Abhinc, before this tyme.



Abhorreo, ui, rêre, to abhorre, to hate.



Abhorresco, to feare to beholde.



Abiecto, aui, are, to caste often away.



Abies, ietis, a fyrre tree.



Abietarius, a carpentar.



Abigeatus, tus, felony in stealynge cattell.



Abigêus, a stealer of cattell.



Abigo, egi, gere, to dryue away any thinge,
that is euyll or noyous. also to driue awaye
cattell by thefte or deceyte.



Abiicio, ieci, iicere, to cast away, to renounce
to despise.



Abintegro, yet ageyne eftesones.



Abintestato, intestate or without testament.



Abiudico, aui, are, to recouer or take away
by iudgement.



Abiugo, aui, are, to vnyoke, discharge, or
putte asonder.



Abiungo, xi, ere, to seuer or sonder.



Abiurati, sworne brethern, or confederatis.



Abiuro, aui, are, to denye by an othe, or to
kepe a thinge wrongfully.



Abiudicatum, adiudged, gyuen by iugement.



Ablacto, aui, are, to weane.



Ablaqueo, aui, are, to rydde the erthe from
trees or vynes, and cutte awaye the vpper
rotes, that they may beare the more fruite.



Ablego, aui, are, to sende away.



Abligurio, iui, ire, to consume in banketting
or farynge delycately.



Abloco, aui, are, to sette or let to an other.



Abluo, ui, ere, to wasshe of.



Abnego, aui, are, to denye vtterly.



Abnepos, otis, A sonne in the fourthe de­
gree in lyneall discent.



Abnuo, nui, ere, to deny or refuse with coon­
tenance or becke, to becke away.



Abnuto, signifieth to do the same oftentimes



Aboleo, eui, uel ui, ere, to put out, or rase out
to anulle, or vndo for euer.



Abolesco, to brynge to naught.



Abolla, a Senatours habyte, or a sowldi­
ours cloke.



Abominor, atus sum, nari, to take for ylle
lucke, or haue in detestation.



Aborigines, people, whyche fyrste helde




the countrey aboute Rome, & lyued abrode
hauynge no houses. They may also be ta­
ken for any other people, whose beginning
is not knowen.



Aborior, abortus sum, aboriri, to be borne
afore naturall tyme.



Aborsus, an vntymely byrthe, nygh to the
conception: which may be called aborsion.



Abortus, an vntymely byrthe, nighe to the
iuste tyme of delyueraunce, whereby the
chylde dieth.



Abortio, onis, et Abortiuus, the byrthe dy­
stroyed with some hurte, or other mysad­
uenture, or medycine.



Abortio, tiui, tire, to brynge forthe a chylde,
or it be perfecte.



Abortium, idem quod abortus.



Abortiuus, a, um, that thynge, whiche pro­
cureth the sayd vntymely byrthe.



Abpatruus, My fathers great vncle.



Abrado, si, dere, to pare or scrape away.



Ab re, out of the matter, or out of the pur­
pose, vnsemely, vnconuenient.



Abrenuncio, aui, are, to renounce, or forsake.



Ab re tua, agaynste thy profite.



Abripio, pui, ere, to take fro, or take by fors.



Abrogati, they whiche beinge at lybertie,
submitte them selfis to an other mans rule,
by theyr consente



Abrogo, aui, are, to take awaye.



Abrogare legi, to dissolue or repell a lawe.



Abrotanum, an herbe called southern wode.



Abrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breke  of, plucke
vp, or cutte of.



Abs, of or fro.



Absarus, a ryuer of Armeny, that incloseth
the lasse Armenie.



Abscedo, cessi, dere, to go away.



Abscessus, et abscessio, a departyng.



Abscessus, is of phisytions taken for an im­
postume or botche, or for a course of euyll
humours to fome parte of the body, wher­
by matter is ingendred.



Abscido, di, dere, to cutte of.



Abscindo, signifieth the same.



Abscio, iui, ire, to go out of remembrance.



Abscondo, di, dere, to hyde.



Absens, tis, absent, or awaye.



Absentaneus, a, um, that whiche in absence
is doone.



Absentia, absence.



Absentio, tire, to thinke contrary.



Absento, aui, are, to be absent.



Absimilis, moche vnlyke.



Absis, idos, the strake of a cart whele, wher
in the spokes be sette.



Absisco, tere, to departe from a place. some­
tyme it signifieth to absteine or leaue of.



Absoleo, ère, to be out of vse.



Absoletus locus, a place vnoccupied or ne­
glected.



Absoluo, ui, ere, to loose that whyche was
bounden. also to performe or accomplyshe.
Also to spare or forgyue, to pardon, to
spede, to assoyle.



Absono, absonaui, absonare, to discorde or 
sowne euylle.



Absonus, na, num, that whiche sowneth nat
wel, or discordeth, or scantly may be herde.



Absorbeo, bui, uel absorpsi, ére, to swalowe,
or suppe of all, to deuoure or consume.



Absque, without.



Abstemius, he that drinketh no wyne.



Abstentus, accursed out of the churche.



Absterreo, ui, ere, to prohybyte or lette, or
putte fro.



Abstinentia, abstinence, a vertue in forbea­
rynge to take an other mans goodes.



Abstineo, ui, ere, to absteyne or forbeare, or
tempre.



Absto, stiti, stare, to stande farre of.



Abstorqueo, torsi, quere, to gette by force
or tourmentes.



Abstraho, xi, ere, to take by force or by craft



Abstrudo, si, dere, to hyde.



Abstulit, of Aufero, he hath birefte, taken
away, or borne away. 



Absum, fui, abesse, to be away, or ferre of, or
to fayle, or to be distant or absent.



Absumo, psi, ere, to spende or consume.



Absurdus, surda, surdum, inconuenient, foo­
lysshe, discordinge, dishoneste, abhorringe,
or odious.



Absynthium, wormewoode, 



Absyrtides, be ylandes in the Venitian see.



Absyrtus, the brother of Medea, whome
she dyd cutte into pieces, and threwe into
the see, whan she fledde frome her father 
with Jason. 



Abundantia, haboundance, more than suffi­
cient rychesse.



Abunde, habundantly, plentuously, inough,
and more than inough.



Abundo, aui, are, to habunde, to haue out of
measure more than inough.



Abuolo, aui, are, to flee away.



Abutor, abusus sum, abuti, to abuse, to vse a
thynge: dishonestely, vncomely, contrarye
to that, that it serueth for, oute of order,
or in vayne.



Abusiue, improprely, agaynste Nature, or
custome.



Abydena, trifles, thinges of smalle estima­
tion, wanton toyes, thynges vnseemely for
menne to vse.



Abydeni, a people in Asia, whyche ha­
uynge their Cytie distressed with a longe
Syege, felle into a furye, or madnesse, and




slewe all their wiues, their chylderne, and
afterwarde them selues.



Abydos, the citie of the sayd people.



Abyla, a hylle in the occean See agaynste
Spayne, whiche is called oone of Hercu­
les pylars. 



Augustinus
Ambrosius.



Abyssus, is a depenes without bottom.



A ante C.

AC, signifieth sometyme, and. as Do­
ctus ac iustus es, Thou arte kunnyng
and iuste. Sometyme it is taken for
Than, as Haud secus ac iussi faciunt, They
doo none otherwise than they be comman­
ded. Sometyme it dothe signifie as, as Su­
perbis perinde, ac si Rex esses, Thou arte as
proude as if thou were a kynge.



Acatia, is the iuyce of a fruite called sili­
qua. It maye be called also in Englande
veriuyse.



Acadœmia, a vniuersitie, whiche toke that
name of a place nighe to Athenes, where
Plato the great phylosopher taught phy­
losophye. 



Academici, were a secte of phylosophers,
whyche folowed and taughte the opyny­
ons of Plato. 



Acanthis, idis, a byrde that feedeth on thy­
stelles, and maketh her nest with claye, and
is called in englysshe, a Tytmusse. It was
also a boye, whiche the poetes doo sayne
was transformed into a floure of his name.
It is also a bushe, lyke a whyte thorne, with
lasse leaues, mosy, and pryckynge.
Dioscorides sayth, that it is an herbe, that
groweth in stony and moyste grounde, and
hath leaues broder and longer than letyse,
in forme lyke to rockette, somwhat blacke,
and in broysynge softe and fatty, hauynge a
stalke of two cubytes high, of thyckenesse
of a mans fynger, garnyshed vnder the top
with lyttell longe leaues and pryckynge,
wherevnto groweth a whyte floure. 



Acapna, drye wodde that smoketh not.



Acara, a towne in the myddelle of Hun­
garye.



Acarnania, a parte of a royalme in Grece,
named Epirus. It is also a lyttell countreye
in Egypte: and it is a citie by Syracusis in
the royalme of Sycile. 



Acarpia, lacke of fruite.



Acatalectos, a verse, wherein one syllable
lacketh.



Acatium, the greattest sayll in the shyppe.



Accalaurentia, the name of her, that nou­
rished Romulus and Remus, the fyrst buil­
ders of Rome.



Accedo, accessi dere, to goo to, or appro­
che. Sommetyme it sygnifyeth to gyue an
eare or harken, to take hede, and to make
moche of.



Accelero, aui, are, to make haste or spede.



Accendo, di, dere, to kendle, inflame, pro­
uoke, or byue boldnes.



Accensi, were sowldiours appoynted to be
aboute great offycers for defence of their
persones. Festus saythe, that it were they,
whiche after the dethe of souldiours were
put in their places. Varro affirmeth, that
they were ministers redy at the commaun­
dementes of principall offycers.



Accentus, an accent or tune, wherby a silla­
ble is pronounced.



Accepso, in the stede of acceperim, I haue
taken.



Acceptabula, all vessayle or other thynge,
that may receyue and kepe what soo euer
shall be putte into it.



Acceptilatio, an acceptaunce, a word of the
lawe, whyche hapneth in this wyse. One
sayth to an other, Art thou contented with
that that I haue promysed the? or that by
my bargain I owe to the? The other saith,
ye I am contented. This is Acceptilatio.
Also wherin soo euer I haue bounden my
selfe by receyuynge of any thynge, it maye
be called Acceptilatio. 



Acceptum, thankfull, pleasant, allowable.



Acceptum fero, to knowledge my selfe to
haue receyued, that is not yet payde, also
to take thankfully.



Accerso, siui, sire, to call forth, or sende for.



Accerso, sere, terti&ecedil; coniugationis, to goo to
calle, or fetche.



Accidens, is an accident, whiche may be, or
not be, with out corruption of that, wher­
in it maye be.



Accido, di, dere, to falle downe in doing re­
uerence.



Accingo, cinxi, cingere, to gyrde, to pre­
pare, to make redye to do some thyng.



Accinctus, gyrte, redye, quycke in his bu­
synesse.



Accio, iui, ire, to calle to.



Accipio, cœpi, cipere, to take, to here, to sup­
pose, to knowe, to vnderstande, to receiue,
to intreate or entertayne.



Accipiter, a hawke.



Accliue, stepe bendynge.



Acclino, aui, are, to enclyne or bende to.



Accliuis, siue accliuius, rysynge vpwarde to
a smalle toppe.



Accludo, to shutte to.



Accola, the nexte inhabytant.



Accola campi, He that dwellethe nexte to
the fielde. Also he that commeth oute of
one countreye, and dwelleth in an other.






Accolo, to dwell by or nyghe, specially hil­
les or waters.



Accommodo, aui, are, to accommodate, ap­
propre, to applye, make apte, set in order,
gyue, or inclyne.



Accredo, didi, ere, to giue credence, to assent.



Accresco, creui, crescere, to growe to.



Accubitum, a bedde or couche to lye on by
daye tyme, as it was the maner of the olde
Romaynes, to eate lyenge on their beddis.



Accubitus, the lyenge in the said maner.



Accubo, accubui, bare, to lye by, or to sytte,
or lye downe to eate.



Accumbo, cubui, bere, to lye downe, to lye
by, to lie or sytte downe at feastes and ban­
kettes. Accumbere mensam, to syt at one table.



Accumulo, aui, are, to accumulate or gather
in heapes, to increase.



Accuro, aui, are, to take good hede.



Accuratus, ta, tum, wherin is moche dyly­
gence, curiouse.



Accurate, diligently, curiousely.



Accurro, ri, rere, to runne to, to spede thither



Accusatorius, ria, rium, whiche conteyneth
an accusation.



Accuso, aui, are, to accuse.



Acedia, slouthe, pensyfenes, heuynesse of
harte, werynesse.



Acedior, diatus sum, to be wery, or to waxe
slouthefull.



Acentra, et acentreta, thynges wherof the
poynt in the myddes is not knowen.



Aceo, acui, acere, to be sowre or sharpe.



Acephalus, la, lum, without a heed.



Acer, et aceris, a tree, the wodde wherof is
moste gentyll to worke in, and is named in
englyshe Dowgeon. 



Acer, cra, crum, et Acer acris, acre, sower as
vineger. sommetyme it betokeneth stronge,
sometyme sharpe, Acer inimicus, a sharpe
ennemye. Also sore, as Acres animaduerso­
res, soore punysshers. 



Acredo, Acritudo, Acritas, sharpenesse, or
sowernesse.



Acriter, sharpely, or sowrely.



Acer, aceris, chaffe of mylsede.



Acerosum frumentum, vnkleane wheate.



Acerbitas, bytternes of taste, sharpenes of
tyme, crueltie in man.



Acerbo, baui, are, to trouble, to make byt­
ter, or abhomynable.



Acerbus, ba, bum, vnrype, bytter, difficult,
or peynefulle, as, Robustorum iuuenum a­
cerba mors, The dethe of yonge menne is
peynefulle, as who saythe, they dye with
greatte difficultie.



Acersecomes, He that neuer cuttethe his
heare.



Aceruatim, in heapes.



Aceruo, aui, are, to gather into heapes.



Aceruus, a heape or gatherynge togyther,
specially of grayne.



Acesco, sci, scere, to waxe sowre or tarte,
specially in lykour.



Acetabulum, a
saulcer, wherin vyneger or
other lyke sauce is put. reade it in the table of measures. 



Acetare, to moue or styrre.



Acetarium, a salate of herbes. it is also a gar­
deyn, where salate herbes do growe.



Acetum, vynegre.



Achæi, people in Grecia. and somtyme they
be taken for grekes generally.



Achæron, tis, is of poetes taken for a ry­
uer of helle.



Achaia, a region in Grecia.



Achateon, the mayne sayle of a shyppe.



Achates, was the name of the companyon
or mynion of Aeneas the Troiane. It is al­
so the name of a precious stoone founde in
Sicile, which is in colour browne, and hath
cerkles blacke and whyte. 



Achetæ, gresshoppers, which chirpe loude
and pleasantly.



Achilleum, a sponge, whiche is verye softe,
and hath smalle holes.



Aciæris, a hatchet of brasse, which amonge
the paynyms was vsed in sacrifice.



Acicula,  a pynne.



Acidula, peares that be sower.



Acidus, da, dum, sowre, or sharpe.



Acies, betokeneth the edge of a knyfe, or
other weapon or toole. Also the front of
an hoste, at the ioynynge of battayle. more
ouer that parte of the eie, whyche is cal­
led the syghte.



Acinacis, a crooked sworde that the Per­
syans vsed.



Acini, be lyttell kernels, whiche be in gra­
pis, raisons, pomegranates, & other beries.



Accipenser, or Aquipenser, a kynde of fyshe
whiche hathe the scales tourned towarde
the hedde.



Aclanes, he that neuer cryeth.



Aclytes, a weapon vsed in the olde tyme.



Aconitum, an herbe, wherin is mooste fer­
uent poyson.



Acontiæ, certayne impressyons in the fyr­
mament lyke to fyrye dartes, whyche doo
seeme to flie.



Acopa, medicines to remedy werynesse.



Acopis, a precious stone lyke a glasse, with
smalle golden dropes, wherwith yf oyle be
heate, and the body therwith anoynted, it
dissolueth all werynesse.



Acor, ris, a tartenes lyke vnto vnripe wyne
or pomegranates.



Acquiesco, eui, escere, to leane, as to leane




my heed or arme vppon any thynge. Also it
signifieth to assent to other mens sayinges.



Acquiro, siui, rere, to attayne a thynge that
is sought for.



Acraton, pure wyne, without a lay, or vnmixte.



Acredo, dinis, the sharpnes that is in frui­
tes, whiche be not rype.



Acredula, the wodde larke.



Acrimonia, tartnes, which biteth the tunge,
and perceth the heed, as in the taste of gar­
lyke, oynions, and other lyke thynges. It
signifieth sometyme sharpnes in speking or
mynde: sometyme lyuelynes and quycke­
nesse of wytte.



Acrochordones, a kind of wertes, as great
as beanes, so small at the rootes, that they
do seme to hange by a synewe.



Acroma, a subtyll sentence or lesson, requi­
ringe moche study and serche. it is also ta­
ken for all thynges to be recited or doone,
to delyte the audience.



Acta, water bankis, or which men do cal stron­
des, wheron the see floweth. Also it is that
which we cal actes, concerning mens lyues or
priuate busynes put in writing. also such de­
des as haue hapned out of iugement. Acti­
tata, be those, whiche haue hapned in iuge­
ment, proprely they, which be in doyng.



Acteon, the name of a man, whom Diana, bi­
cause he did se her nakid, turnid into an hart:
& so was he torne & slain of his own houndis.



Actio, onis, betokenith somtime pronuncia­
tion, sometime an oration writen, sometime
an action in the lawe, sometyme an hysto­
rie, sometyme a defence, otherwhyle a re­
compence in wordes for benefite receiued,
as gratiarum actio, for thankes. generally
it is taken for act or dede in euery thyng. 



Actiosus, busye.



Actito, aui, are, to practise, specially in ci­
uile causes.



Actor, whiche dothe the dede. Also in the
lawe the plaintife, complaynant, or deman­
daunt. Also a player of enterludes. Also a
mannes factour or baylyffe, that hathe the
charge of his busynesse.



Actualia nomina, names, which do procede
of acte, as Rex, a regendo, of gouernynge,
Dux a ducendo, of leadynge.



Actuarius, ria, rium, actiue.



Actuarius, a substantiue, signifieth a nota­
ry or scribe, or any other that writeth spe­
dily. Also it betokenith a kynde of shippes,
whiche be callid barkis.



Actum est, it is loste.



Actuosus, full of actes.



Actus, ta, tum, performed, also arryued, thrust
in, brought to, or feared.



Actus, tus, a dede, the partes of a comedie
or play, a dayes warke in tyllage.



Actutum, anon, without tarienge.



Aculeus, a prycke or stynge.



Acumen, the sharpnes of euery thing. it si­
gnifieth also clerenes of witte.



Acumino, aui, are, to sharpen.



Acuncula, a smalle nedell.



Acuo, ui, ere, to make sharpe, as a knyfe, or
other thinge lyke. somtyme it betokenethe
to teache, otherwhile to steere.



Acupictores, imbrowderers.



Acus, ci, a fishe called a banstikle or banning.
rede it in the addition.



Acus, aceris, chaffe.



Acus, acus, a nedell, also chaffe of corne, also
an order in battayle.



Acutus, ta, tum, sharpe, but in voyce it be­
tokeneth high and small, as a treble.

 

A, ante D.

AD, by hym selfe, or ioyned to an o­
ther word, signifieth to, or at, as Va­
do ad oppidum, I go to the towne.
Erat ad ripam fluminis ingens arbor, There
was at the ryuers syde a great tree. Some­
tyme it signifieth agaynst, as, Ad illum mi­
hi pugna est, Against him is my warre. Som­
tyme it betokeneth in comparyson, some­
time cause, as, Ad quid hoc fecisti? For what
cause, or wherto diddest thou this? Some­
time about, as Ad duo millia hominum occisa
sunt, There be slayne aboute two thousand
men. Also after, as, Ad hæc, After this.



Ad annum, durynge a hole yere.



Ad diem, at the day appoynted.



Ad tempus, for a whyle.



Ad exemplum, to the example or lykenes.



Ad extremum, fynally at the laste.



Ad pedes desilio, I light on my fete.



Ad rem facit, it maketh for the matter, or is
conuenient.



Ad rem pertinet, it belongeth to the pour­
pose.



Ad uerbum, worde by worde.



Ad unum, vnto the laste.



Adæque, semblably, so moche: as, Adæque
miser, so moche a wretche.



Adagia, an olde wife, whiche late hadde a
chylde.



Adagium, a prouerbe, or as I mought say,
an olde sayde sawe.



Adamas, adamantis, a precious stone, called
a dyamant.



Adamo, aui, are, to loue very well.



Adamussim, by rule, streight as a lyne.



Adapto, aui, are, to ioyne to.



Adaquo, aui, are, to water horse or cattell.



Adarea, a frothe or fome growyng on ree­
des in the fennes.






Ad calendas gr&ecedil;cas, signifieth Neuer. For
the olde grekes had no calendes.



Addico, xi, dicere, to saye, to iudge, to ap­
poynte, or depute.



Addictus, he that is iudged, appoynted, or
deputed.



Addictus, ta, tum, openly solde. Also Addi­
cere was whan the iuge in the old tyme de­
lyuered the dettour to his credytours, to
do with hym what they lysted.



Addisco, didici, discere, to lerne wel, or adde
to in lernynge.



Additus, ta, tum, added or put to.



Addo, didi, dere, to adde, ioyne, or put to.



Addoceo, cui, cere, to lerne.



Addormio, miui, ire, to slepe.



Adduco, xi, cere, to bryng to, or bring forth,
sometyme to drawe or plucke togither.



Adducta frons, a frownyng foreheed. som­
tyme adducere is to extende or thrust out. 



Adedo, di, dere, to deuoure.



Adeo, so moch, moreouer, surely, without
doubte. Somtyme it signifieth euen, as Tu­
re iam adeo eius audies uerba, Thou thy self
euen nowe shalte here his wordes.



Adeo, iui, ire, to go to, to demaunde, to at­
tempte, to make assaulte.



Adeps, adipis, the fatte of all thynge.



Adeptus, opteyned gotten, or founden.



Adhabito, taui, tare, to dwelle by.



Ad hæc, moreouer.



Adhæreo, to cleaue faste, to sette sure, to
ioyne to.



Adhalo, to blowe or to breathe on a thyng.



Adhamo, aui, are, to bynde to, or tye, or
grappell.



Adhibeo, ui, bere, to put to, to haue by me.



Ad hoc, furthermore.



Ad horam, at tyme appoynted.



Adhuc, yet, hitherto.



Adiaceo, cui, cêre, to lye by.



Adides, short battes of a cubyte longe and
an halfe, hauynge pikes of yron in theym,
and were tyed to a lyne, that whanne they
were throwen, he that did cast them, mought
plucke them agayn vnto him, hurlebattes.



Adigo, egi, adigere, to procure or styre, to
bynd by othe, or promyse, to bryng or dryue
to, to fasten or ioyne to.



Adiiciales, feastes that pryestes made in
the olde tyme.



Adiicio, ieci, iicere, to caste to, to adde or
putte to, or increase.



Adiicere oculum, to loke on, or consyder.



Adimo, emi, ere, to take away, or diminishe.



Adineo, iniui, ire, to put in.



Adinstar, lyke to.



Adipales, feastes that priestes were wonte
to make.



Adipatus, ta, tum, larded, basted.



Adipiscor, adeptus sum, to gette or optain:
ioynid with a person it signifieth to ouertake.



Aditio, tionis, an accesse, or repaire.



Adito, taui, tare, to go to.



Aditus, tus, accesse, commyng to, or entrie.



Adiudico, aui, are, to adiuge.



Adiugo, aui, are, to yoke or ioyne to.



Adiungo, xi, ere, to ioyne to, to applye.



Adiuro, aui, are, to denye with an othe, to
coniure.



Adiuto, aui, are, to helpe often.



Adiuuo, aui, are, to helpe.



Adiutorium, helpe.



Adiumentum, helpe.



Adlimina, a porter, whiche dothe kepe the
vtter gate.



Ad liquidum, clerely, euidently, playnly.



Admando, aui, are, to sende to, to delyuer
any thynge to one to bringe to an other.



Ad manus, at hande, redy.



Adminiculor, aris, et Adminiculo, are, to
ayde, to succour.



Adminiculum, ayde, supportation.



Admiratio, a wonderynge.



Admiror, raris, ratus sum, rari, to wonder.



Admissarius equus, a stalyon horse.



Admissionales, vshers of the chambre.



Admissura, the acte or tyme whan beastes
doth their kinde in generation. Seasoning.



Admitto, misi, mittere, to admitte, to put to,
to brynge in, to suffre, to susteyne, or take.



Admodum, very moche, somwhat, resonably.



Ad modum, as it were.



Admolior, iris, molitus sum, liri, to putte or
adde to.



Admoneo, nui, êre, to warne, to exhorte.



Admordeo, momordi, dêre, to byte soore.



Admoueo, ui, êre, to moue to, or put to.



Adoleo, leui, lui, êre, adultum, to begynne to
grow, to do sacrifice with incense, or other
fumes, to burne swete thynges.



Adolescentia, is the aege betwene chylde­
hode and mannes age, whiche is betwene
xiiii. and .xxi.



Adolescentior, aris, atus sum, to be wanton,
or full of youthe.



Adolescenturio, iui, ire, to playe the boye.



Adonia, festiual dayes, which were kept in
the honor of Adonis, the derling of Venus. 



Adonis, the name of a chylde, whiche was
sonne of Cynare, kyng of Cypres, whome
Venus had for her derlynge, whiche was
slayn with a bore, whom the poetes fained,
that Venus turned into a purple floure.



Adonidis horti, gardeyns for a lyttell tyme
pleasant, whiche shortely decayen.



Adoptio, an election of an heyre out of the
cours of inheritance, as by wyll or gyfte.






Adoptitius, he that is adopted or taken in
the stede of a sonne.



Adoptiuus, the son of him that is adopted.



Adopto, aui, are, to elect or apoint an heire.



Adoratio, reuerence due to god, or saintes.
also an inwarde deuotion and affection to
hym that reuerence is doone vnto: and is
an expresse mocyon or acte of reuerence
done with the body.



Adorea, et adoreola, A prayse that is giuen
to them that haue victorie. Also a cake of
fyne wheate, whiche they vsed in sacrifice.



Adoreum, sede corne.



Adordior, iris, adorsus sum, riri, to speake
to, to beginne.



Adorior, adortus sum, to sette on sodaynly,
to begynne. Adorior hunc, I sette on him.



Adoro, raui, are, to honour with inclination
of the body, to beseche.



Ad plenum, perfectly, fully.



Adprimus, chiefe of all.



Adpulsus, Adpulsio, the dryfte of sheepe
to the water.



Adrepo, psi, ere, to crepe to.



Adrumo, maui, to grudge or make rumor.



Adruo, rui, ere, to turne the erth in tyllage.



Adscire, to ioyne or putte to.



Adsum, fui, esse, I am here, or presente, or
at hande.



Ad summam, in conclusion, finally.



Ad tempus, for a tyme.



Adueho, uexi, uehere, to bring to or cary to.



Aduena, a straunger.



Aduenio, ni, uenire, to come to.



Aduentitia bona, goodes whiche doo come
vnloked for.



Aduentitius morbus, syckenes that cometh
without our defaute, and of some menne is
called an vncome.



Aduentitius, He that commethe to a place
by chaunce.



Aduentito, aui, are, to come often to.



Aduento, aui, are, to come nigh.



Aduentores, commune resorters, or haun­
ters to a place.
Plautus in
Mustella­
ria.


Aduersarius, an aduersarie.



Aduersitores, seruantes, whiche do fetche
home their maisters after dynar or supper.



Aduersor, satus sum, sari, to repugne or be
contrarye, or to refuse.



Aduersus, contrary, or agaynst.



Aduerto, ti, tere, to tourne to.



Aduiuo, uixi, uiuere, to lyue yet.



Adulor, atus sum, lari, to flatter.



Adulatio, flatterye.



Adulter, adultera, a man or woman auoutrer.



Adulterinæ claues, counterfaite keys.



Adulterinus, na, num, counterfaite, or forged.



Adultero, raui, rare, to counterfaite or forge.



Adulterium, auoutry.



Adultus, ta, tum, full growen.



Adumbro, aui, are, to make or giue shadow,
to represente or expresse, as peynters doo,
that do shadowe ymages in playne tables,
to make them shewe imboced or rounde.



Adunco, aui, are, to make croked.



Aduncus, croked or hooked.



Ad unguem, to the perfection.



Aduno, aui, are, to gather togyther.



Ad unum, eueryche one.



Aduocatus, an aduocate.



Aduoco, caui, care, to call to, or cal to help.



Aduolo, laui, are, to flie to, or nygh a place.



Ad uotum, after myn, or thin, or his appetite.



Adusque, vntyll.



Adytum, the chauncell or other secrete place
of the temple, where none came but prie­
stes, or persones sanctifyed.

 

Ae, ante D.

AEdere, spiritum, to yelde vp the gost,
to dye.
Cicero &
Attic.


Aedere facinus, to do an yll dede.



Aedere stragem, to make a slaughter of men.



Tit. Liuius.



Aedere nomina, to telle the names to be
wrytten.



Cicero in
Vene.



Aedere librum, to sette forth such a boke.



Aedere scriptum, to shewe forth writing.



Aedere prælium, to make battayle.



Aedepol, an othe amonge gentyles, sygny­
fyenge by Pollux house. 



Aedes, a hous. and if there be ioyned ther­
vnto the name of god or of a saynt, it syg­
nifieth a churche, or temple. Aedes salua­
toris, saynt sauiours churche.



Aedicula, an oratorie, or place, where ima­
ges were kepte.



Aedificium, al the hole building of the hous.



Aedifico, caui, care, to buylde.



Aediles, officers, whose charge was to see
to the kepynge vp and maynteynyng of tem­
ples, and priuate houses, and to make pro­
uision for solemne playes.



Aedilitas, litium, the office of the Aediles. 



Aedilitius, He that hadde ben ones in that
authorytie.



Aeditiuus the prelate of the temple.



Aediticius, a Judge or arbitratour chosen
of the one parte.



Aedituor, ari, to rule ouer the temple or hous



Aeditus, ta, tum, hygh and stronge.



Aedituus, the prelate of the temple or chur­
che, and may be nowe called the persone or
paryshe prieste.



Aedo, ædidi, tum, to set forthe or publyshe.
Also it signyfyeth to brynge forthe by ge­
neracyon.






Ae, ante G.

AEger, gra, grum, sycke.



Aegipanes, beastes lyke to men, ha­
uynge fete lyke to gotes.



Aegre, greuousely, or heuily.



Aegrimonia, syckenes.



Aegroto, aui, are, to be sycke.



Aegrotatio, syckenesse.



Aegrotus, ta, tum, sycke.

 

Ae, ante M.
¶ 

Aemulor, emulatus sum, æmulari, to en­
uie without malyce, or to folowe, or studye
to be lyke to an other.



Aemulus, he that foloweth or enuieth ano­
ther, onely for desyre of glorie.

 

Ae ante N.
¶ 

Aenatores, blowers in trumpettes.



Aeneus, &ecedil;nea, æneum, brason.



Aenigma, tis, a derke question, harde to be
vnderstanded.



Aenigmatistes, he that pourposeth harde
questions.



Aénum, a cawdron.

 

Ae, ante Q.
¶ 

Aequabilis, equall.



Aequabilitas uitæ, wherin is no varietie or
trouble.



Aequeuus, of one age.



Aequalis, equall, playne, lyke, or lyke age.



Aequaliter, lyke wyse.



Aequamentum, indifferencie.



Aequanimis, he that is neyther extolled
with, prosperitie, nor discomforted in aduersite.



Aequanimitas, takyng in good parte.



Aequanimiter, moderatly, paciently, coldly.



Aeque, iustly, or as well.



Aequi bonique facio, I take in good parte,
I recke not, or care not.



Aequidiale, the tyme whan the dayes and 
the nightes be of one length.



Aequilibrium, of euen weight or poyse.



Aequimanus he that vseth the one hand as
well as the other.



Aequinoctium, the tyme of the yere, whan
the day is as longe as the night, whyche is
twise in the yere. In spryng time about the
viii, Calendes of Aprile: And in Autumne
aboute the .viii. calendes of October.



Aequinoctiale, the adiectiue of æquinoctium.



Aequiparo, aui, are, to compare or make equal



Aequipolleo, ui, ere, to haue lyke power, or
be of lyke estimation.



Aequitas, equitie, iustyce, or euennes.



Aequiualeo, ui, ere, to be equiualente, or of
lyke valour.



Aequiuocum, one worde hauynge dyuers
sygnifycations.-



Aequo, aui, are, to make euen or playne.



Aequor, the see, somtyme other waters.



Aequus, euen or playne.

 

Ae, ante R.
¶ 

Aer, the ayresommetyme wynde, blaste,
breathe, or sounde.



Aera, ræ, money numbred.



Aerarii milites, sowldiours waged.



Aerarium, a tresory, where tresure is kept.



Aere diruti milites, sowdiours, whiche for
some defaute were put out of wages.



Aeripes, whiche is as swyfte as the wynd.



Aerius, of the ayre or lyke to the ayre.



Aeratus, myxte with copper.



Aerugo, ginis, rust or canker in mettal, spe­
cially in copper or syluer.



Aeruginosus, rustye, or cankred.



Aerumna, labour paynfull, care of minde,
with heuynes, infelicitie.



Aeruscare, to gette money by falsehode.

 

Ae, ante S.
¶ 

Aes, æris, is proprely copper or brasse. It
is oftentymes taken for money, sometyme
for trumpettes.



Aes nostrum, Moneye that other menne
do owe vnto vs.



Aes alienum, money that we doo owe to o­
ther men.



Aes suum, money that other men doo owe 
vnto hym, whom we speake of.



Aes ductile, mettal that wol be sone molten.



Aesculum, an oke that beareth maste.



Aestas, Sommer.



Aestimabile, that whiche may be valewed.



Aestimatio, a peyne sette.



Aestimo, aui, are, to esteme, to value.



Aestiua, places to be in for shadowe in the 
sommer tyme.



Astiuo, aui, are, to dwelle or be in a som­
mer place.



Aestuaria, places whervnto the see floweth
and ebbith, or meres, filled with salt water.



Aestuo, aui, are, to waxe hotte, to bourne,
to flowe lyke the see.



Aestuosus, hote, or feruente.



Aestus, tus, tui, heate of the wether, or bur­
nynge of the sunne. Also the vyolence or
troublous motion of the see.

 

Ae, ante T.
¶ 

Aetas, age.



Aetate, an aduerbe, signifieth long tyme.



Aeternus, euerlastynge.



Aether, the fyrmament.



Aethera, ræ, the ayre.






Aethra, sygnifieth the same.



Ae, ante V. 
¶

A euum, longe or euerlastyng tyme.



A ante F.

AFer, or Apher, a man born in Affrike.



Affabilis, a man easy to be spoken vnto.



Affabilitas, gentylnes in heryng.



Affabre, counnyngly, craftily.



Affabrum, counnyngly or craftily wrought



Affaniæ, tryfles.



Affatim, abundantly.



Affecto, aui, re, to seke affectualli, to trouble
whan it is put with damno,  or other lyke.



Affectata oratio, a curyouse fourme of
speakynge.



Affectatio, curyositie.



Affectate, curyousely.



Affectus, ta, tum, troubled or vexed.



Affectus, tus, tui, et affectio, affection or na­
turall motion, as gladnesse, desyre, and su­
che lyke.



Affero, fers, attuli, afferre, to brynge to.



Afficio, eci, ere, to moue affection or dispo­
sition, either to good or to yll.



Afficit me gaudio, It maketh me gladde.



Afficit me dolore, It maketh me sory.



Affecit eum lætali uulnere, he gaue to hym
his deathes wounde.



Affigo, gere, to nayle to, or fasten.



Affines, in fieldes betokeneth adioynyng:
In men it betokeneth alyance by mariage.



Affirmo, aui, are, to affirme.



Affirmatio, affyrmaunce.



Affligo, flixi, gere, to punyshe.



Afflictatio, punyshement of the body with
syckenesse.



Afflare, to blowe wynde.



Affluo, fluxi, fluere, to ouerflow or abunde.



Affore, to be presente.



Affrica, The thyrde parte of the worlde,
wherin is Carthage, Numidia, and all the 
countreys nowe called Barbarye.



Affricanus, a man of Affrike. Also the most
noble capitayne Scipio, was called Affri­
canus, bycause he subdewed that countrey
to the Romaynes.



Affrico, cas, caui, uel affrixi, to rubbe.



A fronté atque à tergo, A prouerbe signifieng
the conferrynge of thynges passed, with
the state of thinges present.

 

A ante G.

AGamemnon, was the generall Capy­
tayne of the grekes, atte the syege
of Troye.



Agamnestor, was kynge of Athenes.



Age, Go to. 



Agedum, go to yet.



Agellus, a lyttell fyelde.



Ager, agri, a fielde. Somtyme a territorie
belongynge to a towne, wherin is includid
fieldes, medowes, woddes, and waters.
Sommetime a manour with the demeanes.
sometyme the arable felde onely.



Agger, eris, a heape of stones or turfe. also
a bulworke, or a countremure to a fortresse
or campe in battayle, sometyme it sygny­
fieth a caulsey.



Aggero, aui, are, to heape vppe.



Agglomero, to make vppe on heape, by
addynge to.



Agglutino, naui, nare, to ioyne togyther.



Aggrauo, aui, are, to be bourdenouse or
chargeable.



Aggredior, gredi, to goo to, or come to, to
inuade, to begynne, to attempt.



Aggrego, aui, are, to gather to gyther.



Agilis, nymble, or lyght.



Agilitas, nymblenes, dexteritie.



Agina, wherin the beame of a payre of ba­
lance is hanged.



Aginator, he that is meuid with a litle gain.



Agiographa, bokes of holy scripture.



Agito, tare, to do often, to pryck, to compell,
to trouble, to persecute, to vexe, to consy­
der, to reuolue, to solycite.



Agmen, an hooste of men.



Agnati, kynsmen of the fathers syde.



Agnatum, that whyche is in byrthe more
than nede requireth.



Agnomen, the surname that I haue by my
father.



Agnosco, noui, noscere, to knowe.



Agnus, a lambe.



Ago, egi, agere, to do, to leade, to dryue, to
labour, to here, to speake, to pronounce, to
sayne, to goo. Nudi agunt, They go naked.
I extende or sprede. Radices agunt, They
sprede their rootes. I treate of a thynge,
I giue. Ago gratias, I giue thankes. I
brynge forthe, also to expell. Venena mem­
bris agit. It expellethe poyson oute of the
membres.
Pom. Mel.


Agolum, a staffe to dryue cattell with.



Agonia, fere 7 heuines, or vexation of mynd.



Agonisma, the rewarde of victorie.



Agonista, a champyon.



Agonizo, aui, are, I contende, or fyghte va­
lyantlye.



Agonothera, he that makethe a commune
game, and payethe the rewarde to theym
that do wynne it.



Agoranomus, he that setteth the pryce of
vyttayle, a tasker.



Agoræus, a markette manne, a haunter of
markettes.






Agrarius a landed man. Also he that fauo­
reth the lawes, whiche be made for the or­
derynge of possessions.



Agrarius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to landes
or possessions.



Agrestis, agreste, wylde growen, withoute
culture. Also he that is rude and beastlye,
without gentyll maners.



Agricola, a husbande manne.



Agricolator, the same.



Aggripetæ, they that do aske their portion
in diuision of landes.



Agrippæ, they whiche be borne with their
feete forewarde.

 

A ante H.

AHenum, a potte to heate in drynke.



Ahenus, a vesselle of whyte brasse or
copper, whyche is bryghte bothe
within and without.

 

A, ante I.
¶ 

Aio, ais, ait, I saye, thou sayest, he sayth.

 

A, ante L.

ALa, a wynge of a byrde, and a wyng
of a battayle, whyche is proprelye
of horsemenne.



Alacer, et alacris, alacre, quycke of spirite,
or of wytte, lusty of courage, mery, and he
that lyueth in hope: proprely he that is in
a meane betwene glad and sorie. Somtime
it betokeneth a man redy and willing, ther­
of commeth Alacritas, redynes or prompt­
nes of wyll. also feruentnes of mynde. 



Alatus, ta, tum, wynged.



Alauda, a larke.



Albarium, the parget of a wall.



Albedo, albetudo, albor, whytenes.



Albeo, bui, bère, to be whyte.



Albeus, et albeolus, a chessebourde.



Albico, aui, are, to make whyte.



Albugo, ginis, a whyte spotte in the eyen.
also the whyte of an egge.



Album, a table openly sette vp, wherin ey­
ther the names of officers, or some publike
decree is wrytten.



Albumen, albuminis, the whyte of an egge.



Alburnum, the fatte that is in some tree.



Albus, ba, bum, whyte.



Alcedines, et Alcyones, are byrdes of the
see, whiche do hatche their yong chykens
on the lande, and do lay their egges on the
sandes, in myddes of the wynter, and whan
the see is mooste troublous, if they do lay,
it becommeth sodaynly calme, and the stor­
mes and wyndes do ceasse, vntyl these bir­
des haue all hatched, and brought vp theyr
chykens and made them redy to flee: whi­
che is in the space of .xiiii. days. This birde
is lyttell more than a sparowe, his fethers
be purple of colour, myxt with whyte, and
hath a longe necke and a smal, his byl som­
what grene, longe, and sclender, and this
byrde is sene very seldome.



Alea, a dye, playinge at dyes. somtyme it si­
gnifieth chance. Alea fortunæ, The chance
of fortune. somtyme peryll.



Aleator, a dysar.



Alecula, a sprotte.



Ales, alitis, a byrde, sometyme it signifyeth
swyfte in fleing, or runnyng: as Alite plan­
ta, swyfte of foote.



Alexicacon, a remedy to putte away mys­
chiefe, or any yll thyng.



Alexipharmacum, the generall name of me­
dicines, whiche do expell syckenes.



Alga, reyte, or wedes of the see.



Algeo, alsi, algêre, to be in peyne, proprely
for colde, to chyll for colde.



Algor, grefe. sometime it signifieth colde.



Alias, an aduerbe, sygnifieth, or els, elles­
where, an other tyme, sometyme.



Alias res agis, Thou takest no heede what
is spoken.



Alibi, els where.



Alica, a drynke made of wheate brayed in 
a stone morter, the huskes of the wheate
beinge taken cleane away.



Alicubi, somewhere. aliubi. 



Alicunde, from some place.



Alicunde, from some place.



Alienigena, a straunger borne.



Alienigenus, na, num, that whiche comethe
out of an other countrey.



Alieno, naui, nare, to alienate, to putte a­
way, or putte of.



Abalieno, are, to separate, to put a sonder.



Alienus, na, num, diuers, vnlyke, not agreable.



Aliger, any thynge that hath wynges.



Alimentum, alimonia, sustynaunce, fode, or
lyuynge.



Alioqui, or els, excepte that.



Aliorsum, to some other place.



Alipedes, swyfte runnynge horses.



Aliptes, he that anoynteth a man, and a sur­
gion that healeth woundes.



Aliqua, by some place.



Aliquando, sometyme.



Aliquantisper, a lyttell whyle.



Aliquantum, aliquantulum, somewhat.



Aliquatenus, in some parte, by some reason.



Aliquid, some thynge.



Aliquis, some man. Aliquis est, He is a man
of no small estimation.



Aliquò, to some place.



Aliquorsum, towarde some place.



Aliquot, some, nor many, nor fewe.






Aliquoties, at sometymes.



Aliter, or els, contrary wise.



Aliunde, from an other place.



Alius, alia, aliud, other, or an other.



Allabor, labi, to flow by, sayl by, or rowe by



Allatus, brought.



Allecto, aui, are, to allure or drawe to, by
fayrenes, to allure.



Allectus, allured.



Allego, lexi, gere, to ascrybe, to cheese, to
assygne.



Allego, aui, are, to sende, to allege, or bring
forthe, to depute, or gyue auctoritie.



Allegoria, a figure or inuersion of wordes,
where it is in wordes one, and an other in
sentence or meanynge.



Alleluya, prayse ye our lorde.



Alleuo, aui, are, to lyfte vp.



Allex, & allux, the greatte toe, whanne he
lyeth ouer the nexte toe.



Alliatum, a sauce made with garlyke.



Allicifacio, feci, re, to allure, to drawe to.



Allicio, exi, licere, to allure.



Allido, si, ere, to squatte or throw any thing
agaynst the grounde or walles.



Alligo, aui, are, to bynde to.



Allium, garlyke.



Allophylos, a straunger.



Alloquor, to speake to.



Allubesco, to doo it gladdely, to obeye, to
fauour, to consente.



Allucinatio, a blyndenes of mynde.



Allucinor, to be deceyued in opynyon, to
fantasye.



Alludo, allusi, alludere, to doo a thynge in
iape, to speake merily, or consent. somtyme
it sygnifieth to speake some thynge, which
secretely hath some other vnderstandyng. 
Alludere ad hystoriam, to speke or do some
thynge agreable with somme hystorie be­
fore wrytten.



Alluo, lui, ere, to flowe nigh to, to washe as
the water dothe the grounde, whan it flo­
weth ouer it.



Alluuium, a floode caused by rayne, or by
ryuers whan they rise.



Alluuies is whan abundance of water mixt
with claye, couereth the grounde.



Almus, ma, mum, al thinge that norysheth
vs, proprely the erth is so called, alma tel­
lus, bycause we haue therof our sustinance. 
Sometyme it signifieth quiete, Almus dies,
A quiete day. in Virgile. 



Alma, a virgin hydde, or secrete.



Alnus, an alder tree. Somtyme it signify­
eth a shyppe or bote.



Alo, alui, alere, to nouryshe or fede.



Alonge, farre of.



Alopecia, a syckenes of the heed, whereby.
the heares do falle of.



Alpes, the mountaynes, whiche do depart
nowe Italy and Fraunce.



Altare, an altar.



Alter, rius, teri, an other, the other, one of
the two.



Alius, an other, the other Alter, the other,
the seconde. Sometyme it sygnifieth both.
Vnus aut alter, one or bothe. Vnus et alter,
The one and the other. 



Alter, teris, siue alteres, teris, poyses of lead,
made to lyfte vp with bothe handes, to ex­
ercyse men, whyche may not otherwyse la­
bour: wherof there be now many in Eng­
land, specially in the chambres of studentes.



Altercor, caris, to contende with wordes
one with an other on sondry partes.



Alternatim, by tourne, one at one tyme, an
other at an other tyme.



Alternis, nowe one, nowe an other.



Alternis diebus, sondrye dayes, where one
day is betwene.



Alternare, to do thynges by tourne, nowe
one and than an other.



Alternatio, succession by tourne.



Altero, aui, are, to alter or chaunge.



Alteruter, bothe the one and the other. also
or the tone or the tother.



Althæa, the great malowes.



Altilis, in plurali, altilia, all thynge that is
franked to make fatte, be it beaste, fyshe, or
foule. Altilis gallina, a henne franked or fed



Altisonus, he that maketh noyse from  aboue,



Altitonans, he that thoundereth, whiche
name the paynyms gaue to their god Iu­
pyter. 



Altiuolans, all thyng that flyeth hygh.



Altrinsecus, to the tone or the tother, to the
tone parte, betwene the one and the other,
in the higher parte.
Apulesus.


Altus, ta, tum, high, depe, proprely in the see.
it sygnifieth also excellent, glorious, ancient.
Vergilius.


Aluearium, et Alueare, a place where hiues
be sette. also a stocke of hyues.



Alueolum, et alueolus, a basket or mawnde,
also a culuerhole, a chessebourde, or tables
to playe on.



Alueus et aluus, a hyue for bees, a vessaile
to washe in, the bealy of any thing that lac­
keth lyfe. sometyme it signifieth a shyppe.



Aluini, they whiche be moche vexed with
freattynges in the bealy.



Alumen, alumme.



Alumnari, to nourse or brynge vp.



Alumnus, a sonne or scolar that is brought
vp of a man, as of his owne father, eyther
with sustinance, maners, or lernynge.



Aluta, lether proprely tawed. somtime it is
put for a bagge or a pourse.






Alutamen, any thynge made of lether.



Alutarius, a tawyer.



Aluus, the bealy. also a hyue.

 

A. ante M.

AMabilis, bile, amyable, worthye to
be loued.



Amabo, of felowship, a good felow­
shyp, a familiar word vsed among frendes.



Amabundus, he that is a great louer, or a­
morous.



Amando, aui, are, to countremaunde.



Amans, amantis, a louer be it man or woman.



Amanter, louyngely.



Amanuensis, a clerke or secretarye, alway
attendynge.



Amaracus, maioram.



Amo, aui, are, to loue hartily.



Amaresco, sci, scere, to waxe bytter, or to
be bytter.



Amaritudo, dinis, bytternesse.



Amarulentus, vexed with malyce.



Amasius et Amasia, he or she that louethe,
or is loued.



Amator, a louer, or he that is amorous.



Amatorculus, a small or symple louer.



Amatorie, lyke a louer.



Amatorium, a drynke charmed, to make a
manne a louer.



Amatorius, ria, rium, that whyche per­
tayneth to loue.



Cæsar com­
men. li.6.



Ambactus, a seruaunte.

 

Ambages, a cyrcuite of wordes, or a tale
drawen in length.



Ambagiosus, sa, sum, that aboundeth in su­
che fourme of speakynge.



Ambidexter, he that vseth bothe handes
lyke welle.



Ambigo, to compasse. also to doubte.



Ambigue, doubtefully.



Ambiguum, a doubte.



Ambio, iui, ire, to compasse, to seke for pro­
motion, to desyre, to praye, or intreate.



Ambitio, nis, inordynate desyre of honour
or auctoritie.



Ambitiosus, he that immoderately desy­
reth honour.



Ambitus, ambitus, a cyrcute: also the of­
fence of ambition, made by the lawes.



Ambo, bothe.



Ambrosia, was called of the Paynyms the
meate of goddis. Some do saye, that it is
an herbe of the kynde of Mugworte. 
rede in the addition.



Ambulacrum, a priuate place to walke in, a
walke or galerie.



Ambulatio, walkyng, and a walking place.



Ambulator, a walker or styrer.



Ambulo, aui, are, to walke or styrre aboute.



Amburo, bussi, rere, to bourne all about.



Amens, madde.



Amentum, a thonge, or that which is boun­
den to the myddes of a darte, or iauelyne,
to caste it.



Ames, amitis, a perche for a hawke.



Ametor, he that lacketh his mother.



Amice, frendely.



Amicinum, a canne or potte, wherout they
powre wyne.



Amicio, ciui, cire, to clothe, to putte on a 
garmente.



Amicitia, amitie or frendshyppe.



Amictus, cta, ctum, cladde.



Amictus, ctus, ctui, a garment or apparayle.



Amicus et amica, a frende, a louer.



Amicus, ca, cum, ioyned to a thyng, lacking
lyfe, signifieth profitable, or holsome.



Amita, my fathers syster, myne aunte.



Amitini, cosyn germayns by broder & sister.



Amitto, misi, tere, to suffre to depart, to lose
to sende, to lette passe, to take fro.



Amnis, a ryuer, or brooke.



Amodo, from hensforthe.



Amæno, naui, nare, to make mery, or glad.



Amænus, na, num, pleasaunt or dilectable.
Locus amænus, A delectable place.
Amænum ingenium, a pleasant wytte.



Amænitas, tatis, pleasure, dilectablenesse,
or myrthe.



Amolior, I remoue with great peyne.



Admolior, I put to, or sette vpon a thinge.



Amor, loue.



Amoueo, moui, mouère, to remoue, to put
from a place or a thynge.



Amphora, a measure, whiche euery waye
contayneth a foote. it may be vsed for euery
potte that is caryed aboute.



Amphorarius, he that beareth the potte, a
tankarde bearer.



Amplector, ti, to imbrace.



Amplio, aui, are, to make more, to draw to.



Ampliatus, a manne repried, or delayed in
iugement, vpon some difficultie or consy­
deration.



Amplitudo, greatnesse of power or maie­
stie, sometyme it sygnifyeth largenes, Ter­
re amplitudo, The largenes of the countrey



Ampliuagus, moche wandryng.



Amplius, more.



Amplus, pla, plum, large, wyde.



Amplustra, Amplustria, uel Aplustra, The
takclynge of the shyppe.



Ampulla, an oyle potte. Also a bottelle or
flagon, sometyme it signifyeth a thyng that
is blowen or puffed. Suetonius vseth that
worde for a drynkyng glasse.
Suetonius
in Domi­
tiano.


Ampullor, I swelle for pryde.



Amputo, taui, tare, to cutte of.



Amula, a water pot, and it may be vsed for




holy water potte. See Calepine. 



Amuletum, any thinge that is ordeyned a­
gaynst poysonynge.



Amurca, the mother or fome of all oyles.



Amussis, the masons or carpenters rule.



Amigdalus, an almonde tree.



Amigdalum, an almonde.

 

A, ante N.

AN, whyther, or if.



Anas, natis, a ducke.



Anatinus, lyke a ducke.



Anatarius, ria, rium, of a ducke.



Anathema, in holy Scripture betokeneth
separation, els where it signifyeth a thyng
offered or sette vp in a temple or churche,
as thynges offered and hanged vp.



Anathematizo, aui, are, to curse or gyue to
the deuylle.



Anatomia, anotomie or cuttyng of men by
phisytions, to consyder the inwarde par­
tes and membres.



Anceps ancipitis, doubteful.



Anchora, an anchore.



Ancile, a shielde without corners, such one
in the tyme that Numa was king of Rome,
was sene falle out of the skye.



Ancilla, a mayden seruant it was proprely
taken for a bondewoman.



Ancillor, to serue humbly and diligently.



Anclo, aui, are, to drawe wyne or other ly­
koure.



Anfractus, windinges and turnynges, spe­
cially in the grounde.



Angaria, a constraynt or compulsion.



Angelus, an aungelle.



Angina, a disease in the throote, called the
Quynse. 



Angiportus, a great hole in the erthe with
many tournynges, or that whyche hathe
none issue out, or a lane in a towne, whyche
leadeth the nexte waye to a strete, or that
whiche lyeth on an hauen, whereby mar­
chandyse is caried frome the water, or re­
caryed.



Ango, anxi, angêre, to tourmente or vexe.



Angor, anguyshe of body or mynde.



Anxietas, anxietudo, anguysshe or sorowe.



Anguilla, an eele.



Anguis, a snake.



Angularis, lare, cornerde.



Angulatim, cornerwise.



Angulosus, full of corners.



Angulus, a corner.



Angustia, straytnes, or perplexitie of mind.



Angustus, ta, tum, strayte.



Anhelitus, brethe or wynde of a man.



Anhelo, aui, re, to fetch wind, or draw breth.



Anhelus, he that drawethe his breathe
peynefullye.



Animaduerto, tere, to consyder, to take
heede, to sette my mynde, to beholde, and
to thynke.



Animaduersio, consyderacion, punishment.



Animæquius, m&ecedil;quia, quium, pacyente, or
sufferynge.



Animal, all thynge that hathe lyfe, and is
sensyble, commonly it is taken for a beaste.



Animalis, le, that wherin is lyfe.



Animans, idem quod animal, sauynge that
it is more larger. For it maye sygnyfye all
thynge that hath spirite, as welle in heuen,
as on erthe. 



Anima, the sowle. sometyme lyfe.



Animatus, animata, matum, that hath sowle
or lyfe.



Animo, aui, are, to gyue courage or bolde­
nesse, to quycken.



Animositas, boldenesse.



Animosus, bolde.



Animus, the mynde, the wyl. somtime it is
put for the soule: sometyme for affection or
delectation, sometyme for wynde or blast,
somtyme for wrathe, sometyme for a sowne.



Annitor, to resyste, or to helpe, to sette to
my mynde.



Annales, Histories of actes yerely done.



Annalis, le, Annarius, ria, rium, that whiche
is done yerely.



Annascor, to grow or to be borne by a place
or manne.



Anniculus, la, lum, that whyche is of oone
yere olde.



Annilis, le, aged.



Annilis fabula, an olde wyues tale, or a tale
without fruite.



Annona, vyttayles, sustynance, or lyuynge.
Somtyme it betokeneth fyndyng in borde
and apparayle.



Annonariæ expensæ, expenses in vitayle.



Annosus, sa, sum, aged.



Annoto, aui, are, to note, to intitle.



Annotinæ naues, shyppes that cary corne.



Annuatim, yerely.



Annuus, a yere.



Annus, a, um, that duryth one yere.



Anquina, the corde wherwith the sayle is
bounde to the maste.



Anquiro, to seke.



Ansa, the eare or handel of a potte or cup.
And sometyme it sygnifieth occasion. som­
tyme a bouckle.



Anser, a goose.



Anserinus, na, num, lyke a goose.



Antæ, the poostes on euerye syde of the
doore.



Ante, antea, before.






Ante alios, aboue other, before other, more
than other, or besyde other.



Antecapio, cœpi, capere, to preuent.



Antecedo, cessi, dere, to go before, to excel.



Antecello, cellui, lere, to excell or haue pre­
emynence.



Antecessum, payde before hande.



Antecœnium, a colation or drynkynge be­
twene dynar and supper.



Anteeo, iui, ire, to precede or excell, or goo
before.



Antefero, to putte before, or set more by.



Ante hac, before this tyme, or before
that tyme.



Anteloquium, the fyrst tourne in speaking.



Antelucanus, na, num, that which is before
daye lyghte.



Anteluco, aui, are, to wake before daye.



Anteluculo, before day lyght.



Antenna, the crossepiece wherto the sayle
is fastened.



Antepagmentum, a portall.



Antepono, sui, nere, to preferre.



Anterius, longe before.



Antes, outwarde pyllars or postes, wher­
by the house or frame is susteyned.



Antesignani, they whiche be next the stan­
darde, appoynted for to defende it.



Antesto, to excelle, or stande before.



Antestor, to make my iudge.



Anteuenio, ueni, nire, to preuente.



Anteuerto, to preuent.



Antiæ, the heare of a woman, that is layde
ouer hir foreheed, nowe gentylwomen do
call them their rolles.



Antica, all that is before vs.



Anticipo, aui, are, to preuente.



Antidotarius, a boke of medicines.



Antidotum, a medicine to expell poyson.



Antigraphum, an example.



Antilena, a peutrell.



Antiquarius, he that sercheth for antyqui­
ties, or redethe olde warkes, or vseth olde
forme of speakynge or writinge.



Antiquo, aui, are, to make voyde, to reduce
to the fyrste state, to repelle. Antiquare le­
gem, to repell a lawe.



Antiquus, a, um, auncient or olde. sometime
it signifieth noble or worshypfull.



Antiquitas, tatis, auncientie.



Antiquitus, of auncient or olde tyme.



Antistes, antistitis, a prelate.



Antistita, an abbesse or prioresse.



Antistitium, prelacy, or preeminence.



Antistitor, he that hathe ouer other pree­
mynence.



Antria, a Pumpe to drawe water.



Antrum, a denne.



Anularius, a ieweller that selleth rynges.



Anulus, a rynge.



Anus, nus, an olde wyfe.



Anus, ni, an arse.



Anxifer, he that causeth sorowe.



Anxius, anxia, carefull or heuye.



Anxietas, anxietudo, care or heuynesse.

 

A, ante P.

APage, remoue, putte away, or dryue
away. Also it hath a signification of
a more vehemency: as Apage hanc
caniculam, Away with this bytche: or, hens
away with this bytche.



Apage sis, lette be, gette the hens.



Apella, withoute a skynne. So be the Ie­
wes called of Horacius, bycause they be
cyrcuncyded.



Aper, apri, a boore.



Aperio, ui, ire, to open, to disclose. to ex­
pownde.



Apes uel apis, a bee.



Apex, apicis, the crowne of the heed, the	
toppe of euery thynge. it sometyme syg­
nifyeth a mytar.



Apexabo, the gutte whiche is ful of blode,
mixte with grease.



Aphrica, one of the thre partis of the world
wherof the inhabitantes be at this day cal­
led generallye Moores or Morynes, the
countreyes be nowe called Tunyse, Fese,
Marocke.



Apianus, na, num, that wherein bees doo
delyte.



Apiarium, the place where as hyues be sette.



Apiarius, he that nourisheth bees.



Apiastra, a byrde whiche doothe deuowre
Bees.



Apiastrum, smallage, an herbe, whiche hath lea­
ues lyke to blacke horehound, but great­
ter, and more tender, and are nat so rough,
and smelleth lyke a cytron, some do take it
for Marche.



Apicæones, shepe, hauynge smalle bodies,
and lyttell wolle.



Apicula, a yonge bee.



Apinæ, nuttes without shales.



Apionia mala, rounde appulles, whyche
I take to be they, that are called pome­
royall.



Apium, an herbe called ache, somtyme it is
taken for our commune persely.



Apologia, a defence or aunswere to a rebuke.



Apologo, aui, are, to requyre or aske.



Apologus, a fable, wherin beastes or trees
doo speake.



Apophoretum, a presente.



Apopthegma, matis, a shorte and quycke
sentence.



Apoplexia, a sodeyne palsey.



Apostata, a Rebelle. It is nowe vsed for




them, whiche do forsake the relygion, that
they haue once receyued.



Apostema, an impostume, wherin corrup­
ted humours haue recourse in any parte of
the bodye.



Apostolus, an apostel. it proprely signifieth
a messanger.



Apotheca, a wyne seller, or shoppe, wherin
thinges be sette to sale.



Appareo, rui, rêre, to appiere.



Apparitores, officers of iustice, attendyng
on the great ministers, to somon or attache
whom they wyll commaunde.



Apparitura, the offyce of a Sergeaunt or
baylyffe.



Apparatus, tus, apparaylynge or deckyng.
Apparatus belli, preparation for warres,
artyllerye.



Appellatio, a namynge, or appelynge to a
hygher iuge.



Appello, aui, are, to name or calle familiar­
ly to me. Also Ulpian the great lawyer wyl
haue it to sygnyfye, to wowe a mayden to
haue her virginitie. sometyme it sygnifieth
to arryue: Sommetyme to appeale to a
higher iudge. 



Appello, appuli, appulsum, to aryue. some­
tyme to apply or sette my mynde, to direct.



Appulsus, appulsus, commynge of beastis to
wateringe.



Appendeo, appendis, pendere, to hange by
or nighe.



Appendix, that which hangeth at an other
thynge.



Appendo, dis, dere, to hange vp, to waye in
a balance or beame.



Appeto, tii, tere, to desyre moche, to go to.
sometyme it signifieth to be at hande. Dies
appatebat, The daye was come, or at hand.
somtyme to wounde or stryke at, as, Leuans
se alis, os oculosque hostis, rostro et unguibus
appetit, Rysynge with his wynges, his ta­
lons and beke, he wounded the face & eies
of him that faught on the other parte.



Applaudere, to moue handes or feete for
ioye, or to beate any thyng to the ground.



Applico, applicaui, applicare, uel applicui ap­
plicere, to ioyne to, to laye to, or sette to,
or to applye.



Applodo, plosi, dere, supra applaudere.



Appluda, chaffe.



Apporto, aui, are, to brynge to.



Appositus, ta, tum, put to, or sette to. somtime
it signifieth conuenient, or to the purpose.



Apprime, chiefely, principally.



Approbus, very honeste.



Apricari, to sytte or go abrode in the ayre
or in the sonne.



Apricus, a place sette agaynste the sonne.



Aprilis, the moneth of Apryll.



Aprinus, bores fleshe.



Aprono in genua, to knele on my knees.



Aptitudo, aptenes.



Apto, aui, are, to ioyne, to agree two thin­
ges togither.



Aptus, ta, tum, apte, agreable, mete, neces­
sarye.



Apud, at, whan it is ioyned with a person,
it signifieth with.

 

A ante Q.

AQua, water.



Aquagium, a cundyte.



Aqualiculus, a lyttell trowgh.



Aqualicus, the panche.



Aqualis, A basyne to wasshe in mennes
handes.



Aquaricola, a place, wherin water is caste.



Aquariolum, Aquarium, a wasshyng place.



Aquaticus, that whyche haunteth the wa­
ter, or lyueth therin.



Aquatilis, the same.



Aquatus, ta, tum, that, wherinto water is
putte. Vinum aquatum, Alayed wyne.



Aqueus, a, um, watrye.



Aquila, an egle.



Aquilex, he that sercheth for water, or con­
uayeth it.



Aquilifer, the standarde bearer of the Ro­
maynes.



Aquilo, the northest wynde.



Aquilus color, russette.



Aquiminaria, all water pottes.



Aquitania, Guyen. 



Aquo, aui, are, to fetche or beare water.



Aquosus, sa, sum, full of water.



Aquula, lyttell water.

 

A ante R.

ARa, an Aultare.



Aranea, a copwebbe. Sommetyme a
spyder.



Araneus, a spyder.



Arator, a ploughmanne. and sommetyme a
ploughe oxe.



Aratrum, a ploughe.



Arbiter, tri, an arbitratour.



Arbitrarium, arbitrable.



Arbitrium, arbytrement, wyll, an espyall.



Arbitror, to trowe, to iudge, or awarde.



Arbor, et arbos, a tree.



Arborator, a lopper of trees.



Arborescere, to waxe to a tree.



Arboreus, ea, reum, of a tree.



Arbustum, a place where trees be sette,
proprelye Elmes, wythye, or Salowe,




it may be taken for an orchard, or a hoppe­
yarde, or a vyneyarde, where vynes doo
growe vp by trees.



Arbustum, a vyne that runneth vp in height
by a tree or a pole.



Arbusto, aui, are, to sette vines by trees.



Arbutum, an appull called a wyldinge.



Arbutus, a wyldyng tree.



Arca, a coffer.



Arcanum, a thynge secrete, or of fewe
knowen.



Arcatus, bent lyke a bowe.



Arceo, cui, êre, to strayne, to putte of, to
dryue away.



Arcera, a horse lytter.



Arcesso, to accuse, to calle for.



Archarius, a stewarde of householde.
rede in the Addition.



Archetypus, the firste example or paterne.



Archiater, tri, a chiefe phisytion.



Archimagirus, chiefe Coke.



Architector, aris, ari, to make craftily.



Architectura, the counnyng of diuysyng of
buyldynge.



Architector, et architectus, a diuiser of buil­
dyng, or a maister of the warkes.



Architriclinus, mayster of the feaste.



Archiuum, the treasorie of Minumentes
and euydences belongynge to a kynge or a
Cytie.



Arcto, aui, are, to strayne oftentymes.



Arctus, ta, tum, streyght.



Arcuatus, facioned lyke a bowe.



Arcubalista, a crossebowe.



Arcula, a lyttell coffer or caskette.



Arculus, a rolle that womenne doo weare
on their heedes, to beare water or mylke
easylye.



Arcus, a bowe, the vaut of a roufe.



Ardea, a byrde called a heron.



Ardelio, a besy manne medlynge with ma­
ny thynges.



Ardeo, arsi, dêre, to burne, to lowe ardent­
ly, or excedyngly, to make haste, to be con­
sumed, to desyre.



Ardens, tis, hasty in doinge, quycke witted.



Ardesco, to by hasty.



Arduus, high and difficult, hard to com to.



Area, a large place in a Cytie kepte e­
uer cleane, where marchauntes do assem­
ble: as I haue sene in dyuers cyties in Al­
mayne. Also it is euerye place marked oute
to buyld or to set an house in. Also a floore,
where corne is thrashed.



Areator, a thresher.



Arefacio, to make drie.



Arena, sande.



Arenaceus, ea, eum, sandy.



Arenatus, arenata, natum, pargetted with
lyme and sande.



Arenosus, sandye.



Arenula, fyne sande.



Areo, rui, rere, to be made drie.



Areola, a bedde in a garden.



Aresco, scere, to waxe drye, or to be made
drye.



Aretalogus, a bragger or a vaunter of his
owne vertues, sometyme a forger of lyes,
to make men merye.



Argentariam facit, he maketh or occupieth a
banke for exchaunge.



Argentarius, a banker, with whom men doo
make their exchaunge of money.



Argenteus, a, um, of syluer.



Argentum, syluer. sommetyme it sygnify­
eth plate.



Argilla, potters claye.



Argumentatio, the declaration of an ar­
gument.



Argumentor, mentaris, mentari, to argue 
or raison.



Argumentosus, sa, um, that whiche is done
with great reason.



Argumentum, is a raison, makyng a profe,
wherby one thinge is gathered by an no­
ther, and the whiche confirmeth that, whi­
che is doubtefulle, by that whiche is not
doubtefull. somtyme it signifyeth a mattier.
sommetyme coniecture, sometyme a shorte
exposition of that whiche foloweth, other
while sentence.



Arguo, gui, ere, to reproue, to impute, to
accuse, to shewe.



Argutiæ, sharpe wordes or shrewde.



Argutor, aris, ari, to speke sharply, shrewd­
ly, or pertely.



Argutulus, somewhat perte.



Argutus, ta, tum, reproued. sometyme it sy­
gnyfyeth shrewde, and he that can in spea­
kynge sharpely inserche a mans mynd. Al­
so shryll of voyce.



Arguti homines, they that speake moche in
fewe wordes.



Argutum, sclender or smalle.



Ariditas, et aritudo, dryenesse.



Aridus, drye.



Aries, arietis, a Ramme. Also a piece of
ordynaunce or engyne, made lyke a ram­
mes heed, to beate downe a walle. It is al­
so oone of the .xii. sygnes that the Sunne
passeth by.



Arietinus, of a ramme.



Arieto, taui, are, to hytte or throwe downe.



Arista, the berde of corne. sometyme it is
putte for wheate.



Arithmetica, aulgoryme, the scyence of
noumbrynge.



Arma, orum, harneyes and weapon. Also
the instrumentes of all maner of craftes,




Also standardes and baners, sommetyme
battayles.



Armamenta, tooles, instrumentes, all store
for warres or shyppes.



Armamentarium, an armorie or storehouse
for shyppes or ordinance.



Armarium, a study where bokes are laide,
or a drye larder.



Armati, armed men.



Armatura, armure.



Armator, an armorer.



Armentarius, the keper of the armorie.



Armentum, store of horse or nete. somtyme
it sygnifyeth cattell.



Armiger, geri, proprely an esquyer for the
body, as he, whiche alwaye attendynge a­
bout a knyght, beareth his hedpiece, his
speare, and his shielde, a custrell.



Armillæ, rynges that gentylmenne vsed to
weare aboute their armes, as at this daye
some men and women do vse, called brace­
lettes.



Armille neutri generis, a facyon of deceipt.



Armillum, a vessel wherin they vsid in their
sacrifice to put wyne.



Armipotens, puissant in armes.



Armo, aui, are, to arme.



Armus, the shoulder of a beaste, or the py­
nion of a fowle.



Aro, aui, are, to eare or plowe lande.



Arquatus morbus, the syckenesse calledde
the iaundise.



Arreptitius, he that is obsessed with an ylle
spyrite.



Arrha et arrhabo, ernest money.



Arrigo, rigi, ere, to water grounde.



Aripio, pui, ere, to take.



Arrogo, aui, are, to gyue to moche, to pre­
sume, to make myne heyre.



Arrogans, arrogant or presumptuous.



Arrogantia, arrogance, presumption.



Ars, artis, a crafte, subtyltie.



Arteria, a synewe lyke to a vayne, wherein
the spirite of lyfe doth walke, as the blode
dothe in vaynes.



Articulatim, from ioynte to ioynte.



Articulo, aui, are, to ioyne one ioynte to an
nother.



Articulus, a ioynt. also a moment or parcel
of tyme. also a colour of Rhetorike.



Artifex, a craftesman.



Artificium, the practise of a crafte.



Arto, aui, are, to strayne, to thraste togy­
ther, to wrynge.



Artocopus, a baker.



Artoptitius panis, breadde made of wheat,
whiche is harde and soore dryed, biskatte.



Artuo, aui, are, to cutte a sonder.



Artus, membres.



Aruina, talowe.



Arundinetum, a place where reedes doo growe.



Arundo, a rede, or cane.



Aruspex, he that telleth of thinges to come
by lokynge in beastes bowelles.



Aruum, a falowe felde.



Arx, arcis, a fortresse or castelle, specyally
standynge hyghe.

 

A ANTE S.

AS, assis, a pounde weyghte. In the
olde tyme in the partition of lande,
or other lyke thynge inherytable,
they called the hole, As, and the partes di­
uided, ounces.



Asarotum, peynted pament, whiche maye
not be swepte.



Ascendo, di, ere, to clymme, to ascende, to
goo vp.



Ascia, a chyppe axe.



Ascio, aui, to chyppe or cutte with an axe.



Ascio, is, to knowe surely.



Ascisco, sciui, scire. to presume, to take vpon
me a thinge.



Ascisco, ascisci, asciscere, to admytte, to take
to me.



Ascribo, psi, bere, to adde to, to attribute, to
impute.



Asscriptitius, he that is added to the nom­
bre of other.



Ascriptor, oris, he that foloweth the exam­
ple of an other, or he that writeth many co­
pies of others exaumples.



Asella, the arme hole.



Asia, one of the thre partes of the worlde.



Asinarius, an asseherde.



Asinus, an asse.



Asotus, prodigall, wanton, incontynente.



Aspecto, aspectaui, aspectare, to beholde
stedfastely.



Aspectus, syght, beholdynge.



Asper, vnpleasant, as well in sight and he­
rynge, as in taste. also harde or greuous.



Aspergillus, a holy water stycke.



Aspergo, aspersi, gere, to sprynge or caste
water.



Aspergo, ginis, a spryngynge of lycour.



Aspernabilis, he that is worthy to be dispy­
sed, or refused.



Aspernor, aris, ari, to despyse, to refuse, to
abhorre.



Aspero, asperaui, asperare, to make sharper
or harde.



Asphaltum, the deed see. Also a certayne
claye there founden, whiche ones burning,
wyll neuer be quenched.



Aspicio, aspexi, aspicere, to beholde, to see.






Aspiro, aui, are, to aspire, to loke to come
to a thynge, to blowe, to fauoure, to gyue
ayde, to gyue all my studye and wytte to
optayne a thynge, to touche, to go to.



Aspis, an adder or serpent.



Asporto, aui, are, to carie away.



Assatura, roste meate.



Assecla, a page, and he that foloweth in all
thynge the wylle of an other man.



Assector, aris, ari, to kepe company.



Assensor, oris, he that consenteth.



Assentio, si, tire, & assentior, to consente, or
assente.



Assentor, aris, to flatter in commendyng an
other mans actes that be yll.



Assequor, eris, qui, to folowe, to gette, to
optayne.



Asseres, bourdes.



Assero, ris, to sowe, or plante by. Also to
clayme, to affirme or approue, to manumise
or make free.



Assertio, an affyrmaunce.



Assessor, oris, associate to a man in offyce or
auctorytie.



Asseruo, to kepe diligentely, to take heede
of one.



Asseuero, as, are, to affyrme.



Assideo, I sytte with or by an other, or I
am assocyate.



Assido, is, dere, to reste me, to sytte downe,
to sytte by.



Assiduus, contynuall, or sufficient.



Assidui fideiussores, Sufficient sureties.



Assigno, aui, are, to assygne or appoint.



Assilio, ui, ire, to leape forth also Assilire, is
to leape, as a horse leapeth a mare.



Assis, is, a sawen bourde.



Assisto, stiti, assistere, to be here, to defende
a mannes cause.



Asso, aui, are, to laye bourdes, to roste.



Assuefacio, wonte.



Assuetudo, wonte, or custome.



Assuetus, accustomed.



Assula, a chyppe.



Assulatim, in chyppes.



Assumo, assumpsi, mere, to take, proprely it
sygnyfyeth to take to moche on me.



Assuo, ui, assuere, to sowe to, or piece.



Assurgo, rexi, gere, to ryse to an other bet­
ter than my selfe, to gyue place, to growe
vpwarde,



Assus, a, um, rosted.



Ast, but. also therfore, as well, moreouer.



Aster, a Sterre.



Asteriscus, a lyttell marke in wrytynge like
a Sterre.



Asthmaticus, he that drawethe his wynde
shorte.



Astipalor, to leane to, to fauour.



Asto, astiti, to stande by, to be present.



Astragalizo, to playe at dyse or tables.



Astragalus, the play at tables.



Astringo, to ioyne, or bynde togyther, to
bynde by couenant or promyse.



Astrolabium, an Astrolabe or instrumente
of astronomy.



Astronomia, the parte of astronomye that
concerneth iudicials and practise.



Astrologia, the speculation and reasonyng
concernyng the celestial or heuenly motions.



Astrum, a celestial body compacte of many
sterres, as a sygne.



Astruo, to buylde, to ioyne oone house to
an other, to fortifie, to affirme.



Astus, crafte or subtiltie.



Astu, craftily, or subtylly.



Astutiæ, subtylties.



Astutus, ta, tum, subtyll or crafty.



Asylum, a saynctuarie.

 

A, ante T.

AT, a voyce, whiche signifieth in the
wordes that do folowe, wrath or in­
dignation. Sommetyme it signifieth
(but yet) whyche is a discrepaunce in the
wordes that are spoken. Sommetyme it sy­
gnifyeth Sed.



At contra, contrarye wyse.



Attamino, aui, are, to fowle or defyle.



At at, tusshe, or fye.



Attauus, a greatte graundefather



Atar, tra, trum, blacke or darke.



Athleta, a greatte wrastler, or a great run­
ner at commune games.



Athletica, the craft of wrastlyng or runnyng.



Athletheta, the iuge in games of wrastling
or runnynge.



Atomus, a thynge so small, that it may not
be deuyded or made smaller. Also Atomi, 
be motes of the sonne.



Atque, and so, as it were.



Atqui, surely, all be it.



Atra bilis, Melancoly.



Attramentarium, an ynkehorne.



Attramentum, ynke, blache, that showma­
kers do occupie.



Atratus, a mourner that gothe in blacke.



Atri dies, dysmall dayes.



Atricus, a porter that kepeth a gate.



Atriensis, an huyssher of the halle.



Atrium, an inner courte.



Atrox, atrocis, cruell, terrible, or sowre in
countenaunce.



Attendo, di, dere, to take hede, to consyder,
to intende.



Attente, intentifely, with a fyxed mynde.



Attentio, a mynde sette or fyxed.






Attento, to attempte.



Attenuo, to appeyre, to make weaker.



Atticismus, a peculyare eloquence vsed in
Athenes.



Atticisso, to speake like a man of Athenes.



Atticus, ca, cum, of Athenes.



Attiguus, by or nigh ioynynge to.



Attineo, ui, êre, to pertayne. Attiner, it be­
semeth, it is conuenient.



Attingo, attigi, tingere, to touche almoste.



Attollo, to auaunce, to lyfte vp, to brynge
to, to take away.



Attonitus, ta, tum, amased or abashed.



Attrecto, aui, are, to feele.



Attribuo, bui, ere, to attribute, to put vpon
one by blamynge or accusynge, to assygne,
to commytte.

 

A ante V.

AVceps, a fowler or byrder.



Auctio, onis, an increase, or an open
sale of priuate goodes.



Auctio hastæ, portesale of the goodes of
men attaynted for treason or felonye.



Auctionarius, the salesman.



Auctionor, to sell by porte sale.



Aucto, aui, are, to gayne, to wynne.



Autor, he that begynneth any act, or is the
fyrste causer or procurer of any thynge.



Autoramentum, an indenture or obligation
wherby a man is bounden to do seruice.
Also ernest money.



Autorare, to bynde by erneste or wrytynge
to serue.



Autoratus, he that is bounde to serue, spe­
cyally in warres.



Autoritas, tatis, autoritie. sometime it signi­
fieth power.



Auctuarium, uel auctarium, ouer measure or
weyghte.



Aucupatorii, lyme twygges.



Aucupium, et aucupatio, byrding or fouling.



Aucupor, to go a byrdynge, or a foulyng, or
hawkynge. Also it signifieth, to serche by
craftye meanes.



Audacia, hardynesse.



Audacter et audaciter, boldly, aduenturously.



Audaculus, hardye, spoken in derisyon, or
contempte.



Audax, audacis, bolde or hardy, or trustyng
well in hym selfe.



Audeo, ausi, audêre, to dare, to presume.



Audio, diui, dire, to here, to consyder, to
perceyue, to graunt that whiche is asked,
to do the thynge that is commanded.



Auditio, herynge, or audience.



Auditorium, a place where menne do here
lessons, or propositions.



Auditus, tus, heryng, one of the fiue wyttes.



Aueho, to carye awaye.



Auellana, a fylberde nutte.



Auena, otes. Somtime it is put for an ote
strawe, or a wheate strawe, or reede.



Aueo, uêre, to couaite.



Aue, be thou gladde or ioyfull, as the vul­
gar people sayth. Reste you mery.



Auersor, aris, to abhorre, to refuse.



Auersus, backewarde, or on the backehalf.
also angrye.



Aduersus et auersus, forewarde and backe­
warde.



Auerto, ti, tere, to tourne away.



Auertor, teris, ti, to disdayne. sommetyme it
signifyeth to tourne away, to tourne fro.



Auerunco, aui, are, to tourne away, or putte
awaye.



Aufugio, gi, ere, to flee hense.



Augeo, auxi, gere, to increase.



Auctus, ta, tum, increased.



Augesco, sci, scere, to waxe greatte, or be
great, to be growen.



Augmento, mentaui, mentare, to increase, or
make more.



Augur, auguris, he that tellethe by byrdes
voyces, or by their flyeng or sytting, what
shall happen.



Auguro, as  et auguror, aris, rari, to telle by
suche crafte, what shall happen.



Augustus, noble, or fulll of maiestie. wher­
fore the emperours of Rome were and yet
be called Augusti.  Augustus is also the mo­
neth nexte after July.



Auia, a grandame.



Auiarium, a thycke wodde without waye.
Also a place where byrdes be kepte and
nourysshed.



Auiarius, a keper of byrdes.



Auicula, a lyttell byrde.



Auidus, a, um, couetyse.



Auis, a byrde.



Auitus, ta, tum, that whiche is lefte by aun­
cetours. Auitus ager, Olde inheritance.



Auius, a, um, without waye.



Aula, a haule. somtyme the palaice or court
of a prince.



Aulêa, tapesry, hangynges of noble men­
nes houses.



Auoco, caui, care, to calle away.



Auolo, aui, are, to flee away.



Aura, sometyme betokeneth a softe wynd,
somtyme brightnes, somtime fauour.



Auramentum, gyltynge.



Auraria, a golde myne.



Aurarii, gylters.



Auratus, ta, tum, gylte.



Aureæ, the hedstall of a horse.



Auris, an eare.






Aureus, a piece of golde in money.



Aureus, a, um, of golde.



Aurichalcum, latyn mettall.



Auricomus, he that hath heare as bryghte
as golde.



Auricula, the eare lappe.



Auricularius, a secretarye or priuye coun­
cellour.



Auriferum, that beareth golde.



Aurifex, ficis, a goldesmyth.



Aurificina, a goldesmythes shoppe.



Aurifur, a thefe that stealeth golde.



Auriga, a carter or driuer of a cart.



Aurigor, aris, to driue a cart or some thing
lyke. Also to gouerne.



Auriscalpium, an eare pyker.



Auritus, greate eared.



Auro, aui, are, to gylte.



Aurora, the mornyng, or sonne risynge.



Aurum, golde.



Ausculto, aui, are, to here diligently, or giue
good eare.



Auspex, auspicis, idem quod augur. Also it
signifieth the persone that maketh the ma­
ryage on the mannes parte. Also the chiefe
capytayne in warres. 



Auspicium, the sygne or token shewed by
byrdes of thynges that shall folowe. Also
it betokeneth fortune gouernance, or dispo­
sition of a capytayn. Also it is a token or si­
gnification of thynges to come.



Auspicor, aris, cari, to take lykelyhode. Al­
so to begynne or entre into a busynesse.



Auster, tri, the southe wynde.



Austerius, sowre or sharpe. Also soore or
without pitie.



Austro, aui, are, to make moyste.



Aut, or, either.



Autem, verily, but, or els.



Autographum, his owne hande wrytynge.



Autumo, to suppose, to affirme.



Autumnus, haruest.



Auunculus, the vncle of the mothers side.



Auus, the grandfather.



Auxilior, aris, ari, to ayde or helpe.



Auxiliarius, he that commethe in ayde of
an nother.



Auxilium, ayde, or helpe,

 

A, ante X.

AXis mundi, is a lyne imagined to go
streight from the north to the south,
dyuydynge the worlde as it were in
two partes: at the endes are supposed to
be two poyntes in heuen, whiche are cal­
led the northe pole and the southe pole.



Axuggia, swynes grease.



 

¶ B, ante A.

BAcca, a berye, as a baye
bery, an hawe berye, an
eglantine berie.



Baccatus, garnysshed
with precious stones.



Bacchanal, lis, the place
where the solemnitie of
Bacchus was kepte.



Bacchanalia, feastes of the paynyms, whi­
che they dydde celebrate with all abhomi­
nations of lechery.



Bacchar, a wyne potte. It maye be called a
quaxinge potte.



Bacchor, aris, ari, to celebrate the feaste of
Bacchus, to runne vppe and downe lyke a 
madde man.



Bacchus, amonge the Paynims the god of
wyne or drunkennes.



Baculus, a staffe.



Balius, a horse of bay colour.



Baiæ, arum, a place in the royalme of Na­
ples, where be naturalle bathes of warme
water bothe plesant and holsome: And by
translation some poetes do so call all other
naturall hote bathes.



Baiulo, aui, are, to beare.



Baiulus, a porter or cariar of bourdens.



Balæna, a greatte fishe, whiche I suppose
to be a thurlepoll.



Balanus, a kynd of acornes. it is also a sup­
positorie to helpe them that be costife. All­
so a swete oyntment made of Mirabolanes. 



Balo, aui, are, to blete lyke a shepe.



Balbucinor, aris, to maffle in the mouthe.



Balbus, he that can not pronounce well his
wordes whan he speaketh.



Balbutio, iui, ire, to stamer or stutte.



Balinea, a bayne or a bathe.



Balius, balia, lium, baye colour.



Balista, a crossebowe, or a brake. It may be
vsed for a gunne.



Balnearia, all thinges belongyng to a bain.



Balnearius, of a bayne, Balneatorius. 



Balneator, the keper of a bayne, or he that
serueth in a bayne.



Balneum, a priuate bayne.



Balnea pluraliter, a commune bayne.



Baltheus et baltheum, a belt, a sworde girdel.



Bambatium, cotton.



Baptisterium, a bathe or vessell to wasshe in
the body. A dienge vate, a fonte.



Barathrum, a vnmeasurable depenes.



Baratro, an vnthrift that in lechery & glot­
tony deuoureth his substance.



Barba, a berde.



Barbari, in the olde tyme were all people,
excepte grekes. proprely it be they, which




do speake grossely, without obseruynge of
congruite, or pronounce not perfectly, spe­
cially Greke or latyne. Also they that ab­
horre all elegancie. Moreouer it signifieth
them, whyche be without letters, fiers or
cruelle of maners or countenaunce, bar­
barouse.



Barbaria, the countreye where dwellythe
people rude or beastly.



Barbaricarii, weauers of cloth of baudekin.



Barbaricus, barbarous.



Barbarismus, the corrupte fourme of spea­
kynge or pronouncynge.



Barbatus, ta, tum, berded.



Barbitium, the berde.



Barbiros, an instrument of musyke, whiche
I suppose is that, that men call doulsimers.



Bardiacus, a garment.



Bardocucullum, a thrummed hatte, or a she­
pardes cloke.



Bardus, a foole. Somtyme a mynstrel that
syngeth iestes or fables.



Barrire, to braye lyke an olyphant.



Barritus, the brayinge of an oliphant.



Barrus, an olyphaunt.



Basia, honest kysses, swete kysses.



Basiator, a kysser.



Basiatio, a kyssynge.



Basilica, a place where people do assemble
for suites in the lawe, and ciuile iugementis
be exercised, and counsayles holden. Also
it maye be taken for a halle, or other large
place, where suiters do attende, or men do
wayte on rulers, or great feastes be kepte.
It also sygnifyeth a cathedral churche.



Basilica nux, a wall nutte.



Plaut. in
Epi.



Basilicon, a kynges robe.



Basilicus, ca, cum, royall.



Basilicé, royally.



Basilicanus, he that kepeth the place called
Basilica. 



Basiliscus, a Cocatrice, whiche is a serpent
in the desertes of Aphrica, with a whyte
cyrkle aboute his heed, hauynge a sharpe
heed, redde eyen, and is somewhat blacke
of colour, and is so venymous, that he sle­
eth men and beastes with his breth, & with
the syght of his eyen.



Basis, the foote of a pylar, or that whiche
susteyneth any lyke thynge. Also it signifi­
eth the foundation or grounde of a matter.



Batris, a vessell with a longe handell.



Batillus, a fyre panne.



Battiola, a wyne potte or flagone.



Batuo, i, ere, to beate with a rodde.



Batus, a measure for wyne or oyle.



Baubare, to barke lyke a dogge.



Baxiæ, slyppers, proprely of phylosophers,
or suche other.

 



Beatus, is he, whiche hath abundaunce of
all thynge that is good, and is perfecte in
all thynges that be worthy prayse, or ought
to be desyred of a good man. sometyme it is
taken for noble or fortunate.



Beatitudo et beatitas, is a heape of good
thynges gathered togyther, of it selfe suf­
ficient without lacke, and a very perfection
accordyng to vertue.



Bellaria, bankettynge dysshes, as tartes,
marchepaynes, and other lyke.



Bellarius, ia, um, apte for the warre.



Bellator, a warryour.



Bellatrix, a woman warriour.



Bellatulus, bellatula, a wanton worde, why­
che is as moche to say, as lyttell fayre one,
well fauoured chylde, praty mayden.



Bellax, acis, vsed or haunted in warres.



Bellicosus, fiers or warlyke.



Bellipotens, puissant in battayle.



Bello, and Bellor, aris, ari, to make warre.



Bellus, la, lum, fayre, pleasant, good.



Bellulus, la, lum, somewhat fayre.



Bellum, signifieth al the tyme that the war­
res do contynue. also battayle or warre.



Bellua, a great cruell beast or a monster.



Beluata, tapesry, wherin is wrought or pain­
ted the fygures of beastes.



Beluinus, na, num, beastely. Beluina rabies,
A beastly furye.



Bene, well, honestly, or prosperously.



Bene de te mereo, I intreate the wel, Thou
arte beholden vnto me.



Benedico, dixi, cere, to prayse, to saye welle
of a manne.



Benedicus, a man wel tunged, or faire spoken



Beneficiarius, he that receyueth a benefitte
or good tourne of an other.



Beneficus, he that is beneficiall or lyberall.



Bene uertere, to turne to good. Precor deum,
ut hæc res bene uertat tibi, I pray god this
thynge may tourne the to good, or maye be
for thy profite.



Bene volo tibi, I wolde the good.



Beneuolus, fauourable.



Beneuolentia, fauour or good wylle, an in­
tente to do well.



Benignus, na, num, gentylle, benygne, and
bounteouse.



Benignitas, bounteousenes.



Beo, aui, are, to comfort, to make happye.



Berillus, is that whiche is commonly called
Crystalle.



Bes, bessis, a waight of. viii. ounces.



Bestia, a beaste.



Bestiarii, men whiche in olde tyme faughte
with beastes in the syghte of the people.



Beto, to walke forthe.

 


Varro.




Bibaculus, he that drinketh often.






Bibax, cis, bibosus, a great drynker.



Biblia, the wyfe of Duilius the Romayne,
whiche was of so greate chastitie, that she
was at that tyme an example, whan it. was
a thynge monstrous to here of vnchastitie.



Bibliopola, a stacyoner, or a boke sellar.



Bibliotheca, a lybrary.



Bibo, bibi, bere, to drynke.



Bibulus, la, lum, that souketh vp shortly.



Biceps, bicipitis, that which hath. ii. heedes.



Biclinium, a chambre with. ii. beddes.



Bicornium, that whiche hath two hornes.



Bicorpus, that whiche hath two bodies.



Bidental, a place where they vsed to sacry­
fyce shepe, whan any house was bourned
with lyghtnynge.



Bidentes, shepe with. ii. teth, called in some
place hogrelles, or hogattes.



Biduum, the space of two dayes.



Biennis, bienne, any thing of two yeres old.



Biennium, the space of two yeres.



Bifariam, in two partes, or two maner of
wayes.



Bifarie, the same.



Bifera arbor, that beareth twyse in a yere.



Bifidus, clefte.



Bifores, that hath two doores.



Bifrons, he that hath two foreheedes.



Bifur, a double thefe, or he that hath sto­
len twyse.



Bifurcatus, ta, tum, double forked.



Biga, a carte drawen with two horses.



Bigamus, he that hath hadde two wyues.



Bigenera, beastes commen of two sondry
kyndes.



Biiugi, cattaylle or beastes yoked two to­
gyther.



Bilanx, lancis, a beame with two balances.



Bilbilis, a towne in Spayne.



Bilibris, Bilibre, waying two poundes.



Bilinguis, double tunged.



Bilis atra, the humour of Melancoly, pro­
prely that whiche bryngeth a man to fransy
or madnesse.



Biliosus, he that hath abundaunce of that
humour.



Bimaritus, he that hath had two wiues.



Bimembris, of two partes, hauynge two
membres.



Bimestris, two monthes olde, or two yere,
accompted of the moone.



Bimulus, of two yeres age.



Bimus, of two yeres.



Binus, na, num, two, idem quod duo. Binæ
litteræ, two letters. Bini tabellarii, two mes­
sangers, bina iuga boum, two yoke of oxen



Binarius numerus, the numbre of two.



Binominus et binominis, he that hath two
names.



Bion, the name of a philosopher.



Biothanatos, he that is violently slayne.



Bipalium, a spade to dygge with.



Bipara, she that hath had two byrthes.



Bipatens, open on bothe sydes.



Bipennis, hauynge twoo wynges. Also a
twyebyll, wherwith carpenters doo make
theyr mortaises.



Bipertior, iris, tiri, to diuyde in two partes.



Bipes, pedis, hauynge two fete.



Bipedalis, et Bipedaneus, twoo foote longe
or brode.



Biremes, shyppes with two toppes, also shippes, hauing
ii. raunges of ores.



Bis, twyse.



Bisaltæ, a people in Scythia.



Bisellium, a seate or fourme, wheron two
men onely may sytte.



Bisextus, one day added to, in foure yeres.



Bisextilis annus, the leape yere.



Bison, tis, a beeste hauyng oone horne, and
a very longe mane.



Bistonis, a citie, and also a greate meare or
poole in the countrey of Thrace.



Bisulcus, ca, cum, clouen footed.



Bythynia, a royalme in Asia, whiche nowe
the turke hath.



Bithynium, a citie in Bithynia.



Bitumen, a kynde of naturall lyme, wherof
the olde walles of the Cytie of Babylon 
were made.



Biuium, a way hauynge two pathes.



Bizen, a cytie of Thracia, of Plynie  called
Bizian.
Plin. li. 4.
 

B ante L.

BLesus, he that stamereth, omittynge
some letters in speakynge.



Blandicus, he that flattereth.



Blandidicus, a fayre speaker, or flatterer.



Blandior, iris, iri, to flatter, to speake fayre
for aduauntage.



Blanditiæ, flatterynge, fayre speche.



Blasphemia, cursynge, reprochynge, com­
monly blasphemy, whiche is nowe onely re­
ferred to the despite of god.



Blasphemo, aui, are, to curse, to reproche,
to speake in the derogation or despyte of
an nother.



Blatero, aui, are, to bable in vayne, and from
the pourpose.



Blatta, is proprely the longe flye that fly­
eth in the leame of a candell, and is of the
kynde of mothes. It is also a silke worme:
and blatteus, beinge an adiectiue, is purple
colour. Vestis blattea, a purple garment.



Blattaria, an herbe, also called Verbascon.



Blax, softe, delicate, wanton, that can not de­
cerne thinges, and whiche vaynely bosteth
hym selfe.






Blepharo, onis, he that hath great browes.



Bleptæ, a people in Aphrike, whiche haue
their visages in their breastes.



Blittus, an herbe being of the kynde of be­
tes, hauynge no sente. Blittea meretrix, an
vnsauorie queane.

 

¶ B ante O.

BOa, a serpent in Italy, so greatte and
large, that on a tyme whan one was
kylde, there was a chylde all hoole
founde in his bealy, as Plinie writeth.
Plin. lib. 8.
capi. 14.


Boarium forum, the markette place, where
oxen be solde.



Bocchyris, a mans name.



Bodellium, a kynde of sweete smellynge
gumme.



Boemia, the royalme of Boeme. 



Boeotia, a countrey in Grece, wherin was
the cytie of Thebes.



Bætis, a ryuer in Spayne by the countrey
of Granado.



Boiæ, gyues or fetters.



Boii, people of Germany, also the people of Beuar or
Berne, and the Marches therof.



Boletus, a musherom.



Bolis, idis, a darte with wylde fyre.



Bolus, a masse or lumpe of mettall, or other
lyke thynge.



Bombitatio, the noyse that bees make.



Bombus, a great sowne or noyse, as it were
of a trumpe, or gunne, a bownce.



Bombycinus, na, num, of sylke, Bombycina
uestis, A garment of sylke.



Bombix, icis, a sylke worme.



Bonæ fidei possessor, a feffee of truste.



Bonaria, calmenes of the see.



Bona uenia, By your lycence, No displea­
sure to you.



Boni consulas, take it in good parte.



Bonitas, goodnesse, honestie and iustyce.



Bonum, good, whiche is contrary to yll.



Bonus, a good man: Also beneuolent, pea­
syble, lyberall, playne, easye to speake to,
worshypfull, treatable, mercyfull.



Boo, oas, are, to belowe lyke a cowe.



Bootes, a sterre whiche foloweth Char­
les wayne.



Boreas, the northesterne wynd.



Boreus polus, the northe sterre, callyd the
lode sterre.



Boristhenes, a great ryuer in the countreye
of Scythia.



Borith, a herbe that fullers vse.



Bos, bouis, a rother beaste, be it bulle, oxe,
or Cowe.



Bosphorus, the name of a parte of the see,
whiche lyeth in two sondry costes: one by
Constantinople, the other more northe.



Bostar, an oxe house.



Bostrychites, a precious stone lyke to wo­
mennes heare.



Botrys, a cluster of grapes.



Botrytes, a precious stone lyke to a blacke
graape.



Botulus, a puddinge made of the inwarde
of a rother beaste.



Bouatim, lyke an oxe.



Bouicida, a slauter man.



Bouile, an oxe stalle.



Bouillæ, larum, a town not far from Rome.



Bouinator, he that with great noyse crieth
out on another man.



Bouinor, aris, to belowe out lyke a cowe.

 

¶ B ante R.

BRabeuta, he that is ordeyned a iuge
in any game of wrastlynge, runnynge,
or leapynge.



Bracca, that kynde of mantell, which nowe
commeth out of Irelande, or a longe gar­
ment made of rough frise.



Braccharii, the makers of suche clothe.



Brachiale, the wrestebone of the hande.



Brachialia, bracelettes, whiche some gen­
tylmen and gentyll women doo vse aboute
theyr armes.



Brachiatus, that whyche lyke an arme hol­
deth any thinge vp, a proppe, or shore.



Brachium, an arme.



Brachylogia, shortenes of speche.



Bracman&ecedil;, philosophers of Inde.



Bractea, thynne plates of mettalle, horne,
or wodde.



Bractearius, a worker of plates.



Bracteator, the same.



Bracteola, leaues of golde or syluer.



Bragada, a ryuer nere to Vtica.



Branchiæ, the gylles of a fyshe.



Branchos, the rewme or cattarre, whiche
falleth downe by the chekes.



Brassica, Colewortes, proprely Cabeges.



Brauium, the rewarde for wrastlynge, run­
nynge, or leapynge, commonly called the
chiefe game.



Breno, a capitayne or leader of the frenche
men called Galli, whiche, buylded Verona
a citie of Venece.



Brephotrophia, an hospitalle, where chyl­
dren be kepte and nouryshed.



Breue, Shortly, et breuiter, et breui,



Breuiloquus, he that speaketh his mynd in
a fewe wordes.



Breuiloquium, a short fourme of speakynge.



Breuiloquentia, the same.



Breuitas, shortenesse.



Breuis breue, Shorte.






Breuiarium, a brigement.



Briareus, a gyant, whiche was of an exce­
dynge greatnesse.



Britannia, Brytayne, whiche doth contein
Englande, Scotlande, and wales.



Britannus, et Brito, a man of that countrey.



Bronchus, the inner parte of the throte.



Bronchi, they whyche haue their mouthe
and tethe standyng farre out, tut mouthed.



Bruchus, a flye, whyche eateth corne, as
it groweth.



Bruma, wynter.



Brundusium, a citie in the royalme of Naples.



Bruseum, an herbour or hedge made with
thornes and briers wounde togither.



Brutii, people in the royalme of Naples,
ioynynge to Sycile.



Brutus, dul and grosse witted like to a beest.



Brionia, an herbe called withwynde.



Brisso, aui, are, to bruse oute.

 

B ante V.

BVbalus, a beaste called a bugill.



Bubastis, a cytie of Aegipte.



Bubo, a shriche oule. also a botche.



Bubsequa, a coweherde.



Bubulcito, tas, to playe the herdeman.



Bubulcus, a herdeman.



Bubile, an oxe house.



Bubulus, la, lum, that whiche longeth to an
oxe or cowe, as Lac bubalum, cowe mylke.



Bucardia, a stone lyke to a bugles harte.



Bucca, the holownes of the cheke.



Buccea, a morsell.



Buccella, the same.



Buccellatum, breadde called byskat.



Buccina, a trumpette.



Buccino, aui, are, to blowe a trumpette.



Buccinum, the sowne of a trumpette.



Buccones, they whiche haue great chekes.



Bucculenti, idem.



Buccula, a lytell cheke. Also that parte of a
helmet, wherby wynde is taken.



Bucentarius, a great shyppe or carrike.



Bucentes, styngynge gnattes.



Bucentrum, a goodde prycke.



Bucephalus, an oxe heed. and the horse of
Alexander the great was so called.



Bucera armenta, herdes of nete. Bucolica,
the same.



Bucula, a heckfar.



Buculus, a bullock, or steere.



Bufo, onis, a tode.



Buglossa, an herbe called langedebese, whiche is com­
monly callyd Borage. Al­
so a fyshe called a sole.



Bugones, bees.



Bulbito, aui, are, to caste durte on one: pro­
prely it is of chyldren, whiche nourysses
do name cackynge.



Bulbus, wyld garlyke hauynge a leafe lyke
to a lylly. it is taken generally for all rotes
that be rounde.



Bulga, a male of lether, wherin clothes be
caried.



Bulimia, great famyne or hunger.



Bulis, a name of a citie.



Bulla, a tablette or other thynge hanged a­
boute ones necke, proprely whan it is ho­
lowe. A bobell of water, somtyme the heed
of a nayle, otherwhyles studdes in girdels
or other thinges.



Bullatus, he that is garnyshed with tablet­
tes or studdes.



Bullio, iui, ire, to boyle, or sethe.



Bullare, to bubble, as water whan it boy­
leth.



Bumastos, a great teate.



Bumelia, a kynde of ashe.



Bupina, great thurste.



Bupodes, great feete.



Bura, or Buris, the hynder part of a plough
whiche is croked.



Burcana, an ile in the occean of Germany.



Burdo, onis, a mulette.



Burgundia, Burgoyne.



Busyris, a tyraunt, whyche was kynge of
Aegypte.



Bustum, a place where deade bodyes haue
ben brente.



Buteo, a kynde of hawkes, whyche hathe
thre stoones.



Buthysia, was called a great sacrifice, suche
as Hecatombe is.



Butyrum, butter.



Buxentum, a towne that the grekes calle
Pyxunta.



Buxeta, a place where boxe trees growe.



Buxus, or Bussus, box tree.



¶ B ante Y.

BYrsa, a hyde of a beaste.



Byssus, fyne sylke.



Byzantium, a citie of Thrace now cal­
led Constantinople, whiche was somtyme
buylded by a kynge of Spartane, called
Pausania, wherof the people and inhabitan­
tes were called Byzantæ. Afterward it was
augmented by Constantine the emperour,
and was the chiefe and heed of all the em­
pire orientall.



Byzari, fantasticall men, and of straunge in­
uentions.



Byrseus, a tanner, or cordynar.



Byssus, a maner of fyne flaxe or lynnen. I
suppose it to be cotten.








C ANTE A.

CABALLI, peple of Asia.



Caballus, an horse. yet
in some partes of Eng­
lande, they doo calle an
horse a cable.



Cabyle, a cite in Thracia



Cabyria, a cytie of the
lower Asia, all thoughe
Cabyrii, be people in India.



Cacabus, a pot or cauldron, wherin meate
is sodden.



Cacus, a gyant, whome Hercules  dyd flee.



Cacabo, as, are, to calle lyke a pertryche.



Cacod&ecedil;mon, an yll spirite.



Cachinnus, a scorne, or a lowde lawghter
in derysyon.



Cachinnor, aris, ari, to laugh immoderately
and with a loude voyce.



Caco, cacaui, care, to shyte.



Cacaturio, idem.



Cacoéthes  gen. neut.  an yll maner.



Cacosyntheton, an yll or defourmed com­
posytion.



Cacula, a page.



Cacumen, the toppe of a hylle.



Cado, cecidi, cadere, to falle, to dye.



Cadere, to happen.



Cadere causa, to be nonsuite in an action.



Cadere formula, idem.



Cadauer, eris, a dead body, or carrayn.



Caducus, ca, cum, fallynge, decayinge. Ca­
ducus morbus, the fallynge euyll.



Caducarii, men hauyng the fallyng euyll.



Caducor, ceris, duci, to be ouerthrowen.



Cadul&ecedil; gutt&ecedil;, drypyng of rosted meate.



Cadiuus, ua, uum, that whiche falleth by it
selfe, as Cadiua folia, leaues fallyn downe
by them selfe. Cadiua poma, appulles fal­
len from the tree.



Cadus, a wine vessel, it may be taken for a pipe.
rede in the Addition, and also
in the table of measures.
Not found in the table of measures.


Caduceus, et Caduceum, a rodde, whiche
poetes supposid that Mercury bare in his
hande, as messanger of Iupiter. 



Caduceator, an ambassatour or Herault sent
for peace, or to take a truse.



Cadurcum, a keuerlede of lynnen, mooste
proprely a quilte.



Cadiscus, a vessell wherin lottes for electi­
on or consent of a multitude be put.



Cadmus, the name of a Prynce, whyche
browghte oute of Phaenicia into Greece
syxetene letters, and was the fyrste that 
wrate in prose, and founde out the fusynge
and castynge of mettalles.



C&ecedil;cias, the easte northest wynde.



Cæcus, ca, cum, blynde, also darke.



C&ecedil;ci morbi, syckenesses which be not ap­
parant: the causes wherof be hydde from
phisitions.



C&ecedil;cilia, a sloworme that is blynde.



Cæcutio, tiui, tire, to se but lyttell, to be half
blynde.



Cæculto, aui, are, to haue a dymme sight.



Cæco, cavi, are, to make blynde.



Cædes, dethe, slaughter or murder.



Cædo, dis, c&ecedil;cidi, cedere, to beate, or whyp,
to cutte, to stryke, to kylle, to breake. Cæ­
dere ianuam saxis, to breake the doore with
stoones.



Cedo, to departe, to gyue place, to obeye.



Cedere bonis, to leaue the goodes.



Cedere iuri, to gyue ouer a ryght or tytle.



Cede manum, gyue me thy hande.



Cedere, to succede.



Cedo, say, Cedo cuium puerum, Tel or say,
whose chylde or seruant.



Cedo, gyue, Quin tu mihi argentum, cedo,
But yet gyue thou me thy money.



C&ecedil;dua sylua, woddes vsed to be cutte, Co­
peyses.



Cæsim, edgelinge. Also at one cutte or
choppe.



Cælum, heuen or the firmament. also a gra­
uynge yron.



Cœlestis, c&ecedil;leste, heuenly, or of heuen.



C&ecedil;licus, ca, cum, idem.



C&ecedil;litus, heuenly.



C&ecedil;lites, heuenly creatures.



C&ecedil;licola, he that inhabiteth heuen.



C&ecedil;lebs, a syngle man or woman. Also euery
chaste persone.



C&ecedil;libatus, a single lyfe without mariage.



Celsus, a, um, hygh.



Celius mons, a mountayne in Rome.



C&ecedil;lo, aui, are, to graue in mettall.    



C&ecedil;mentum, morter, or any other grosse mat­
ter, wherwith walles be made.



C&ecedil;mentarii, daubers, pargetters, rowghe
masons, whiche do make onely walles.



C&ecedil;mentitius, a, um, of morter.



Cæne, a citie.



C&ecedil;pe, an oynyon.



C&ecedil;pula, a chybboll.



C&ecedil;pi, the preter perfect tense of Capio, I
haue taken.



C&ecedil;ruleus, a blewe colour.



C&ecedil;ra, waxe. Also C&ecedil;re were writynge ta­
bles couered with waxe.



C&ecedil;ro, aui, are, to laye waxe on any thinge.



C&ecedil;ratura, the waxinge.



C&ecedil;reus, c&ecedil;rea, c&ecedil;reum, of waxe. Also fatte
or tydye.



C&ecedil;ratum, a seared clothe.



C&ecedil;refolium, an herbe callyd cheruyll.



Cæreus, a taper, or waxecandell.



C&ecedil;reolus, a size candell.






Cærulus, la, lum, et Cæruleus, lea, leum, blewe
of coloure.



Cærosus, a, um, that whiche is myxte with
waxe.



Cærium, a soore, whiche is lyke to a ho­
nye combe.



Cæroma, an oyntment made with oyle and
netes dunge, wherwith men that wrastlyd
vsed to anoynte their bodies. Also it sygni­
fyeth the place where wrastlers were an­
noynted.



C&ecedil;rete, an ancient citie in Tuskay.



C&ecedil;rinthe, thre leaued grasse, whiche brin­
geth furth whyte hony suckles, called cly­
uer grasse.



Cæsar, the emperour.



Cæsarea, a citie in the countrey of Palestina.



Cæsaraugustana, a citie in the realme of Ar­
ragon.



Cæsareus, ea, eum, pertaynynge to the em­
peroure.



Cæsaries, heare, or a bushe of heare.



C&ecedil;senna, a citie in Italy.



C&ecedil;sa, a waipon, somtyme vsed in Fraunce.
it is also a parte of an oration, not conclu­
dynge a sentence: as it were a pyece of a
sentence.



C&ecedil;sura, a piece as it were cut of from the
remenaunt, proprely of a verse.



C&ecedil;strum, an instrumente, wherwith iuorye
was bored. Also a weapon lyke a dagger.



C&ecedil;sitium, a sheete.



Cæsius, gray of colour or blunket. Also he
whiche hath grey eyen.



Cæsones, they whiche be cutte oute of the
mothers or dames belyes.



Cæspes, cespitis, a turfe.



Cæspititius, a, um, made of turfes.



Cæspito, taui, tare, to stumble.



Cæstus, tus, a weapon hauyng great plum­
mates hangyng at the ende of a clubbe.



Cæstus, cæsti, a gyrdell or corse, whiche the
husbande dydde putte aboute his wyfe,
whan he was maried, and at nyght dydde
plucke it of.



Cæter, cætera, cæterum, the remenaunt or
resydewe.



Cæterum, et cætera, be aduerbes sygnyfy­
enge, sometyme moreouer, somtyme from
hensforthe, sometyme Cæterum, is a con­
iunction, and signifieth sed, but.



Caycus, the name of a ryuer in Phrigia.



Cain, in hebrewe signifieth enuie.



Caius, a propre name of a man.



Cala, a byllette.



Calabra, a conuocation place, where mat­
ters concernynge deuotion were treated.



Calabria, a countrey ioynynge to Naples.



Calaber, bra, brum, of Calaber.



Caladrius, a byrde.



Calæ, arum, a cytie in India.



Calagurium, a towne in Biskay.



Calamintha, an herb called calament or nep.



Calanus, a philosopher of Inde, whiche
in the presence of the greate Alexander, 
beinge of the age of. lxxiii. yeres, felynge
hym selfe sycke, made a bonefyre, and
wente into the toppe therof, and bourned
hym selfe.



Calaris, a citie in Sardina.



Calamus, a rede, or wheate strawe. Also a 
penne. It is also taken for a pype, or why­
stell. Also a fyshynge rodde, and a twigge,
wheron birde lyme is put. Also small bran­
ches of trees, also it is a pole to mete with.
conteynynge syxe cubytes and a spanne.
a mette polle.



Calamarium, a pennar.



Calamitas, generalle dystruction, or my­
serye.



Calamitosus, myserable or ful of aduersitie.



Calamistrum, a pynne of wodde or iuorye,
wherwith men and women do set or trimme
vppe their heare.



Calantica, a tyre or burlette for a woman.



Calones, boyes and knaues, which do fo­
lowe hostes, and do either carye the wea­
pons of souldiours, or serue them of wode
or water.



Calathis, the name of a citie.



Calathus, a baskette or hamper.



Calx, hic, calcis, the heele. it sometyme sig­
nifieth the ende of a matter. sommetyme a
stroke with the heele.



Calx, hæc, lyme made of burned stones.



Calcatus, cata, catum, pergetted or whyte
lymed.



Calcaria fornax, a lyme pytte.



Calcarius, a lyme burner.



Calcaneus, et calcaneum, the heele.



Calceus, a showe.



Calcearium, a showmakers shoppe.



Calceolarius, a showmaker.



Calceo, aui, are, to putte on shoen.



Calceamen, et calciamentum. a showe, pyn­
son, or socke.



Calcar, a spurre.



Calcitro, aui, are, to kycke or wynse.



Calcitro, tronis, a horse that dothe flynge
or kycke.



Calcitrosus, a, um, that oftentimes flyngeth
or kycketh.



Calculus, a peble stone. Also the stoone in
the body. Also a chesse man. Also accompt.
also the lefte weight or poyse that may be.
Moreouer a knyfe made of a stone.



Calculosus, he that is moche diseased with
the stone. Calculosus locus, a stonye place.






Calculo, aui, are, to caste accompte.



Calco, aui, are, to treade or presse downe.



Caliga, a hose, or legge harnaysse.



Caligatus, hosed.



Caligo, ginis, darkenes.



Caliginosus, darke.



Caligo, aui, are, to make darke, or be darke.



Calor, et caliditas, heate. Caldor idem.



Caleo, calui, calêre, to be hotte or warme.



Calesco, to waxe hotte.



Calefacio, to make hotte.



Calefio, I am made hotte.



Calidus, da, dum, hotte.



Calorificus, ca, cum, that whiche makethe
hotte or warme.



Callus, brawn, or hardnes of the fete made
with goinge.



Callidus, slye, or craftye.



Calliditas, slyenesse.



Calleo, ui, ere, to be harde as brawne. Also
to knowe perfectly.



Calendæ, the firste day of euery monthe.



Callis, a way moche vsed.



Callimachus, the name of a poete.



Calisthenes, the name of a philosopher.



Cales, a towne in Fraunce.



Calistho, the mother ofArchias, whiche
gaue the name to the countreye of Archa­
dia, whom poetes fained to be transformed
into a beare.



Calypsos, the name of an yle. also of a wo­
man, whiche receyued Ulysses whanne he
escapyd drownynge.



Calyptra, a womans cappe or bonette.



Calliope, oone of the vyrgines, whiche be
named Musæ.



Calix, a cuppe to drynke wyne in. Also a
potte, wherin potage is sodden.



Calyx, the parynge or skynne of an apple,
or other lyke fruite. Also a keueryng made
of clay. Also that parte, wherout springeth
a floure, whiche is grene.



Calliblepharon, a medycyne to make the
eyen fayre.



Callirohè, a fountayne in Grece.



Calydon, et Calydonia, a citie in Grece. also
it was a great forest and wodde in Brytain,
nowe called Englande. It is also a countrey in the 
northe parte of Scotlande.



Calypso, the doughter of Athlas, a Nimph
or woman of the see.



Calopodium, a patyn, or slypper.



Calopus, a beaste in Syria, which with his
hornes throweth downe great trees.



Calænum, a citie in the countrey of Naples.



Calpæ, a mountayne in the southwest part
of Spayne.



Calxa, the sculle.



Caluities, et caluitium, baldnesse.



Caluo, aui, are, to make balde.



Calueo, I am balde.



Caluesco, to waxe balde.



Caluaria, all the heed, whanne the flesshe
is awaye.



Caluo, ui, ere, to deceyue or disapoynt.



Calumnia, a false or crafty accusation.



Calumniator, he that accusethe or seweth a
man vniustly.



Calumnior, aris, ari, to accuse or sue a man
vniustely.



Caluinarius porcus, a swyne fed with grai­
nes, and suche other vyle thynges.



Calastri pueri, syngynge boyes.



Calta, an herbe growynge amonge corne,
hauynge a yelowe flowre.
rede in the addition.



Cambio, iui, ire, to chaunge. In the olde
tyme it signified to fyght, to begyn a iour­
nay, or to tourne in a iourney.



Campso, aui, are, to tourne an other way.



Cambyses, a kynge of Persia, grandfather
of Cyrus. It is also the name of a ryuer in
the countrey of Hyrcania.



Camera, the false roufe of a house, sollar,
or chamber.



Camerare, to make a fauce roufe of a hous,
or to make a solar, or to sylde.



Camerium, a towne of Italy in the coun­
trey of Picenum.



Camertes, the inhabitauntes of Camerine,
a towne in Sycile.



Camerina, an herbe, whiche beinge brused,
prouoketh a man to vomite: wherof camme
this prouerbe, Ne moueas camerinam, for,
procure not harme to thy selfe.



Camillus et Camilla, was in old tyme a boy,
or a wenche that seruyd the byshop, whan
he dydde sacrifyce. Also the name of a man
or womanne.



Chamamelum, et Camomilla, an herbe cal­
lyd Camomyll.



Caminus, a chymnay or fournayse.



Caminatus, ta, tum, made lyke a fournayse
or chymney.



Camænæ, idem quod Musæ.



Campana, a belle.



Campania, the royalme of Naples.



Campus, a felde.



Campestria loca, playne countreys.



Camparius, the keper of the feldes.



Campsores, exchaungeours.



Campe, a worme which eateth heroes, & is
rough with many fete, & is callyd a palmer.



Camus, a bytte or snaffyll. also a rayne or
corde, wherwith men beinge condempned
were bounde.



Canabus, a wyne sellar.



Canna, a cane. also an oyle pot or canne.



Canales, pipes, wherby water doth runne
into a cundyte.






Canalicula, a lyttell pipe.



Canaliculatus, facioned lyke a pipe.



Cannabis, hempe.



Cannabinus, na, num, made of hempe.



Cancelli, latteses, or any thynge made lat­
tese wyse. Also secrete places to looke
oute. Also windowes made with barres of
wodde or yron with dyuers holes.



Cancello, aui, are, to rase or put out, to cut
or teare any thyng that is written.



Cancer, cri, a kynd of fyshe called a crabbe,
also a signe in heuen.



Cancer, eris, a disease called a canker.



Cancri, is the same that Cancelli be.



Cancris, a pylle in medicine.



Candax, acis, a quene of Aegypte.



Candifacio, to make whyte, to bleache, to
make to glowe lyke a burnyng cole.



Candela, a candell.



Candelabrum, a candelstycke.



Candeo, ui, dere, to glowe lyke a burnynge
cole. Also to be white.



Candico, aui, are, to be whyte, or to make
whyte.



Candidatus, was he amonge the Romains
whiche laboured for some of the great of­
fyces in the publyke weale: and they were
so named bycause they dydde weare in the
tyme of their election white apparayle. It
maye be taken by translation at this tyme,
for them that in vniuersities be called ince­
ptours, or regent maisters. Also for theym
that be lately christened, or newely entred
into some honorable or worshypfull state.



Candido, aui, are, to make whyte.



Candidus, da, dum, whyte. It is somtymes
taken for gentyll or easye: as Candidus le­
ctor, a gentyll reder, whiche dothe not o­
penly reproue that which he redeth. Can­
didus iudex, A gentyll or easy iuge.



Candide, gentylly or easily.



Candidus, sometyme sygnifyeth fortunate,
and it sygnifyeth more than Albus, as ory­
ente whyte.



Candificio, aui, care, to make whyte.



Candor, oris, bryghtnesse.



Canentæ, were of the olde Romaynes na­
med the apparayle pertainyng to the heed.



Caneo, et canesco, scere, to be hore, or gray
heared.



Canephora, a mayden, whiche bare on her
heed a basket or cofer, wherin were iewels
or images of the goddes.



Cangrena, a sore called a canker.



Cani, be taken for white heares for age.



Canica, branne, gurgeons.



Caniceps, a beaste, whiche hathe onely the
face of a dogge.



Canicula, a lyttell dogge or bytche. Also a
sterre, wherof canicular or dogge days be
named Dies caniculares.



Caniculus, a whelpe.



Caninus, doggisshe, or of a dogge.



Caninum prandium, a dinar without wyne.



Canis, a dogge, a kynd of fyshe called dog­
fishe, a play at tables, a signe in heuen, wher­
of there be two sterres, oone called Canis
maior, the other canis minor. 



Canistrum, a baskette.



Canities, graynesse of heares.



Canna, a poete whiche was in the tyme of
Martialis. 



Canna, a cane or rede. also a canne or pot.
also a village in the countrey of Galilee.



Cannæ, narum, a towne in the countrey of A­
pulia, where a greatte hooste of Romayns
was slayne by Hanniball. 



Cannetum, a place where kanes or reedes
do growe.



Cannitie, thatched houses.



Cano, cecini, nere, to synge, to playe on the
shalme or other instrument. Also to praise,
to prophecye.



Canere receptui, to blowe the retraicte in
battayle.



Canon, a rule, also the inner parte of a tar­
gate, whiche keuereth the hande.



Canopus, a citie in Aegypte.



Canor, oris, melody, lowde.



Canorosus, a, um, full of melody.



Cantabri, people in Spayne.



Cantabria, a countrey in Spayne.



Cantharia, a stone whiche hath the prynte
of a blacke flye called a byttell.



Cantharis, idis, uel Cantharida, cantharidæ
a greene worme shynynge with a glosse of
golde, whiche is bredde in the toppe of as­
shes, and laide to a mannes body, maketh it
to blyster.



Cantharus, a pot or a iugge. Also a beaste,
whereof there is founde noo female. Also
a kynde of fysshe. also the blacke flye called
the bytill.



Cantherium, a maner of a charyot or wa­
gen. also a perche or a rayle.



Cantherius, a geldynge. Also a traunsome
of timber.



Canthus, the yron wherwith the extremy­
tie of wheeles be bounden, the straake of 
a carte.



Canthes, organ pipes.



Canticum, a pleasant or mery songe.



Cantilena, the melody of the songe.



Cantio, a songe.



Cantiuncula, a lyttell songe.



Cantito, aui, are, to synge often.



Canto, aui, are, to synge or to charme.



Cantus, tus, a songe.






Canus, an olde man.



Canus, na, num, graye or hore.



Canusium, a towne in the countreye of A­
pulia.



Capax, acis, that taketh or conteyneth any
thynge, able to receiue.



Calpedo, the greatnesse of a vessell, or lyke
thynge that contayneth.



Capena, a towne by Rome.



Caper, a gelded gote. sometyme it is taken
for the bucke gote. it also was the name of
an olde grammarion.



Capero, aui, to frowne or lowre.



Capesso, si, sere, to take, or to goo aboute to
take, to receyue. sommetyme it sygnifyeth
to brynge in.
Plautus.


Capetus, the name of a kynge.



Caphareus, a mountayne in Grece.



Capharnaun, the chiefe citie in Galilee.



Capillamentum, the heare of a mans heed.
somtyme the toppes of herbes, where the
seedes do growe.



Capillo, are, to make heare.



Capillatus, a, um, that hath heare.



Capillitium, the heare of the heed.



Capillotenus, iuste to the heare.



Capillus, the heare.



Capillus ueneris, an herbe callyd Mayden­
heare.



Capio, cœpi, capere, to take wyllyngely, or
vnwyllyngly. Sommetyme it sygnifieth to
delyte, to mitigate, to deceyue, Capti do­
lis, deceyued with cautels. somtyme to con­
teyne. Dii boni, quid turbæ? ædes nostræ uix
capiunt, Good lorde, what a company? v­
neth our house woll conteyne theym. Al­
so to make.



Capti oculis, blynde, also great louers be
named capti.



Capis, dis, a cuppe.



Capistro, are, to halter, or putte on a rope,
or corde.



Capistrum, a haltar.



Capitale, et capital, an offence punyshed by
deathe.



Capitalis homo, a man that deserueth deth.
Also that is prone and redy to murder.



Capitalis ira, mortall wrathe.



CApitalis locus, the place of execution.



Capitatus, ta, tum, that growethe greatte in
the heade.



Capite censi, were amonge the Romaynes
the poore sorte of the people, whiche were
discharged of all exactions, and remayned
in the citie onely for generation.



Capitellum, a lytell heed or top of a thing.
Also the hyghest parte of a pyllar.



Capitium, any thing that couereth the heed,
commonly they do call it a hoode.



Capitis diminutio, a condemnation, wherby
a man loseth either libertie of his person, & 
is made bond: or is banished his countrey,
or put out of the kynges protection, or re­
nouncynge his owne familie, is adopted or
taken into an other, whiche is not now vsed.



Capitolinus, was the surname of hym, that
found the heed, whan the Capitole shulde
be buylded.



Capitolium, the palaice of the citie of Rome.



Capito, tonis, he that hath a great heed. also
heddy or obstinate in opinion.



Capitosus, he that hath a great heed, or a 
dull heed.



Capitulatum, any thynge that is growen
to a heed.



Capitulum, a lytle heed, also a chapiter.



Cappa, the name of a greke letter, for whi­
che the latins vse C.



Cappadocia, a countrey in the lesse Asia.



Cappadox, docis, a man of that countrey.



Capparis, a frute called Capers, wherwith
we do make salates & sauce for mutton, whi­
che eaten before meles, be very good for the
stomake, & ageinst diseases of the splene.



Capra, a goote.



Capella, a lyttell goote.



Capreolus, a kydde.



Capraria, an yle in the see called Ligusticum.



Caprarius, a goote herde.



Caprea, a beaste whiche doth see wonder­
full quickly. It is also a kynde of vynes soo
named. Moreouer an yle by Naples.



Capreolus, a beaste called a roo. It is also
the tendrell of a vyne, whiche wyndeth di­
uers ways, called also Pampinus.



Capreus, a, um, that whiche is of a gote. Ca­
prillus, a, um, idem.



Capricornus,  a sygne in heuen, conteininge
xx. sterres.



Caprificacio, the paryng away of the barke
of a tree.



Caprificus, a wylde fygge tree, which run­
neth vp by walles.



Captigenus, na, num, that whiche is of the
kynde of a goote.



Caprile, a stable or pen, where gotes be kept.



Caprimulgi, birdes like to gulles, which ap­
pere not by day, but in the night they come
into gote pennes, and do souke the gotes,
wherby the vdders of them be mortified.



Caprinus, na, num, of a gote.



Caproneæ, the toppe or lyttel mane, that is
in the forheed of a horse, or other beast.



Caprunculum, a greatte vessell.



Capsa, a coffer or cheste.



Capsaces, a vessell wherin oyle is kept.



Capsarius, he that kepith chestis, or apparel.



Capsus, a couered cart.






Captio, nis, the acte of takynge or decey­
uynge, or that wherby any thynge is taken.



Captiuncula, the diminutiue of Captio. 



Captiosus, captious or deceytfull.



Captiuus, a prysoner taken in warres, or
a sclaue.



Captiuitas, captiuitie or bondage.



Capto, aui, are, to gette the fauour of oone
with fayre wordes, pleasant dedes, or re­
wardes. Also to deceyue or take quyckely.



Captator, oris, he that vseth that crafte.



Captatio, the acte or crafte to gette fauor.
also deceyte or subtyltie.



Captura, the apprehendynge or gettyng.



Captus, ta, tum, taken.



Captus, tus, chaunce. also deceyte, percey­
uynge of a thinge, or capacitie. Captus ho­
minum, Mens capacitie. sometyme dilec­
tation, Non possum adduci et suscipere è pe­
cunia captum, I may not be brought ther­
to, and take dilectation of the money.



Capua, a citie in the royalme of Naples.



Capula, a cuppe with a handell.



Capularis senex, an olde manne redye to be
layde in his beere.



Capulum, a rydynge knotte.



Capulus et Capulum, what so euer may re­
ceyue any thynge into it: proprelye it is a
beere, wherin deed corpsis are borne: also
the hyltes or handell of a sworde.



Capus, a capon.



Caput, a heed. Also the begynnynge of e­
uery thynge. Also a chapiter of a boke.



Caput facere, to gather a soore to a heed.



Capys, a mans name that buylded Capua.



Carabus seu Caramus, a fysshe calledde a
Crabbe.



Caraxus, was the brother of Sapphus. 



Carbasus in plurali Carbasa, a kynd of lynnen
cypres: also the saylle clothe of a shyppe.
Moreouer it is a fyne garment of women
of sylke or lynnen.



Carbo, a cole. It was also the name of a
Romayne.



Carbunculare, to haue a Carbouncle or
botche.



Carbunculus, a botche, whiche commeth of
inflamation. it is also a kynde of precyouse
stones, whiche do shyne lyke a bournynge
cole. Moreouer a defaulte in a vyne, and
other trees, wherby they ar burned, whi­
che happeneth about the canicular dayes.
Also it signifyeth erthe, wherin is founde
blacke slatte stones.



Carcer, ceris, a pryson. Also Carceres were
stables, wherin horses were sette, whanne
they shulde runne.



Carcerarius, ria, rium, of a pryson.



Carchesium, a standynge cuppe with han­
delles.



Carchoquios, a kynde of frogges, hauyng
on their bealyes yelowe spottes.



Carcina, a cytie.



Carcinoma, atis, a soore called a canker.



Cardamomum, a kynde of spice.



Cardiacus morbus, a syckenes which hap­
neth by weakenes of the body, with moch
sweatte and feblenesse of the stomake.



Cardinalis, le, chiefe or principall.



Cardineus, the same.



Cardamus, an herbe, whiche some do sup­
pose is Cressis.



Cardo, dinis, the poste, whereon the doore
hangeth, and is moued. Also a mere or boun­
des, whiche passith through the felde from
the southe to the northe.



Cardo rei, the effect of the matter or thing:
the chiefe poynte of the matter.



Cardo causæ, the matter in lawe.



Carduelis, a byrde called a goldefinche.



Carectum, a place full of sedges.



Careo, rui, rere, to lack proprely those good
thynges, which ones were had. Somtyme
it sygnifieth to be without a thyng: as Ca­
reo culpa, I am without faute. Careo febre,
I am without feuer.



Carès, the name of a caruer, the scholar of
Lysyppus. 



Carex, ricis, an herbe harde and prickinge.



Caria, a region in Asia the lasse.



Caries, a lyttel worme that eateth wodde:
It is also putrifaction or fylthe growen by
age or contynuance.



Carina, the keele or bottom of the shyppe.



Carinæ, narum, a strete in Rome, wherein
Pompey dwelled.



Carino, aui, are, to make a thyng of the fa­
cion of a shyppes bottome. Also to speake
to a mannes reproche.



Caritas, tatis, Scarcitie, proprely of that whi­
che serueth for the sustinance of man.



Carius, the name of Jupiters sonne.



Carmania, a countrey of the lasse Asia.



Carmelus, the name of two sondry hylles
in Judea.



Carmen, minis, a verse or metre. Also the
hole warke whiche is made in versis. Som­
tyme it signifieth a charme.



Carmenta, the name of a lady, whiche had
the spirite of prophecy, and gaue aunswere
in verses.



Carminare, to carde wulle, or other lyke
thynge.



Carminarii, they that do pike or make clene
wulle, or carde.



Carmon, a place in Messenia, and the tem­
ple of Appollo in Laconia.



Carnarium, a larder, wherin hangeth salte




fleshe. sometyme it sygnifyeth a bowchers
shambles.



Carnarius, a boucher.



Carnarius, a, um, that pertayneth to flesshe.



Carneus, a, um, that whiche is of fleshe.



Carni, the name of certain people in Italy.



Carnifex, ficis, a boucher of men, or hang­
man, that cutteth theym in pieces.



Carnificina, the place where suche execu­
tion is doone. Also the offyce or acte of a hangemanne.



Carnificium, the same acte.



Carnificinus, na, num, pertaynynge to the
sayde acte.



Carnificor, aris, ari, to playe the hangman­
nes part.



Carniuorum, any thynge that deuourethe
flesshe.



Carnositas, abundance of fleshe.



Carnosus, flesshye.



Carnotum, the mydle region of al France.



Carnuntum, a towne in the border of Ger­
manye.



Donatus.



Caro, carnis, fleshe, proprely of that whi­
che is deade.



Carpatin&ecedil;, plowghemens bootes, made of
vntanned lether, they may be called cokars.



Carpathos, an Ile agaynste Aegypte, the
myddes betwene Rhodes and Candy.



Carpentarius, a carte wright, or carpentar.



Carpentarius equus, a carte horse, or cha­
ryotte horse.



Carpentum, a chariot or wagen.



Carpinus, a kynde of trees.



Carpio, a fyshe called a carpe.



Carpo, psi, pere, to gather or plucke. Also
to chese, to reproue, or taunt, to vse. i. fruor.
Also carpere uires, is to make feble.



Carpere uiam, to walke.



Carpere uitales auras, to lyue.



Carpere lanam, to tose woll.



Carpere cibum, to eate.



Carptim, pykynge out here and there.



Carra, re, a citie of Arrabie.



Carruca, a carte.



Carrucarius, a, um, pertaynyuge to a carte.



Carrus, a charyotte.



Carteia, a towne in Spayne.



Carthaginensis, pertaynynge to Cartage.



Carthago, thaginis, the cytie of Cartage in
Affryke.



Caruncula, a lyttell fleshe.



Carus, a, um, deere.



Carya, the name of a citie in Grece.



Caryatides, the images of women holding
garlandes, or other lyke thynge sette vp
to garnyshe howses.



Caryca, a fygge, specially drye.



Caryota, a date.



Casa, a cotage.



Casaria, the woman that kepeth the cotage



Cascus, a, cum, olde.



Caseus, chefe.



Caseus musteus, Rowen chefe.



Casius, a hyll, in the borders of Aegypte.



Casia, a spice, whiche hathe the vertue of
Cynamome, and is wonderfull soote in sa­
uoure.



Casito, aui, are, to fal or droppe oftentimes.



Caspiæ portæ, certain Monntayns in Asia.



Caspium mare, the see whiche ioyneth to
the sayde hylles.



Casses, sis, nett which may be called hays.
Also an helmette, but than it hath Cassidis
in the genitife case.



Cassiculus, a lyttell haye.



Cassida, æ, an helmette.



Cassiope, a signe in heuen, that hathe .xiii.
sterres, and is figured lyke to a woman, sit­
tynge in a chayre.



Cassita, a larke.



Cassitias, the gumme that droppeth out of
a firre tree.



Casso, aui, are, to put oute, or make of none
effecte.



Cassius, a propre name of a man.



Cassus, a, um, voyde and of none effecte.



Castalius, a fountayn in the fote of the hill
of Pernassus, whiche was dedicate to the
Musis.



Casta mola, was a kynde of sacrifice, that
the vyrgins Vestales made.



Castaneum, a chesten, or cheste nutte.



Castellani, the inhabitauntes of a lyttelle
walled towne.



Castellatim, one lyttelle walled towne af­
ter an other.



Castellum, a lyttell walled towne. It is al­
so a cundyte, oute of the whyche water
rounnethe.



Casterium, a docke where shippes be laid vp.



Castigo, aui, are, to chastise with wordis. al­
so to correcte or amende.



Castitas, tatis, chastitie.



Castor, a Beuer, whiche hath the taile of a
fyshe, in the residue is like to an ottar.



Castor et Pollux, were bretherne both atte
one byrth, which were honored for godds.



Castra, castrorum, an armie of men of warre,
whan they lye or abyde in any place. Also
the place where the hoste lodgethe. Also
the Pauilions beinge pyched.



Castrametor, to lay or lodge an army.



Castro, aui, are, to gelde. Sometyme to cut
of generally.



Castrensis, castrense, that which pertaineth
to an hooste or armye.



Castrum, a castell or fortresse.






Castula, lynnen clothe, wherwith maidens
dyd gyrde them selfe vnder their pappes.



Castus, ta, tum, chaste, honeste, and conty­
nent, or vncorrupted.



Casura, a falle a decay.



Casus, happe, ryune, mysfortune, or myse­
rie. also a case.



Cattabathmus, a towne in Aphrica.



Catechesis, instruction or informacyon to
hym that begynneth any thynge.



Catechiso, aui, are, to instructe, to infourme
or teache.



Cataclysmus, an vnyuersall fludde.



Catadromum, the place where horses be
coursed.



Catalecticum metrum, a verse wherein one
onely syllable lacketh.



Catalogus, speche or writyng where thin­
ges be recyted in order and numbre, a re­
hersalle.



Cataphractus, armed at all pieces.



Cataphracti equites, horsemenne on barbyd
horses.



Cataphractæ naues, keuered shyppes.



Cataphrygæ, Certayne heretikes, whiche
sayde that the holy goste was not in the a­
postels, but onely in them selfes.



Cataplasma, a playster made with herbes
and sewet.



Catapotia, pylles in medicine.



Catapulta, an arowe.



Catarrhacta, a portculious, Also cloudes.
somtyme caues in the erthe.



Catarrhactæ, gret courses of water, falling
downe from highe places. Also the places
from whens they do falle.



Catarrhus, a rewme or styllynge downe of
water or fleme from the heed.



Catascopium, a shyppe that watcheth or es­
pieth for other.



Catasta, a cage, wherin men be sette, whi­
che are to be solde. also wherin they were
punysshed.



Catastroma, parte of a shyppe or pauement.



Catastrophe, a subuersion, or a volume.



Catechumenus, he that is newly instructid.



Categoria, accusation.



Catellus, catella, a lyttell hounde.



Catena, a chayne.



Cateno, aui, nare, to chayne togither.



Catenula, a lyttell chayne.



Caterua, a company of men of warre. some­
tyme a multitude of people.



Cateruarii, they that doo assemble in com­
panyes.



Cateruatim, by companyes.



Catharctica, purgatiue medicines.



Cathedra, a benche or stoole.



Cathinea, a kynde of erthe, wherof latyne
mettall is made.



Catholicus, vniuersalle. nowe it is vsed for
hym that kepeth the faithe, as the vniuer­
sall churche hath obseruyd it.



Catillatio, a great reproche layde to gen­
tylmen, whiche had robbed the countreis,
that were alied to the Romaynes, and had
riottously consumed the goodes.



Catillones, lycke dyshes, glottons.



Catillus, the ouer stone of a mylle, callyd
the runner.



Catina, a citie in Sicile.



Catinus, a potage dyshe.



Catillus, idem.



Cathortoma, the righte worke of vertue,
a ryght dede.



Cathortosis, a right affection.



Catus, wyse, or wytty. Also the name of a
noble and wyse familye in Rome.



Catularia, one of the gates of Rome.



Catulire, the desyre of female kynd, to com­
pany with the male kynde, proprely to goo
assaute, to rudder, to horsynge, or to blys­
sonynge.



Catulitio, the goinge assaute. &c.



Catullus, the name of a poete.



Catulus, a kytten or yonge catte. Also it is
putte generally for the yonge kynde of all
beastis. also for a dogge.



Catus, a catte.



Caua, a hole, wherin byrdes do brede.



Cauedium, is a place at large, hauyng ma­
ny porches, whiche serueth to a commune,
lyke a market place.



Caucasus, a very hygh mountayne in Inde.



Cauda, a tayle of a beaste. somtyme a mans
priuye membre.



Caudacus, gentyll and pleasant.



Caudax, dacis, the lower part of a tree next
the roote. Also a table, hauynge many lea­
ues or tables.



Caudicariæ naues, a shyppe whyche cary­
eth vytayles.



Caudis, a towne of Samnie.



Cauea, a caue or darke place in the ground.
Also a cage or cowpe, wherein byrdes be
kept. Moreouer a place where a comedy
or enterlude is playde.



Caueo, caui, cauêre, to beware, to eschue:
also to prouyde diligently, to take hede. Ca­
ue tibi, Take hede of thy selfe.



Cauerna, a caue or holowe place in the
grounde.



Cauilla, uel Cauillum, a mocke or a ieste.



Cauillo, aui, are, uel cauillor, ari, to ieste to
mocke, to bourde.



Caula, a shepe house, but proprely a folde.



Caulescere, to growe into stalke.



Cauliculus, a tender stalke.






Caulis, a stalke or stem of an herbe or tree.
Also it is an herbe called colewortes. It is
somtyme taken for all pot herbes, the rumpe
of a beaste, and for a shafte or iauelyn.



Caulon, a towne, whiche of Plinie  is situ­
ate in the fyrste region of Italy.



Cauma, atis, heate.



Caunus, an yle in the occean see.



Cauo, aui, are, to make holowe.



Caupo, onis, a howkster that selleth meate
and drynke.



Caupona, a woman that selleth wyne. Also
the tauerner.



Cauponaria, tauerners crafte.



Cauponius, ia, ium, pertaynyng to the tauerne.



Cauponor, to sell as howksters do.



Cauros, was an yle, whiche afterward was
called Andros, and after that Antandros.



Caurus, a westerne wynde.



Causia, a hatte or cappe after the facion of
Macedonye.



Causon, nis, a burnynge feuer.



Caussa, a cause or matter in suite.



Caussarii milites, souldiours, which for cau­
ses reasonable, were discharged oute of
the armye.



Caussaria missio, a discharge of a souldiour
for a reasonable cause.



Caussatio, an in warde syckenes.



Causatiuus, tiua, tiuum, that is cause that a
thynge is done.



Caussidicus, a man of lawe.



Caussificor, aris, to complayn me of a thing
that dothe greue me.



Causso, aui, are, to cause.



Caussor, aris, to fynd the matter, or to bring
for excuse.



Caustica medicamenta, medicines, whiche
do burne the skynne or the fleshe.



Cautêres et cautêria, is a markynge yron, or
an instrument, wherwith soores ar burned.



Cauteriatus, ta, tum, marked or burned with
that instrument, or marked with an yron.



Cautes, a ragged rocke, or hylle fulle of
greatte stoones.



Cautum est, It is ordeyned or prouided by
an acte of parlyament or counsayle.



Cautio est, it is nede to prouide or beware.



Cautus, a man that is circumspecte.



Cauus, a, um, holowe.



Cauus, an holowe place.



Causter, a fludde of Lidie. 



Caystrus, fœm. gen. a citie of Cilycie.

 

¶ C ante E.

CEcrops, pis, the fyrste kynge of A­
thenes.



Cecropius, a, um, of Cecrops. 



Cecropidis, a man or womanne, commynge
of hym.



Cecropide, men of Athenes.



Cecriphalea, a rocke in the see, or an yle.



Cedar, a region of Arabie.



Cedo, cessi, dere, to gyue place, to goo a­
way, to voyde, to withdrawe, to graunte,
to gyue.



Cedo bonis, I leue my goddes to an other.



Cedere intercessioni, to procede no further,
to admytte the contrary.



Cedo iuri, I release my ryghte.



Cedunt mihi ea bona, those goodes ar com
or happened vnto me.



Cedite manus, gyue me your handes.



Cessit, it hapned.



Cedo, in the imperatiue mode, Tell thou.



Cedit dies, amonge lawyers is, The tyme
is come, that the dette is due to be payde.



Cedria, the first sweatyng of the pitche tre.



Cedrides, the fruite of the cedre tree.



Cedropolis, a towne in Caria. 



Cedros, an yland in the costis of Germany.



Cedrosis, a whyte vyneyarde.



Cedrus, a kynde of trees, whiche is excel­
lent for buyldinge, forasmoche as the tym­
bre therof is great, & very lyght: also it du­
reth longe, and is neuer eaten with wor­
mes, and is soote in sauour, hauyng leaues
lyke to a cypresse tree.



Celebresco, I am in greate fame, or am re­
noumed.



Celebris, bre, famous. Also swifte, honou­
rable.



Celebritas, tatis, renoume. Also a great as­
semblye.



Celebriter, honourably.



Celebro, avui, are, to celebrate or brynge in
renoume, to make good reporte. Also to
haunte, to honour, or worship.



Celer, eris, swyfte, quycke.



Celero, aui, are, to doo a thynge quyckely,
to make haste.



Celetes, runnynge horses.



Celeustes, he that calleth on the mariners,
to rowe or labour.



Celeusma, the shoute or crye that shypmen
or botemen do make, whan the master doth
whystell or calle.



Cella, a cellar, wherin any thyng is kepte.
Also where we be pryuily wasshed. Also a
secrete place in the temple.



Cellaria, a wyne sellar.



Cellarium, a storehouse.



Cellarius, he that hathe the charge of a
cellar or storehouse.



Celatim, priuily.



Celo, aui, are, to hyde, or wyll not knowe.



Celox, a swyfte shyppe, or barke.






Celsus, hygh.



Celtæ, Frenche men.



Celtiberi, a people in Spayne, of Celtis,
Frenche men, and Iberis Spayniardes as­
socyate togyther.



Celtis, a kynde of sweete trees growynge
in Affryke.



Celydrus, a womannes apparayle.



Cemellio, a towne in Liguria.



Cenchris, a byrd lyke an hauke, which ma­
keth a great sowne whan he crieth. Also it
is the name of a town or countrey in Grece.



Cenina, a citie of Italy.



Cenomani, people in Lombardy.



Cenodoxia, vayne glorye.



Cenotaphium, a tombe, where no manne is
buryedde.



Censeo, sui, ere, to suppose, to shewe myne
opinion or sentence, to determyne, to be di­
scontent, to numbre people, to the intent to
take them, whiche be apte for the warres,
or to leuye or taxe a subsidie.



Censio, nis, a chastysement.



Censor, a iudge of mens maners. Also su­
che as was appoynted to valewe mennes
goodes.



Censorius uir, he that hath bene a Censour,
or is worthy for his grauitie to iuge and cor­
recte other mens maners.



Censualis, he that dothe assiste or accompa­
ny the iuges of maners called censors.



Censui agri, were those fieldes, whiche by
the lawe ciuile mought be boughte & solde.



Censura, the authoritie or iudgement of a
censour. Also correction of maners, lawe,
or decree, concernynge maners.



Census, sus, yerely reuenues. Also valuati­
on of goodes. Also a subsidie, the numbring
of the people.



Census, si, he that is assessed or taxed, capi­
te censi, taxed by the polle, or he that pay­
eth heed syluer.



Centaurea, a kynde of herbe called Centory



Centauri, a people in the countrey of Thes­
saly, whom the poetes dyd fayne to be the
one half lyke a man, the other halfe lyke a
hors. Also they be certayne great shyppes.



Centaurus, a ryuer, whiche was fyrste cal­
led Euenus.



Centimanus, hauynge a hundred handes.



Centipeda, a worme called a Palmer, whi­
che is heary, and hath many feete.



Cento, a quylte, or a iakke, or other lyke
thynge stuffed with linnen, floxe, or cotten,
or a cushyn made of pieces of cloth of dy­
uers colours.



Centrum, the poynt, whiche is in the very
myddes of a thynge.



Centum, a hundred.



Centies, a hundred tymes.



Centum uiri, certayne iudges in Rome, be­
inge of the numbre of a hundred and fiue.
And their iugementes were called Centum
uiralia iudicia.



Centunculus, a vyle garment.



Centuria, a parte of an hoste, conteynynge
an hundred men. Also a portion of ground
in the felde, contayning an hundred acres.



Centuriatim, by a hundred togyther. Also
plentuousely, or in a great numbre.



Centurio, nis, a capitayn ouer one hundred
of foote men.



Centurio, aui, are, to diuide men into a com­
pany, contaynyng an hundred persons: or
feldes into a hundred acres of lande.



Centussis, a hundred pounde weyghte, or
a hundred pieces of that money that were
called Asses.



Cephale, or lis, sygnifieth the heed.



Cephalea, the heed ache, whan al the heed
dothe ake.



Cephalus, the name of a man, and of a fishe.



Cepheus, the name of a kynge of Ethiope.



Cephisia, the region Attica.



Cephisis, a laake nere to the see Athlanticum



Cepites, a precious stoone, hauynge manye
whyte strikes.



Ceporus, a gardyner.



Ceramicus, a place in Athenes, where men
beinge slayne in battayle, were buryed. Al­
so an nother place, where commune wo­
men dwellyd.



Cerastes, a serpente, whiche hathe hornes
lyke a ramme.



Cerasus, a chery tree.



Cerasum, a cherye.



Cerates, a smalle weight or poyse, whyche
is the fourth part of a scrippule, the foure score and sixtenthe parte of an ounce.



Ceratinæ, is of Quint. called a spece of rea­
sonynge inexplycable.



Cerberus, the porter of hell. Also a dogge
with thre heedes, which Hercules drewe
out of Helle.



Cercopithecus, a beast called a Marmoset.



Cerdo, nis, a cobblar.



Cereale, pertaining to Ceres the goddesse.



Cerebrum, the brayne.



Cerebrosus, a man being braynsycke, or wild
brayned, trustynge onely to his owne wyl.



Ceres, the goddesse of corne. sometyme it
is vsed of Poetes for the selfe corne, or 
breadde.



Ceretani, a people in Spayne.



Ceretum, a towne in Italye.



Cerinthe, es, an herbe called a honysuckle.



Cerinthus, a thynge which is founde in ho­
nycombes, wheron bees do feede.






Cerîtus, madnes or frensy.



Cerno, creui, cernere, to see or perceyue al­
so to consyder: sometyme to iuge, or deter­
mine. somtyme to trie out. Also to fyght in
battayle, to entre into lande, which is hap­
pened vnto me by inheritance or gifte.
Cice. Do­
lobelle. &
ad Attic.


Cernuus, Stowpynge or lookynge downe­
warde.



Certamen, a conflycte or byckerynge.



Certatim, oone contendynge or stryuynge
with an other.



Certisso, aui, are, to be certified or sure.



Certitudo, dinis, certaintie or suretie.



Certo, aui, are, to contende or stryue.



Certus, ta, tum, certayn, sure, without dout.
sometyme it sygnifyeth euen as we wolde
haue it.



Certe et certo, surely.



Certuus, a harte, or a forke, wherwith cota­
ges be propped vp.



Ceruinus, na, num, of a harte.



Ceruicale et ceruical, a bolstar.



Ceruisa, ale or beere.



Ceruix, uicis, the hynder part of the necke.



Cerunina, eare waxe.



Cerus, a kynde of oken trees.



Cerussa, Ceruse, or whyte leade, wherwith
some women be paynted, and colde play­
sters be made of it.



Cerix, cis, a pursyuant or bedyll.



Cespes, Cespitis, a tirfe. some so call theym
sottes, grasse and erthe togither.



Cessim ire, to recule or go backe.



Cesim ferire, to stryke edgelynge.



Cesso, aui, are, to ceasse, to leaue warke, to
abyde.



Cessator, he that is slowe in dooinge his
dewtie.



Cestrum, an instrument, wherwith iuorie
is made holow. also a dagger, or a wimbyl.
also an herbe, whiche is called Betayne.



Cetariæ, places nyghe the see syde, where
Tunye and other greatte fysshes be taken
and saltyd.



Cetarius, a fyshemonger, or taker of great
fysshes.



Cetra, a lyghte tergate.



Cetrati milites, Sowldyours with lyghte
tergates.



Cetus, a great fyshe called a whale.

 

¶ C ante H.

CHabrias, the name of a noble philo­
pher & capitayne of Athenes, which
vsed to say, that more terrible was an
hoste of hartes, hauynge to their capitayn
a lyon, than an hoste of lyons, hauyng an
harte their capitayne.



Chalame a citie of Perse, whiche nowe is
called Aetisiphon.



Chalaza, a gatherynge vnder the skynne
lyke the disease called Bubo.



Chalastra, a certayne apparayle.



Chalcedonia, a citie in Asie agaynste Con­
stantynople.



Chalcis, dis, the name of a citie in Grece.
also of an yle, and of a byrde.



Chalcites, a stone of the colour of brasse,
but more blacke.



Chaldæa, a region in Asia, ioyning to Ara­
bie, wherin was the great cite of Babylon.



Chaldei, be taken for greate astronomers
of the contrey of Assiria.



Chalestra, a citie of Thessaly on the se cost.



Chalyx, a flynte stone, oute of the whiche
fyre is stryken.



Chalybes, a people in the lasse Asia, in the
countrey called Pontus, whiche people do
dygge greatte plentie of yron naked. It is
proprely taken for steele. And also it is the
name of a fludde in Spayne.



Cham&ecedil;cissos, an herbe called grounde iuy.



Chamædaphne, an herbe whiche groweth
in length wynding togither in dyuers par­
tes, and hath leaues lyke to lawrel or bays,
and hath a floure lyke to a vyolette, and is
called of some men perwyncle.



Cham&ecedil;dreos, an herbe called Germander.



Cham&ecedil;leon, ontis, a lyttell beaste, hauynge
his skynne spotted lyke to a lybard, whych
chaungeth into dyuers colours, according
to the thynge that he seeth. They be ingen­
dred in Inde, and is of the quantitie and fi­
gure of a lysard, but that his legges be len­
ger, and goeth vpryght, and hath a snoute
lyke a swyne, a longe tayle, and small at the
ende, his eyen be neuer closed, he doth ne­
uer eate or drynke, but is nourisshed onely
by ayre. Chameleon is also an herbe.



Cham&ecedil;melon, an herbe called camomylle.



Cham&ecedil;teræ, maydens whiche were wonte
to sytte at their maystresses feete.



Chamelopardalis, a beaste whyche is as
great as a camel, of skynne and colour 
lyke a panther, hauynge spottes of sondrye co­
lours, and hath his forelegges and necke
longe, and the heed lyke a camell, his fete
and legges lyke an oxe.



Chamelus, a beaste called a camelle, com­
munely knowen.



Chania, the countrey callyd Epirus, Cha­
ones, men of that countrey.



Chaos, a confuse matter without fourme,
made fyrst of nothyng, wherof poetes sup­
posed all other thynges to procede.



Characote, a frame, aboute the whiche vy­
nes be wounde and tourned.






Characias,  an herbe callyd Spourge.



Character, a token, a note made with a pen,
a fygure, a style or fourme of speakynge.



Characteres, letters.



Charadrius, a greatte deuowrynge byrde
of the see.



Caraxes, the brother of Sapphus.



Charistrium, a grene marble stone.



Carrisius, the name of a grammarion.



Charistia, the plurell numbre, is as it were a
Christmas feaste, or a wake, where kynnes­
folke do resorte togither, bryngyng or sen­
dynge presentes mutually.



Charitas, charitie or loue, proprely toward
men, or a mans countrey.



Charites, the graces, whiche were suppo­
sed to be the doughters of Iupiter, which
were thre in noumbre, whose names were
Aglaia, Thalia, Euphrosyne:  And where in
speakynge or writinge appered to be a mer­
uaylous dilectation or swetenes, it was said
that therin was a grace, in latine, Charis.



Chariophilon, a kynde of soote spyce that
groweth in India.



Charon, tis, was named of the Paynyms,
the booteman, that caried sowles ouer the
three ryuers of Helle, Acheron, Stix, and
Cocytus. 



Caropus, amyable, pleasant, gratious.



Charta, paper. Also a leafe of paper, or o­
ther lyke thyng, wherin we do write. also a
mayden that had neuer chylde.



Chartaceus, of paper.



Chartilago, ginis, a grystell.



Chartophylacium, a coffer, or other lyke
thynge, wherin papers and rolles be kept.



Charundas, the name of a man, which gaue
lawes to the Atheniens.



Charus, well beloued.



Charybdis, a gulf of the see by Sicyl, wher­
in is daungerous saylynge, by reasone of
stremes flowynge contrarye eche agaynst
other, wherby shippes be therin deuourid.



Chasma, a gapynge or openyng of the fir­
mament, or of the erthe.



Chel&ecedil;, the klees of a Crabbe, Crauaise, or
Scorpyon.



Chelonophagi, eaters of snayles.



Cheledonia, an herbe callyd Selandine. al­
so a westerne wynde.



Chelys, a snayle. somtyme itis taken for an
harpe or lute.



Chelydros, a see snayle.



Chemites, a maner of tombe, like to yuorie.



Chemiscus, a parte of the foreshyp, wher­
by the ancre doth hange. sometyme it is ta­
ken for all the shyppe.



Chennis, is an yland, as Pompon. writeth.



Chenoboscion, a place where geese be fed.



Chenopus, a goose foote.



Cheospes, a kynge of Aegypte.



Cherronesus, the parte of Grece callydde
nowe Morea. It is sometyme taken for the
north part of the great Asia, it is also callid
Chersonesus.



Chersina, a kynde of lande snayles.



Chersydros, a serpent, whiche abydeth as
well in water, as on londe.



Cherubin, one of the holy orders of aun­
gelles, wherein is the science dyuine and
mystycalle.



Cherusci, a people of Germany.



Chibis, an herbe.



Chilorus, a ryuer of Macedonie.



Chiliarchus, a capitayne of a thousand men.



Chilias, adis, the numbre of a thousande.



Chilon, one of the. vii. wyse men of Grece.



Chilones, men hauynge great lyppes.



Chim&ecedil;ra, a gote. Also a mountayne in Ly­
cia. Also a monster, hauynge thre heedes.
one lyke a lyon, an other lyke a goote, the 
thyrde lyke a dragon.



Chimerinos, a cerkle of heuen, into the
whiche whan the sonne cometh, the days
be at shortest.



Chymus, the iuyce procedynge of meate
digested, whiche by the vaynes commeth
into the membres, and restoreth that whi­
che is consumed by heate.



Chios, an yle in the see callyd Eous, whi­
che was somtyme called Aeolia, where ma­
stix growith.



Chirâgra, the goute in the fyngers.



Chiragricus, he that hath suche a disease.



Chiridota, a cote with longe sleues.



Chirographum, et chirographus, an obliga­
tion or lyke instrumente, wherby a man is
bounden, and hath put to his hande.



Chiromantia, palmestry.



Chiron, nis, the name of a man, whom poe­
tes doo fayne to be the one halfe of a man,
the other halfe lyke a hors: who fyrstdyd
fynde the vertues of herbes, and taughte
Aesculapius phisike, and Apollo to harpe,
and Astronomy to Hercules, and was ma­
ster to Achylles, and excelled all other men
of his tyme in vertue and iustyce.



Chironium, is a fore in the legges of fete,
which is hote, & swelleth by the two sydes.



Chironia, wylde vyne.



Chironomia, a facyon of gesture with the
handes vsed in daunsynge, or in keruynge
of meate.



Chirotheca, a gloue.



Chirurgia, surgerye.



Chirurgus, a surgion.



Clena, a cloke.



Chlamis, idis, a cloke, whiche proprely is




worne by men of warre.



Chlamidatus, cloked.



Chobar, signifieth all the greatte floodes,
which be in the region of Caldee.



Chœnix, icis, a certayne measure, contay­
nynge foure tymes the measure callyd
Sextarius.
rede in the table of greke mesures.



Cholera, an humour callyd choler. Also a
syckenes callyd the colyke.



Choliambi, a certayne kynde of verses.



Chondros, a grayne of frankensence.



Choragium, stuffe, proprely wherwith that
place is adorned, where as shall be enter­
ludes or disguysynges.



Choragus, he that kepethe suche stuffe or
apparayle.



Chorannei, certayn men that lyue in wod­
des in Persia, whiche are soo swyfte, that
they take hartes with runnynge.



Choraula, the crafte to blowe trumpettes,
or to playe on shawlines, or other lyke
pypes.



Choraules, players on the sayde Instru­
mentes.



Chorda, a corde or rope.



Chorea, a daunse.



Choriambus, a fote in meetre, which hath
the fyrste syllable, and the laste longe, and
two in the myddell short.



Chorius, a fote in meter, whiche by an o­
ther name is called trochæus, & is but of. ii.
syllables, the fyrst longe, the seconde short.



Chorobates, a measure to meete grounde
with, or a masons rule.



Chortos, hay, or grasse mowen.



Chorus, the company of players or daun­
cers. also a quyar.



Chresis, is vse, & catachresis is abusyon.



Chreston, an herbe called cycorie.



Chytrapus podis, a treuytte.



Chrestus, the name of a noble authour of
Athenes.
Columella


Chria, a notable sentence spoken shortly, to
exhorte to vertue, or disswade from vyce.



Chrisis, vnction.



Christus, annoynted.



Chromaticus, whose colour neuer chaun­
geth, but is alway one.



Chronica, corum, an historie of actes done,
with the tymes expressed. Cronicles.



Chronicus, ca, cum, temporal, or pertayning
to tyme.



Chrysia, a cytie in Phrigie, and an ylande
in Indie.



Chrysendetum, any thing bounden with gold.



Chryses, the name of a Prophete amonge
the gentiles. Also of a maiden giuen by the
grekes to kinge Agamemnon at the battayle
of Troye.



Chrysippus, the name of a famous and no­
ble phylosopher.



Chrysoaspides, knyghtes that hadde shyl­
des of golde.



Chrysocolla, a stone with the pouder wher­
of paynters do make a golden colour. also
goldsmythes do vse it to sowder golde.



Chrysocoma, golden heare.



Chrysocomus, he that hath golden heare.



Chrysogonum, that bryngeth forth golde.



Chrysolampis, a stone of fyrye coloure by
nyghte.



Chrysomela, apples of the colour of gold.
by an other name callid apples of Armeny.



Chrysolitus, a precious stone of the colour
of golde.



Chrysopastus, a stone with golden spottes.



Chrysothemis, the doughter of Agamem­
non and Clytemnestre. 



Chrysostomus, the name of a byshoppe of
Constantinople, and also of an hystoryen,
whiche were so called for their eloquence.
for Chrysostomus is in englysshe a golden
mowthe.



Chus, a certayne measure conteynynge fyx
tymes the measure called Sextarius.
rede in the table of greke measures.



Chytra, a pot with feete, or a tryuette.

 

C. Ante I.

CIbâle, pertaynyng to meate.



Cibarium, meate. Cibarius, a, um, vyle.



Cibarius homo, a vyle persone.



Cibarium uinum, yll wyne.



Cibo, aui, are, to feede.



Ciborium, a kynd of appuls of Alexandry.



Cibus, meate.



Cicada, a grassehopper.



Cicatricosus, he that hath many tokens of
woundes.



Cicatrix, icis, a token or scarre, where a
wounde hadde ben.



Cicer, eris, a grayne lyke to peason.



Cicercula, differeth frome Cicer oonely in 
coloure.


 
Cicero, onis, the name of the mooste noble
Romayne, whyche was the father of la­
tyne eloquence.



Cichorea, & Cichorium, an herbe callydde
Succorye.



Cicina, a nyght crowe.



Cicindula, a fly whiche shineth by nyghte.



Cicinia, a lyttell leane serpent in Italy.



Cicones, a people of Thrace.



Ciconia, a byrde called a storke. also it is a
certain rule or measure.



Ciconius, the name of him that buildid Brixia



Cicorium, an herbe that groweth eue­
ry where.






Cicum, the thyn rynde of Pomegranates.



Cicur, uris, tame.



Cicuro, aui, are, to make tame.



Cicuta, a venomous herbe, which groweth
two cubytes in height, with a grene stalke
full of knottes, bushy in the toppe, hauing
leaues smaller than Coriander, and seedes
greatter than anyse sede, and is horrible in
sauour: Some dothe nowe vse that name
for Hemlocke.



Cidaris, a cappe, which the kyngs of Per­
sia dydde vse, and also the byshoppes in the
olde lawe.



Cieo, & cio, ciui, to meue a thyng, or to cal.
Bellum ciebant, They dydde sette forth to
battaylle.



Cileo, lui, ere, to meue or stirre a thyng.



Cilicia, a countrey ioynynge to Syria.



Cilicium, any clothe or garmente made of
heare.



Cilium, the ouer skynne wherwith the eye
is closed.



Cilix, licis, an inhabytant of Cilicia.



Cillibe, & cilliba, a rounde table.



Cilones, men hauynge great rounde fore­
heedes.



Cima, the tender part of the stalk of herbis.



Cimatia, thinges that be foure square.



Cimbri, a people called Danes. In the old
tyme thay inhabyted not onely Denmarke,
but also all the yles frome Selande to the
northe see.



Cimerii, people of Scythis, they that doo
dwell in the countreys, where as is conti­
nuall colde and moche darkenes.



Cimex, a stynkynge worme bredynge in
wodde or paper.



Cimolia creta, fullers klaye.



Cinedi&ecedil;, stones founde in a fyshes heed.



Cin&ecedil;dus, a wanton boy without shamefast­
nes. Also a daunser of galyardes and wan­
ton maskes. It is also taken for a tumblar.



Cincinni, heares that be trymmed. Cincin­
nati, men hauynge their heare trymmed.



Cincticulus, a short cote called a ierkyn.



Cinctus, tus, a shorte garment, whiche the
Consulle dydde weare, whan he profered
battaylle.



Cinis, neris, asshes.



Cineraceus, & Cinereus, a, um, of the colour
of asshes.



Cinericius, a, um, baken or rosted vnder ashes.



Ciniflo, nis, he that maketh hote the instru­
mentes, wherwith men or womenne dydde
trymme their heare.



Cingo, cinxi, cingere, to gyrde or compasse
aboute.



Cingria, a shorte pype, hauynge a smalle
sownde.



Cingula, a gyrthe for beastes.



Cingulum, a gyrdell for men.



Cinna, a citie of Thessaly. also the name of
a Romayne, whiche exceded in crueltie.



Cinnabaris, a stone callyd a Sanguinary. it
is also callyd in latyn Sanguis draconis, dra­
gons bloudde. it is put into sondrye medy­
cynes to staunche bloudde.



Cinnamomum, & Cinnamum, a spyce cal­
lyd Cynnamom.



Cinniligium, a gyrdell, whiche a bryde or
newe wedded wyfe weareth, a corse.



Cinnus, a heare of a man or womans heed,
or a medly of dyuers thinges togither.



Ciperum, a soote plante or herbe, whiche
is good to breake and expulse the stone.



Cippus, a payre of stockes. Also a lyttelle
hylle, whiche menne calle a barowe. Also a 
tombe, a pyllar.



Circa, aboute, nyghe.



Circe, the name of a woman, by whome a 
citie in the countrey of Campania, callyd 
Circium, was buylded. Also a wytche, whi­
che tourned the companye of Ulysses in­
to beastes.



Circenses ludi, were certain games in Rome
wherin horses ranne with chariottes.



Circerus, a greate shyppe, whiche they of
Asia vsed.



Circino, aui, are, to compasse, to make a
cerkle.



Circinus, an instrument called a compasse.



Circiter, about: and it is referred somtime
to tyme, as Circiter calendas Iunias, About
the fyrste day of June. sometyme it is re­
ferred to the place. Circiter in media arce,
Aboute the myddes of the castell. somtyme
to the thynge. Circiter duo millia hominum
c&ecedil;sa sunt, There were nygh two thousande
men slayne.



Circites, hoopes of brasse or yron.



Circitores, officers in cities, whiche do go
aboute to see that good rule be kepte.



Circius, a sowtherne wynd, which is won­
derfulle vehement.



Circuitores, the serchers of watches. Also
they whiche do go about the stretes to sell
garmentes or lynnen clothe.



Circulo, aui, are, to compasse or close with
a dyche, or other lyke.



Circulatim, by cerkles, or in the fourme of 
a cerkle.



Circulator, he that gothe aboute to shewe
hym selfe, or what he can do, or to deceyue
the people.



Circulatorius, ia, ium, pertaynyng to suche
auaunters or deceyuers.



Circulatrix, she that gothe aboute to gette
money with daunsynge or tumblynge.






Circulus, a cercle or compasse.



Circum, aboute.



Circumago, egi, agere, to leade aboute, to
tourne about.



Circumiaceo, ieci, iicere, to put about.



Circumlitio, onis, bournishinge, klensynge,
or polishinge.



Circummitto, to sende about.



Circummunio, iui, ire, to inclose, walle in, or
dyche in.



Circumnascor, to growe aboute,



Circumplector, to imbrace or close in.



Circumscribo, psi, bere, to wryte, or drawe
aboute with a lyne. Also to deceyue one in
bargaynynge with him. Fratrem circumscrip­
sit in diuisione h&ecedil;reditatis, He deceyued his
brother in particion of the inheritaunce.
Also to gather, comprehende, or descryue
throughely. Cuius scienti&ecedil; summam breui­
ter circumscribo, The effecte of whose ler­
nynge I wylle comprehende or descryue
shortely.



Apulesus.



Circumsecus, on bothe sydes.



Circumsedeo, cessi, sedere, to besiege.



Circumsido, sedi, sidere, to go aboute to be­
siege.



Circumsisto, stiti, sistere, to stande about one,
to defende hym.



Circumspectus, Circumspect.



Circumspicio, exi, cere, to looke about.



Circumspicuus, a, um, that maye be behol­
den on all partes.



Circumsto, steti, stare, to stande about.



Circumuado, to inuade, or perce on al parts.



Circumueho, uexi, uehere, to cary about of­
tentymes.



Circumuenio, to compasse a man, to deceiue
hym, to close him in, as in warres, to oppresse.
Fœnore circumuentus, Oppressed with vsury.



Circumuolito, aui, are, to flee about.



Circumcelliones, tauerne haunters, or ray­
lers aboute.



Circumcido, cidi, cidere, to cut about a thing.



Circumcolo, colui, colere, to dwel now here
nowe there.



Circumcolumnium, a place sette about with pillars.



Circundare, to go aboute as a rynge dothe
about a mans finger, or a diche about a close.



Circumeo, iui, ire, to go about any thynge.



Circumfero,  to cary or beare about. Also to
clense. Idem ter socios pura circumtulit vn­
da, Also he clensed his company thre times
with cleane water.
Vergil. 6.


Circumflexus, bowed.



Circumfluo, to abounde.



Circumfluere, is also to flowe or rounne a­
boute as water aboute a cytie or Coun­
treye.



Circumfluus, a, um, that floweth aboute.



Circumforaneus, a, um, that maye be, or is
often caryed aboute.



Circumforanei, malaperte guestes and tel­
lars of tydynges in markettes.



Circuo, iui, ire, to go aboute.



Circus, a Cercle. Also a rounde place wal­
led aboute, of the whiche there were thre
in Rome, where there was made cer­
tayne games.



Circius, the name of an yle in Mysia.



Cirnea, a cuppe.



Cirri, heares curled, or fethers that doo
growe on the toppe of abyrdes heed, as
a larke or an heron.



Cirtacus, a kynde of baume.



Cis, a worme amonge corne, which I sup­
pose to be called weuyls. Also it sygnifieth
on this syde: as Cis Rhenum, on this side
the Ryuer of Rhyne: Cis Alpes, on this
syde the mountaynes callyd Alpes. Some­
tyme it sygnyfyeth lasse. Cis natur&ecedil; leges,
Lesse than the lawes of nature may suffre.
Salust vseth it ones for beyonde. Cis Rhe­
num atque intra mare nostrum et oceanum, Be­
yonde the ryuer of Rhine, and within our
see, and the occean see.



Cisalpina Gallia, was somtyme that coun­
treye, whyche is frome the mountaynes
callydde Alpes, vnto the Ryuer of Ru­
bycon.



Cicium, a carte.



Ciciarius, a cartar.



Cispius, a mountayne in Rome.



Cisseus, a kynge of Thrace, father of He­
cuba, quene of Troy.



Cissybium, a cuppe or bolle made of iuy.



Cissites, a precious stone lyke an yuy leafe,
bright of colour.



Cista, a cheste, coffer.



Cisterna, a cesterne,



Citatus, called, sommoned, or cited.



Cithara, a harpe.



Citharis, a byshopes myter.



Citharista, an angle of Fraunce by Mar­
cile, lyinge out to the see.



Citharistria, a woman harper.



Citharizo, aui, are, to harpe.



Citharœdus, a harper.



Cytisus, an herbe called chickwede.



Citimus, ma, mum, the laste.



Cito, aui, are, to cite, to sommon, or call.



Citorus, a mountayne where groweth plen­
tie of boxe trees.



Citra, on this syde. sometyme without. Ci­
tra adulationem, without flatterye.



Citreum, an orenge.



Citrus, a tree called a citron tree.



Citrum, a fruite callyd pome citron.






Cittium, a towne of Cyprus.



Citus, quycke, hasty, swyfte. Sommetyme
deuided or parted.



Cito, soone, shortly.



Ciuicus, ca, cum, is the same that ciuilis is.



Ciuica corona, a garlande of oken leaues,
vsed to be gyuen to them that had saued a
citesyn in battayle.



Ciuilis, le, that pertayneth to a cytesyn.



Ciuilis homo, a man experte in those thin­
ges, that appertayne to the ministration of
acommon weale.



Ciuilitas, tatis, courteysy, ciuilitie.



Ciuis, a citesyn or demsen. Also Ciuis meus
my countrey man.



Ciuitas, tatis, a citie, proprely it is the mul­
titude of cytesens gathered togyther, to
lyue accordyng to lawe and ryght.



Cius, a ryuer of Thrace.



Cizicus, a citie in Asie the lesse.

 

¶ C ante L.

CLades, dis, a discomfyture in battaile,
a distruction of men.



Clam, priuilye, vnwares. Clam me
profectus est, vnwaares to me, he wente
his waye.



Clamo, aui, are, to crye, to calle.



Clamor, oris, a crye, a clamour, a noyse.



Clamosus, a, um, clamorous or ful of noyse.



Clanculum, secretely.



Clandestino, priuily, or secretly.



Clandestinus, a, um, priuie, or secrete.



Clango, xi, gere, to sowne a trumpette.



Clangor, oris, the sowne of a trumpet. som­
tyme the crie that geese or other lyke byr­
des do make.



Clanius, a citie of Champayne, nere to the
citie Acerras.



Clareo, ui, ere, to appere, to be wel knowen,
and to be clere.



Clare, clerely, apparantly.



Clarifico, eci, cere, to make clere or apparant



Clarigatio, a clerynge, a subsydie or taske
graunted by a commune consent.



Clarigo, aui, are, to aske clerely.



Claritas, tatis, clerenes. somtyme nobyli­
tie, or honourablenes.



Claro, aui, are, to make noble or honorable.



Claros, a citie in Grece.



Clarus, a riuer, whiche rounneth from the
high mountaynes of Alpes, into the ryuer
callyd Danubium.



Clarus, ra, rum, clere, noble, honorable, famous



Classiarius, diligent.



Classicus, an officer, which with a trumpette
or tabore called people togither. sometime
a man beinge in reputation.



Classicum, a peale or noyse of trumpettes,
or belles to calle menne togither, or to goo
to battaile.



Classicus, ca, um, pertaynynge to nauyes.



Classis, a nauie of shyppes. sometyme it is
taken for one shyppe. somtyme companyes
or fortes of people, ordered in a citie after
the value of their substaunce. Also Classes
be degrees or formes in scholes: as prima
classis, the fyrste degree or fourme. &c.



Clatro, aui, are, to shutte a wyndowe, speci­
ally a lattyse wyndowe.



Clatrum et clatrus, a lattyse wyndowe, or
any thynge made lyke a lattyse.



Claua, a clubbe.



Clauarius, an offycer appoynted to deale
the emperours gyfte of money or corne a­
monge the souldiours.



Clauator, he that vseth a clubbe.



Clauatus, sette with nayles.



Claudeo, to halte. somtyme to erre.



Claudianus, the name of a poete.



Clauditas, haltynge, lamenesse.



Claudius, the name of an emperor of Rome



Claudo, si, dere, to shytte. somtyme to com­
passe: also to put of: also to halte.



Salustius.



Claudus, a, um, lame.



Clauicula, a lyttell kay or clubbe.



Clauicularius, he that beareth the kayes.



Clauiculus, the tendrelle of a vyne.



Clauiger, idem quod clauicularius.



Clauis, a kaye.



Claustrarius, a maker of kayes and lockes.



Claustrinus, a keper of the cloyster, or of
any other place, wherin any lyuyng thyng
is inclosed.



Claustrum, a cloister, or other place, where
any lyuynge thinge is inclosed.



Clausula, a lyttell sentence. or a parte of a
sentence.



Clausura, a shuttynge in.



Clauus, a nayle. Also the sterne of a shippe.
Also a corne on a mans toe or fingar. More­
ouer, Claui be lyttell swellynges of harde
fleshe in the corner of mens eien. Also puf­
fes growing in the stemmis of great trees.
Also in harneys, that whiche is callyd the 
ryuet. Moreouer Clauus is a garment pir­
led or powdred with spangles, lyke nayles
heedes. wherfore the propre garmente of
a Senatour was callyd latus clauus.



Clazomenæ, a citie of Ionie, whiche Pa­
ralus buylded.



Clazomenia, an ylande, whiche is called
Marathusa.



Cleantes, the name of a philosopher, whi­
che succeded Zeno in his schole.



Clerchus, the name of a philosopher. there
was a noble capytayne of the same name,




of whom Xenophon wryteth in the expedi­
tion of Cyrus the lesse.



Clemens, tis, mercyfull.



Clemencia, mercy.



Clementer, mercyfully.



Cleobulus, the name of oone of the seuen
wyse men of Grece.



Cleodamas, the name of a geometrician in
the tyme of Plato. 



Cleombrotus, the sonne of Pausanias, capi­
tayne of the Lacedemons.



Cleopatra, the name of a lady quene of E­
gypte.



Clepo, psi, pere, to stele.



Clepsydra, a dyall, which dyuided the hou­
res by the rounnynge of a certayne mea­
sure of water. It was also the name of a
fountayne in Athenes.



Cleronnoma, herytage.



Cleronomos, an heyre.



Clerus, chosen by lotte. Also a worme, whi­
che distroyeth and corrupteth hony combes.



Clibanarius, he that fyghtethe in iustynge
harnayse.



Clibanus, an ouen, or the mouth of a furneis.



Cliens, tis, a clyent or seruant reteyned.



Clientela, the nombre of clyentes or of ser­
uantes retayned, also their offyce or dutie.



Clientularium, an yerely fee, for counsayle,
or assystence.



Clima, tis, is a porcion of the worlde be­
twene south and north, wherin is variacy­
on of tyme in the lengthe of the daye, the
space of halfe an houre, whiche is set oute
in the tables and chartes of Cosmography



Climactericus, ca, cum, signifyeth the degrees
of mans lyfe by seuen yeres, in the whyche
he is in daunger of death or mysfortune.



Climactericum tempus, the sayde daunge­
rouse tyme.



Climacterum, idem.



Climax, a ladder, and the fygure callydde
gradation.



Clinicus, a phisition, that healeth with me­
dicines. Also he that is so syck, that he can 
not aryse out of his bedde.



Clinopodion, an herbe.



Clinopale, wrastlynge in the bedde.



Clio, the name of one of the musis.



Clisis, declynation.



Clitell&ecedil;, a packesaddell. Also the name of a
place in Rome.



Clitellarii, packehorses or mules, that doo
serue for caryage.



Clitomachus, the name of a phylosopher.



Clitorius, a fountayne in Grece.



Clitumnus, a ryuer in Italy.



Cloaca, a synke, whereby water passethe,
or gutter.



Cloris, a mayden or nymphe, whiche was
maryed to Zephyrus, vnto whome was as­
sygned for her dower, to haue reule ouer
flowers.



Clotho, one of the fatall ladyes, hauynge
power ouer mannes lyfe, in dyssoluynge
thereof.



Cludo, si, dere, to shytte.



Cluo, ui, ere, to contende or fyght.



Clum&ecedil;, the huske of barley.



Clunaculum, a bowchers choppyng knife.



Clupea, a cyte of Affrike, next to Cartage.



Clunes, the buttockes or haunches.



Clymene, the moder of Promotheus, daugh­
ter of Oceanus. 



Clypeus, a shielde or targate of fotemen.



Clismus, a pourgation or washynge.



Clytemnestra, the wyfe of Agamemnon. 



Clyster, eris, and Clysterium, a glyster.

 

¶ C ante N.
¶ 

Cneus, the name of a man.

 

¶ C ante O.

COacesco, coacesci, coacescere, to waxe
all sowre.



Coætaneus, of one age.



Coagmento, taui, tare, to ioyne togyther, or
make lyke.



Coagulo, aui, are, to gather into a kourde
or creame.



Coagulum, curde or creame.



Coalesco, coalui, coalescere, to gather to­
gither, to increase.



Coarcto, aui, are, to strayne or presse to­
gyther.



Coasso, to planke or bourde.



Coaxare, to make a noyse lyke a frogge
or tode.



Cocalus, a kynge of Sycile, to whom De­
dalus fledde out of Creta, whome Minos 
kynge of Crete pursued.



Coccentum, a meate made of honye and
popye sede.



Cocceus, a, um, et Coccineus, a, um, of scar­
lette colour.



Coccina, a scarlette vesture.



Coccinus, et Coccus, scarlette colour.



Coccum, grayne wherwith cloth and silke
is grayned.



Cochlea, a snayle. somtyme the shelle, som­
time cokles. Also a winding staire or vyse.



Cochleare, a spone.



Cochlium, a wyndynge stayre.



Cochlides, rounde ladders.



Coclites, a man, hauynge but one eye.



Coctie, a parte of the mountayns of Alpes.



Coctilis, hoc coctile, soden or baken.






Coctito, aui, are, to boyle.



Coctiuus, a, um, easy to be boyled.



Coctonum, a potte to boyle in. sommetyme
cocula doo sygnyfie styckes. whyche wyll
soone be on fire.



Cocus, a Cooke.



Cocynthum, a mountayne in Italy, that di­
uideth two sees.



Cocytia, sacrifices that were doone in ho­
nour of Proserpine. 



Cocytus, a ryuer of Helle.



Coccis, igis, a byrde called a cocowe.



Coda, a tayle.



Codatremula, a byrde callydde a wagge
tayle.



Codex, icis, the body of a tree, or a greate
boke or volume.



Codicillus, a lybell.



Codiculus, a dyminutife of codex, whan it
is put for a boke.



Codonia, an yland, that the almayns kepe.



Codrus, the propre name of a kynge of A­
thenes, which to saue his countrey, willing­
ly loste his lyfe.



Cœliacus, he that is sycke of the colycke.



Cœmeterium, a churche yarde.



Cœna, a soupper.



Cœnacularia, the way or crafte to ordayne
a supper.



Cœnaculariam facere, to lette a house in di­
uers partes to sondry persones, wherein
are many parlers or drynkyuge houses.



Cœnacularius, he that doth lette such hou­
ses to hyre. Vlp. de pignor. act. I. Solutum.



Cœnaculum, a parler, or other place where
men do soupe.



Cœnaticus, ca, cum, pertayning to suppers.
Apparatus cænaticus, ordinance for supper.
Sermo cænaticus, communication mete for
suppers.



Cœnatio, a lowe parler for to soupe in, a
sommer parler.



Cœnatorius, a, um, bilongynge to suppers.



Cœnaturio, ii, ire, to labour or endeuour my
selfe to soupe.



Cœnipeta, a goer about to suppers vnboden



Cœno, aui, are, to soupe.



Cœnobium, a Monasterye or other place,
where men lyue in commune.



Cœnula, a lyght soupper.



Cænum, myer.



Coeo, iui, ire, to come togither with other,
to ioyne to, to drawe togyther, to gather
togither, to do the acte of generation.



Coerceo, cui, cère, to restrayne, to bynde
harde or straight, to compell or constrayn.



Cœtus, an assembly of people.



Cogitatim, aduysedly.



Cogito, aui, are, to thynke.



Cogitatio, onis, a thought.



Cognati, kynnesmen.



Cognitor, oris, he that pleadeth an nother
mannes cause, his clyent beinge present.



Cognobilis, knowen.



Cognomen, a surname, whiche a man hath
of his auncetours.



Cognomines, dyuers men of one surname.



Cognomino, aui, are, to gyue a surname.



Cognosco, noui, noscere, to knowe, to con­
syder, to vnderstande, to lye with a wo­
man, to iuge a matter, or here a mattier to 
iudge it.



Cogo, coégi, cogere, to constrayne, to ga­
ther to gyther, to mylke a beaste, to make
lycour thycke or harde, to presse into, to set
or brynge in order.



Cohibeo, ui, ere, to restrayne, to keepe of,
to lette.



Cohors, tis, a company of men of warre, a
courte wherin pultrie is kepte.



Cohortor, aris, ari, to exhorte.



Cohum, a thonge or lyngell, wherwith the
oxe bowe & the yoke are bounden togider.



Coinquino, aui, are, to soyle, or make foule.



Cois, a garment of fyne sylke.



Colaphizo, aui, are, to buffette.



Colaphus et colaphum, a buffette.



Colasis, a kynde of punysshemente that is
done for chastisemente.



Colax, a flatterer.



Colchis, an Ile in Asia, where Medea 
was borne.



Coleus, the codde of a man.



Coliculus, a tender stalke of an herbe.



Colidos, an Ilande in the occean of Inde.



Coliphium, a kynde of breadde.



Colis, the braunche of a vyne.



Colitia, a great furrowe for water to runne
into, for sauynge of the corne.



Colla, a kynde of glewe.



Collabello, aui, are, to ioyne lyppes in kys­
synge.



Collacrimo, aui, are, to wepe with other.



Collare, a coller for a hounde.



Collactaneus, he that souketh with me one
norise, a foster brother.



Collatina porta, the name of a yate in Rome



Collatinus uenter, a great swollen bealye.



Collatio, onis, a conferrynge togither.



Collatis signis pugnare, to fyght in a fielde
pyghte.



Collectanea, thynges writen, gathered out
of many warkes.



Collectitius, a, um, that which is gathered.



Collega, a felowe or companyon in offyce.



Colliculus, a hyllocke.






Collido, si, ere, to beate togither.



Colligo rationem, I make accompt.



Colligo, legi, ligere, to gather togyther, to
take away, to bryng togither. Seipsum col­
ligere, to brynge home agayne the partes
of the mynde, that were dispersed. Also to
prepare. Se colligit in arma, he made hym
redy to fyght.
Ci. Tus.4Virgilius.


Colligo, aui, are, to bynde togither.



Collimare, to wynke with one eye.



Collina porta, a yate at Rome.



Collino, to lyne, or lay by lyne.



Collis, a hylle. also colles the backe.



Colossus, an ymage as hygh and great as
a towre.



Colluco, aui, are,to make a glade in a thycke 
wodde.



Collum, a necke.



Colluuiarium, a synke or gutter.



Colluuies, whan the erthe is couered with
water by greatte floodes.



Collutilo, aui, are, to defyle.



Collyrida, a cake.



Collyrium, a medicine for soore eyes.



Colo, aui, are, to strayne out lycour.



Cola, a streynour.



Colo, ui, ere, to worshyp, to loue, or fauour,
to haunte, to inhabyte or dwelle, to leade,
Hanc uitam colo, I leade this lyfe. to tylle,
or husbande grounde.



Colobium, a iacket or cote without sleues.



Colocasia, a beane of Egypte.



Colochynta, a frute whiche purgeth fleme.



Colon, a gutte, whiche goth from the left
syde vnto the right, in the which the dunge
taketh his fourme, and there is the disease
called Colica, the colyke. It is also a mem­
bre or parte of a sentence.



Colonia, people sent to dwell in a place, whi­
che is not inhabyted. Also a house of hus­
bandrye.



Colonicus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to hous­
bandrye.



Colonus, a husbandemanne. also coloni be
they, whiche are sent to inhabyte a coun­
trey or towne. Also a hygh place in Athe­
nes, where Neptune was worshypped.



Colophon, onis, the name of an yle: and al­
so of a citie in Grece.



Colophonem addere, to make an ende, or
fynishe a warke.



Color, oris, colour.



Colori&ecedil; uestes, garmentes made of wolle
vndyed.



Colorificus, he that maketh colour.



Coloro, aui, are, to gyue or make a colour.



Colos, the fundement.



Colostrum, creame of mylke.



Colotes, the name of a manne that was a
peynter. Quint. li.2. 



Coluber, a serpent, which lyeth in the sha­
dowe of woddes.



Colum, a strayner.



Columbar, aris, a pyllory.



Columbaris, et hoc columbare, of a doue.



Columbarium, uel columbaria, a douehouse
or culuerhouse.



Columbatim, in the maner of doues.



Columbarius, he that taketh doues.



Columbaria, an ylande in the Tuskayn see.



Columbus, et columba, a culuer or doue.



Columbinus, a, um, of a culuer.



Columella, the name of oone that wrate of
husbandry moste eloquently.



Columellares dentes, cheke tethe.



Columen, luminis, the succour or staye, the 
wynde beame of a house.



Columis et hoc colume, hole.



Columna, a royall citie in Bruce.



Columna, a pyllar.



Columnus, was in olde tyme that we calle
nowe culmus.



Coluri, certayne cerkles in the celestialle
Sphere.



Colus, a distaffe.



Colymbades, olyues, or oyle beries.



Collybus, an exchange of money.



Collybistes, an exchaunger.



Collybia, fygge tartes, fartes of Portyn­
gall, or other lyke thinges.



Coma, al the heare togyther called a bushe



Comagena, a countrey in Syria.



Comare, to haue moche heare, or a greate
busshe.



Comatus, ta, he or she that hathe a greatte
bushe. By translation it is sayde of trees or
herbes, that haue longe leaues or floures.



Comata, a shepardes name in Theocr. 



Comata Gallia, all Fraunce, a this half the
mountaynes.



Comatulus, a boye with a fayre busshe of
heare.



Combino, aui, are, to combyne or confede­
rate togyther.



Comburo, bussi, burere, to burne or consume
with fyre.



Come, an herbe callyd gotes bearde.



Comedo, edi, edere, to eate.



Comedo, donis, he that consumeth his own
goodes ryottously.



Comes, mitis, a companyon or felowe. Al­
so a name of dignitie, which we cal an erle.



Comessatio, a bankette after soupper.



Comessari, to bankette.



Comessabundus, vsyng to bankette.



Cometes et cometa, a blasynge sterre.



Comis, gentyll, full of good humanitie.



Comiter, gentylly.



Comitatus, tus, a felowshyppe.






Comitialis dies, the daye whan people as­
sembled at Rome, for the election of officers.



Comitialis morbus, the fallynge sycknes.



Comitium, a congregation or assemble of
the people for election of officers. Also the
place where the election is made.



Comitor, aris, to accompanye or goo with
one, or kepe felowshyp with other.



Comma, a poynt ending a sentence, where
many sentences be: as, Nihil tibi profuit no­
cturnum pr&ecedil;sidium palacii, nihil urbis uigili&ecedil;,
nihil timor populi, nihil concursus omnium
bonorum: There is Comma foure tymes.



Commanducatus cibus, chewed meate.



Commanducare, to chewe meate.



Commeatus a sulfe conduct, or leaue
to departe. sometyme vytailes for an army
or multitude of menne. sommetyme for a
passage of men.



Commemoro, aui, are, to remembre.



Commendaticius, a, um, that wherwith a
man is remembred or recommended.



Commendo, aui, are, to commend or praise,
sometyme to recommende.



Commentaculum, a marshals or huyshers
rodde.



Commentor, taris, to thynke on, to make
mencyon, to dispute, to write commentaries,
or bokes for remembrance.



Commentarium, uel commentarius, a brige­
ment or other boke, conteynynge thynges
briefely writen. Also it signifieth a comment.
Also a boke of remembrance or a Register
or exposition.



Commenticius, a, um, fayned, or deuysed
for the tyme.



Commentum, a comment or exposytion, a
matter fayned.



Commeo, aui, are, to go hither and thider,
or to go to, or with an other.



Commertium, an entercourse or lybertie to
cary marchandyse from one place to an o­
ther. Also a commutation or forme of bieng
and sellynge togither. Also a famylyarytie
or custome.



Commereo, ui, ere, to commytte. Si sen­
serit te timidum pater, arbitrabitur comme­
ruisse culpam, If thy father doo perceyue
the to be aferde, he woll suppose, that thou
arte gyltie, or haste committed the offence.
Also commerere, to deserue.
Terent. in
Phor.


Commessari, to feede more than ynough.



Commigro, to goo with one to a place.



Commilitones, felowes togyther in warres.



Commilitium, felowshyp in warres.



Comminiscor, sceris, to cal to remembrance.



Comminus, forthewith atte hande, hande
to hande.



Commissura, a ioynt of any thynge that is
closed and opened, as proprely of tables,
whiche be ioyned.



Terentius.



Commitigo, gaui, gare, to knocke. Tibi uti
commitigari uideam fandalio caput, That I
may see the knocked on the heed with his
slypper.



Committo, misi, mittere, to commyt, or in­
ioyne, to offende, to ioyne togither. Also to
do and begynne. Quibus dictis mox pr&ecedil;lium
commisere, That spoken, they began ba­
tayle. Also to delyuer, to compare, to bring
in contencion, to put togither, to confiscate
or sease for a forfayture.
Salustius.


Ci. in Ver.
act.3.



Commodata res, a thynge lende withoute
aduauntage.



Commodatarius, he that taketh a thynge
of lone, he that boroweth.



Commoditas, tatis, a commoditie.



Commodo, aui, are, to do for an other man­
nes commoditie. Also to lende.



Commodum, profite or commoditie. Also
good, apte, or conueniente. sometyme it is
an aduerbe, and than it sygnifieth the same
tyme, in good tyme, scarsely. Commodum
discesseras heri, cum Trebatius  uenit, Thou
were scasely departed, whanne Trebatius 
was come.



Commodus, a, um, profitable, or apte.



Commœreo, rui, rère, to be all heuy or sory.



Commonefacio, feci, facere, to warne.



Commoneo, nui, ére. idem.



Commotria, a mayden that dothe araye or
apparayle her maystresse.



Commoueo, ui, ére, to trouble, to turne or
change a mans mynde. to hurt. somtyme to
depart. Tu et cura, ut ualeas, et te istinc ne te­
mere commoueas. Farwell, and take hede
that thou departe nat hense to hastily.
Ci. Tyro.


Communico, aui, are, to communicate or de­
parte some thynge with an nother, whyche
I haue.



Communis, commune, common.



Commuto, aui, are, to chaunge one thynge
for an other.



Commutare uerba, to chyde, or to gyue a
shrewde worde for a good.



Como, psi, ere, to apparayle gorgiously, to
trymme, proprely it belongeth to women.



Comœdia, an enterlude, wherin the com­
mon vices of men and womenne are appa­
rantly declared in personages.



Comœdice, gentylly and pleasantly.



Comœdior, aris, to ieste, or scoffe.



Comœdus, a player in enterludes.



Comicus, a maker of enterludes.



Compactum, an agreement or appoyntment



Compagino, aui, are, to put or ioyne togy­
ther a thynge that is lowsed.



Compago, ginis, a ioining togither of things.






Compar, aris, equall, or euen lyke.



Comparatiuus, a, um, comparatiue, wherin
begynneth excesse in comparyson.



Comparo, aui, are, to compare or make e­
quall, or more, to ordeyne, to prepare, to
ioyne, to deuyse, to bye.



Comparatio, comparyson, preparation, or
byenge.



Compasco, to fede or kepe cattell.



Compascuus ager, a common fielde.



Compedes, gyues or fetters.



Compeditus, a, um, fettred or gyued.



Compello, puli, pellere, to compelle or con­
strayne, to ioyne or brynge togither.



Compello, aui, are, to speake to, to accuse.



Compendiarius, a, um, compendious or brefe.



Compendiosus, a, um, very profitable.



Compendium, a sauynge or sparyng, or ad­
uauntage, a compendious or shorte fourme
in wrytinge or other acte.



Compendifacio, to make compendious.



Compenso, aui, are, to make recompense,
or amendes.



Compensatio, onis, a recompense, or satis­
faction.



Comperendino, to deferre, or put of, or delay.



Comperendinatio, a delaye.



Comperendinaria dies, a daye ouer in mat­
ters of lawe.



Comperio, ii, ire, to knowe of an other man.



Comperior, iris, to fynde, or imagin in myn
owne opinion.



Compertus furti, founden gyltie of felony.



Compertum habeo, I knowe or perceyue.



Compernis, he that hath his knees nyghe
to gither, or longe fete.



Compesco, scui, scere, to assuage, to mitigate



Competo, tii, tere, to aske, or sue for an of­
fyce, or other lyke thinge agaynst an other
that dothe the semblable. Competit, It is
mete or conuenient. Hoc illi competit, That
is mete or conueniente for hym. Also it is
suffycyent.



Compilo, aui, are, to take by extorcyon or
wronge, or as the vulgare speche is, Com­
pilare is to polle and shaue.



Compilati, polled by extorcion.



Compingo, pegi, pingere, to thruste. Quid
faciam nunc, si tres uiri me in carcerem com­
pegerint? Howe shall I do nowe, if the of­
ficers thruste me into prison. Sommetyme
Compingere is to compact, or put togider.
 


Compita, many pathes goynge into oone
waye.



Compitalia, feastes or drynkynges, made
where as be many pathes.



Compitalicius, cia, um, belongynge to the
sayde feastes.



Complector, eris, to imbrace or hold straite



Complector te amore, I loue the hartilye.



Complector cogitatione, I beare in mynd.



Complector animo, I consyder.



Compleo, eui, ère, to fulfylle, or fyll to the
toppe, to fynyshe, or performe, to make vp.
or supply that lacketh.



Complex, plicis, partener, companyon in act.



Complexus, imbracynge or collynge. Also
agrement in wordes or sentences.



Complico, aui, are, to folde or wrappe to­
gyther.



Complodo, si, dere, to clappe togyther the
handes for ioye.



Complura, ryght many.



Compluries, very often.



Compluuium, a gutter, wherin fallyth rain
from many houses.



Compono, to put or ioyn togither, to make
ordeine, or dispose. Also to compare, to ad­
orne, to gather, to recreate, to appease, to
conclude, to accorde or agree, to redeme,
to dissemble or fayne.



Compos, potis, he that hath his purpose or
desyre. also euer content.



Compos animi, of sownde remembraunce,
not madde.



Compos uoti, he that hath his own desire
or appetite.



Compositio, onis, a makynge, an ornament,
a composition or agrement.



Compr&ecedil;des, sureties or pledges togither.



Comprimo, pressi, primere, to presse or thrust
togither, to holde or refrayne. Also to de­
floure a woman.



Compressus, a defloration or rauyshement.



Comptus, tus, freshe apparayle.



Compulsus, a, um, compellyd or hytte with
any thynge.



Compunctus, a, um, marked, or spotted.



Compungo, xi, gere, to punche, or prycke,
or stryke.



Computo, aui, are, to deme, to accounte, to
decerne, to impute.



Comum, a cytie of France on this syde the
mountaynes, the inhabytantes wherof are
called comenses.

 

¶ C ante N.

COncateno, aui, are, to bynde togither
with chaynes.



Concauus, a, um, holowe.



Concedo, cessi, dere, to graunt, to permitte,
or suffre, to departe away, to go to a place,
to consente.



Concentus, tus, a consente, many voyces in
one tune, or accorde in musyke.



Conceptaculum, or conceptabulum, any thing
holowe and apte to receyue or holde, as a
vessell.






Concepta uerba, wordes expressed and pro­
nounced.



Conceptus, ta, tum, conceyued.



Conceptus, tus, a conception of a chylde
within a woman. And also a conceyte or
thyng conceyued in thought.



Concernere, to concerne.



Concertatum, debated in reasonynge.



Concha, proprely a muskle. sometyme the
shell of a muskle, oyster, or cockle. Also e­
uery vessell that is holow, and open aboue,
proprely a bolle, wherin lynnen clothes be
washed. somtyme a wyne vessel Also a trum­
pet, as it semethe made of erthe, lyke to
suche as the poore men do vse, which haue
the fallyng sycknes, and do come from the
place in Ducheland, called saint Cornelius. 



Conchis, a meate made of beanes.



Conchon, is called a vessell of the grekes,
or the holownes of the cies.



Conchus, a perle.



Conchile, & conchilium, a kynde of shelle
fyshe, out of the whiche a lycour is taken,
wherwith sylke is dyed purple. it is some­
tyme taken for the purple colour.



Conchiliata uestis, a purple garmente.



Concido, cidi, ere, cisum, to cutte in pieces,
to die. Cæsar.



Concido, concidi, ere, concasum, to falle
downe all togither. Et muri ciuitatum con­
cident, And the walles of all cities shal fall
all togither.
Lactantius.


Conciliabulum, a counsell house.



Conciliabundus, he that is redye to gyue
counsayle.



Consiliatrix, a woman that endeuoureth hir
to make agreemente betwene menne and
their wyues.



Concilio, aui, are, to accorde or make fren­
des togither.



Conciliare affinitatem, uel pacem, to make
alyance or peace.



Conciliare odium, uel inimicitias, to get ha­
tred or displeasure.



Concilium, counsayle, or the assemblye of
counsaylours.



Concinnitudo, dinis, aptenes, or proprenes.



Concinno, aui, are, to make apte, or propre,
or fytte.



Concinnus, a, um, apte, fytte, propre.



Concinere, to agre in one song, or one tune.



Concio, ciui, cire, to call togyther a multi­
tude.



Concio, onis, a pulpet or stage, wherein he
standeth that exhorteth people. Also an as­
sembly or congregation of people, callyd
togyther, to here the commaundement of
the kynge, or other in authorytye in the
weale publyque. Also it is the oration or
proposition made vnto them, called a concion.



Concionalis, he that is wont to make orati­
ons or propositions to the people.



Concionatorius, ria, rium, pertayninge to a
Concyon.



Concionor, aris, ari, to preache or purpose
a matter to the people.



Concionator, oris, he that preachethe or
purposeth an oration.



Concipio, cœpi, cipere, to conceyue or ap­
prehende, to delyberate, or determyne in
mynde.



Concipere iusiurandum, to swere in recyting
to othe, as it is ministred.



Concito, aui, are, to steere.



Conclamatum est, it is at a poynte, or paste
remedy.



Conclaue, a priuy or secrete chambre. some­
tyme a bankettynge chambre.



Concludo, clusi, dere, to conclude or make
an ende.



Conclusio, onis, a conclusyon or ende of a
mattier.



Concordare, to be at a concorde or agrement.



Concoquo, coxi, concoquere, to digest.



Concordia, concorde or agrement.



Concorporo, aui, are, to make one thynge
of dyuers.



Concors, dis, of one wyll or mynde.



Concrepare, to make a greatte noyse, or to
creke, as a doore dothe in the openyng.



Concretum, congeled or conglutinate.



Concubitor, oris, he that medlethe with a
womanne.



Concubium, the fyrste slepe in the nyghte,
or the depest of the nyght.



Concumbo, bui, concumbere, et concubo,
aui, are, to lye togither, to accompany to­
gither, in the acte of generation.



Concupisco, piui, piscere, to coueyte or de­
syre feruently.


 
Concupiscentia, a feruent desyre or appe­
tite carnall.



Concutio, tii, tere, to shake.



Condecer, it well becommeth.



Condecenter, agreably.



Condecentia, a besemynge.



Condemno, aui, are, to condemne.



Condecoro, aui, are, to make cleanly, or ho­
neste, to polyshe.



Condico, xi, cere, to appoynt, to ordeyn, to
promise, to aske agayn, to denye, to assigne
by mouthe, to denounce, or declare.



Titus. Li.



Condictio, onis, an action in the law, or ap­
poyntment to a day certayne.



Condictum, a promyse.



Condio, iui, uel dij, dire, to season meate, to
pouder, or otherwise order it, to preserue
it from corruption.






Condimentum, that wherwith thynges be
preserued from corruption, or elles made
dilectable in tast.



Conditaneus, a, um, that whiche is to be
preserued.



Conditio, onis, Condicion, fortune, estate,
election, or choyse.



Conditionem accepit, He toke the bargain
or promise, or he agreed.



Condititia cibaria, powderid meate, or o­
ther wise preserued.



Conditiuus, a, um, that which may be pow­
dered or kepte.



Conditor, oris, A maker.



Conditorium, a Sepulchre, a place wher­
in ordinaunce for warre is kepte.



Condo, didi, dere, to laye saulfe, or hyde.
sometyme to make, or buylde.



Condocefaceo, fœci, facere, to make to
knowe.
Ci. Tus.
lib.5.


Condris, an herbe, called false dittayn, by­
cause it is lyke dyttayne, but it hathe lesse
leaues.



Conducibile, profitable.



Conduco, xi, cere, to brynge with me, to
hyre, to take a house or lande. also to ga­
ther, to conuert.



Conducere, to profyte.



Conducit, it is profytable.



Conductitius, a, um, that whiche may be hi­
red or taken, or is vsed to be hyred.



Condalium, a rynge.



Condyloma, atis, a swellynge in the funde­
ment, somtyme harde, somtyme softe.



Condylos, the knuckle of a fynger.



Confecta, thynges voyded or concluded
by reason.



Confercio, to stuffe, or porre.



Confertus, ta, tum, gathered as people be
gathered in a prease, thycke sette.



Confertissima turba, in the thyckest prease.



Confero, tuli, ferre, to put togither, to sette
forthe, to prepare, to put in. Ne posterius in
me culpam conferas, Put not at the last the
defaut in me. Consilia conferunt, They kepe
their counsels togither. To lay to, or ioyne.
Nouissima conferam primis, I wyll lay to,
or ioyne the laste to the fyrste. Conferre, to
profyte. Conferre in pauca, To conclude
shortly. Also conferre, to lay togither. Sitque
utrique proximum horreum, quo conferatur
rusticum instrumentum, To bothe, next there
muste be a barne, wherin maye be layde vp
togyther instrumentes longyng to husban­
dry. Also Confero, I gyue. Multa contuli in
Catonem, I haue gyuen or attribute moch
to Cato, I haue fauored moche Cato.  Con­
tuli me domum, I went home. Contuli me
ad Catonem, I went unto Cato. 
Plautus.TerentiusColumella


Conferua, an herbe whyche groweth in
freshe waters lyke to a spunge.



Confessor, oris, a confessour.



Confestim, eftesoones.



Conficio, eci, ficere, to performe or finyshe,
to perishe or be consumed, to distroy or sle,
to explicate or declare. Honestatis pars con­
fecta est, quam tibi cupio esse notissimam, The
part of honestie is declared, which I wold
shulde be vn to the perfitely knowen. Also
to bring to passe, Si me amas, confice, If thou
louest me, bryng it to passe. Also to gather
money. Permagnam dices ex illa re pecuniam
confici posse, Thou wylt say, that a greate
somme of money mought be made of that
thynge. Conficere to breake. Nucem denti­
bus conficere, To breake a nutte with his
tethe. Also to consume or waste. Qui cum hic
non uideant me, credant me conficere argen­
tum suum, who bicause they se me not here
they beleue I waste their money. Also Con­
fici, to be made. Quomodo potest ex mul­
torum deorum aceruo unus deus confici. By
what meanes maye there be of a heape of
goddes one only god made?
Lactantius.Cic. offic.Plinius.Terentius


Confido, di, dere, to trust, to be sure, to dare.



Confidens, tis, he that regardeth no lawes,
nor feareth any thynge. somtyme it sygny­
fieth constant, assured.



Confidenter, constantly, assuredly, somtime
hardily, boldly, aduenturously.



Confinis hoc confine, next to or adioyning.



Confinium, a border or marche of a coun­
trey or lande.



Confit, it is made to gither.



Confiscare, to sease for a forfaiture.



Confiteor, eris, to confesse.



Conflages, places, wherinto many wyndes
do blowe.



Conflare, to blowe togither, to blowe lyke
as one bloweth the fyre.



Conflata pecunia, money coyned.



Conflare mendacium, to imagine a lye.



Conflare inuidiam, inimicitias, odium, to stire
or procure enuy, hostilitie, hate.



Conflauit æs alienum, he is runne in dette.
Also Conflare, to gather. Conflauit ex his
omnibus populum, Of all those he gathe­
red a great multitude. Also to make. Et cur­
u&ecedil; rigidum falces conflantur in ensem, And
the croked sithe into the harde sworde is
made.
Vergilius.


Conflatile, that which is apt to be wrought
lyke mettall.



Conflicto, aui, are, to fight often.



Conflictor, aris, ari, to be vexed or troubled,
to fyghte.



Confligo, fligi, gere, to fyght as men doo in
battayle.






Confluere, to come or runne together, or
flowe.



Confluges, places, into the whiche many
riuers do flowe.



Conformis, hoc conforme, of a conformitie
or lyke in facion, conueniente.



Conforto, aui, are, to comforte.



Confugio, fugi, gere, to flee with other.



Confundo, fudi, dere, to confounde, to med­
del together.



Confuto, aui, are, to reproue or vaynquyshe
by wordes. Also to steere.



Congedus, a Ryuer in Spayne, nere to a
towne called Bilbilis.



Congenulo, aui, are, to knele.



Congero, gessi, ere, to gather to gyther, or
heape vppe.



Congiarium, An almes, or other lyberalle
gyfte, giuen by the prince vnto his people,
be it in money corne or vitayles.



Congius, a certayne measure, wherin Sex­
tarius is syxe tymes, and the lycour therin
conteyned wayeth tenne pounde.
reade in the Table of Romayne
measures.



Conglobare, to brynge or come rounde to­
gether.



Congratulator, aris, ari, to reioyce with a no­
ther man of his good fortune.



Congredior, eris, gredi, to go with an other
to fight, or dispute.



Congressus, us, a batayle.



Congrex, of the same flocke.



Congruo, grui, ere, to agree.



Congruum, Agreable.



Congrus, & Conger, a fishe called a Conger.



Coniectarium, effectuall, or parfyte.



Coniecto, aui, are, to suppose, to iudge.



Coniector, oris, an interpretour of dremis, 
A Coniectour, that dothe coniecte what 
shall happen.



Coniectura, A coniecture.



Coniecturale, that whiche is coniectid, or
gathered by coniecture.



Coniectus, us, a certayne direction of ray­
son vnto the trouthe.



Conifera arbor, a tree whiche beareth frui­
tes beinge smaller at the one ende than at
the other, lyke a pyne appull.



Conijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caste, to coniecte.



Coniecit se in fugam, He put him to flyghte.



Coniicere in uincula, To cast into prison, or
to laye a man in the stockes or gyues.



Coniecit se intro, He went his way in.



Coniecit se in pedes, He toke hym to flight,
he toke hym to his legges.



Coniicere tela, to cast dartes, or to shoote.



Coniicere in letitiam, to bringe to a gladnes.



Coniugalis thorus, the chamber where the
husbande and wyfe do lye.



Coniugo, aui, are, to yoke together, or mary.



Coniugium, mariage.



Coniungo, xi, ere, to ioyne together.



Coniunx, iugis, A wyfe.



Coniugus, a, um, that whiche ioyneth.



Coniuro, aui, are, to coniure or conspire with
other for an yll pourpose.



Coniuratio, a Conspiracye.



Conniueo, & Coniuo, is, iui, uel xi, to winke,
and is vsed to be spoken, when men wol let
thynges passe, that ought to be loked on.



Connubium, matrimony.



Conoides, the female of the Cipresse tree.



Conon, nis, the name of a kyng of Athenes.



Conopœum, A Canapy, proprely suche one
as hangeth ouer beddes, and is wroughte
lyke a net, to kepe out gnattes, whiche do
stynge men in theyr beddes.



Conquinisco, conquexi, conquiniscere, to ducke
with the heed.



Consalutare, to salute one an other.



Consanguineus, Coseyne.



Consanguinitas, tatis, Kynred.



Conscendo, di, dere, to klyme.



Conscientia, Conscience.



Conscisco, sci, scere, to consent, determyne,
or graunt to a mattier wyllynglye.



Consciscere mortem, To kill wylfully.



Conscius, conscia, that knowith with an other.



Conscius sceleris, partie or priuy to the of­
fence, accessarye.



Conscribo, psi, bere, to wryte thynges to­
gether.



Conscripti, they whose names be writen or
registred to supply a numbre, whiche doo
lacke: or suche as be newe chosen or added
vnto the other.



Consecranei, suche as be dedycate to one
facte or opinyon.
Tertullia­
nus.


Consecro, craui, are, to dedicate or consecrate.



Consectanei, they whiche be of one secte.



Consector, aris, to folowe all together.



Consensio, A Consent or accord of one mind
or pourpose.



Consentio, tii, tire, to Consente.



Consentaneus, a, um, agreable.



Conseptum, An inclosure or place inclosed.



Conseptus, ta, tum, inclosed.



Consequentia, thynges whiche do folowe
or insue.



Consequiæ, sequeles.



Consequor, to folow immediatly, to optain,
or get, to expresse. Verbis consequi non pos­
sunt, They may not be expressed in wordes.



Conferere manus, to fyght hand to hande.



Confero, feui, ferere, to sowe or sette her­
bes togither.



Confessus, sus, Men syttynge togyther. It
may be taken for a sessyons or syttynge of
men, whiche be commissioners.






Consido, sidi, dere, to sytte or abyde togy­
ther. It may be vsed to sytte at a sessyons.



Consiliarius, a counsellour.



Consilio, iui, uel lui, lire, to leape togyther.



Consilior, aris, to take counsayle.



Consilium, a counsayle. It may be taken for
commyssioners or iudges assigned.



Cic. pro
Rosc.



Consisto, stiti, sistere, to stande faste or sure,
to abyde boldly by a thynge.



Consistorium, a counsell house, specially in
a princis palays.



Consobrini, cousyns germains of two bre­
therne or two systers.



Consolabundus, he that comforteth a man.



Consolida, the name of an herbe, callyd
Confery.



Consolor, aris, ari, to gyue comforte, or
take comforte.



Consono, nui, are, to make one sowne togi­
ther. Also to accorde or agree.



Consors, tis, a felowe or companyon. some­
tyme it sygnifieth lyke.



Consortium, felowshyp or company.



Conspicio, spexi, cere, to see or beholde.



Conspicilium, a lowpe to looke oute of a
howse, or walle.



Conspicilia, spectakles.



Conspico, spexi, ere, & Conspicor, aris, ari, 
to beholde.



Conspicuus, a, um, circumspect, wytty, or
of a sharpe and quycke witte. Also appa­
rant or playne to perceyue.



Conspiro, aui, are, to conspire or consente.
Also to blowe togyther.



Conspiratio, nis, a conspiracye.



Constantinopolis, Constantinople, a cytie
in Thrace.



Consternium, a place where men, whanne
they were bayned, layde their garmentes.



Consterno, aui, sternere, to throwe downe,
to ouerthrowe.



Consternati, men ouerthrowen. sometyme
abashed.



Consternatio, tionis, an abashement.



Consterno, straui, sternere, to straw, to paue.



Constituo, stitui, stituere, to ordeyne, to go­
uerne, to prouyde, to couenant, to fourme.
Corpus bene constitutum, A body well com­
plexioned.
Cicero.


Constitutio corporis, the complexion. Con­
stitutio caus&ecedil;, whiche our lawyers do calle
the matter in lawe.



Constitutus, ta, tum, ordeyned.



Consto, stiti, stare, to persyste or abyde in
a thynge.



Constat animo, He is of a stedfaste mynde.



Constat pedibus, He is sure of his feete,
or hoole.



Sisennia.



Constat, it costeth, it is solde for.



Constare, to stande togyther, to be many­
feste or knowen, to agree.



Constans, tis, constant or stedfaste.



Constanter, constantly.



Constantia, constance, or stedfastenes.



Construo, struxi, struere, to buylde, to or­
dayne.



Consuesco, sueui, suescere, to be wonte. som­
tyme to vse carnallye. Cum eius consueuit
matre clanculum, He hadde company with
his mother priuely. Also to vse for a cu­
stome. sometyme to lyue. Nec magis humo
quem stagno consueuerunt, They lyue as welle
on lande, as on water.
TerentiusColumell.


Consuetudo, dinis, custome or vsage. Also
carnall company.



Consuêfacio, to accustome.



Consul, lis, a chiefe officer among the Ro­
maynes.



Consularis, He that hadde ben consulle, or
were mete to be consull.



Consulatus, tus, the offyce of Consull.



Consulo, lui, sulere, with a datyue case, to
gyue counsayle: with an accusatiue case, to
aske counsaylle. Also with a datiue case, it
sygnifieth to prouyde, to helpe to. Graui­
ter de se consulere, To doo somme hurte to
hym selfe.



Consulto, taui, tare, to gyue or aske coun­
sayle often, to delyberate or shewe myne
aduyse often.



Consulto, delyberately, or aduysedly.



Consultor, toris, he that gyueth counsayle, 
somtyme he that asketh counsayle.



Consultus, tus, & Consultum, the thing that
is consulted. Sometyme an acte of coun­
saylle.



Consummo, aui, are, to summe vp in a reck­
nynge, to fynishe or performe, or make vp,
or make perfite.



Consummatus, ta, tum, perfyte, at a pointe.



Consumo, sumpsi, sumere, to consume, or
distroye.



Consuo, ui, ere, to sowe togyther, or ioyne.



Consyderate, with a consyderation.



Consyderatus, he that dothe a thinge with
consyderation.



Consydero, aui, are, to consyder.



Contabulari, to bourde, or to laye bourdes
on a roufe or floure.



Contagium, & Contagio, Contagionis, & 
Contages, an infectiue syckenesse.



Contamino, taminaui, taminare, to vyolate,
or defyle, with myxtynge thynges togy­
ther, to dishoneste.



Contemno, contempsi, contemnere, to dis­
pyse, or contempne, whyche is lasse than
despysynge.






Contemptus, tus, despyte.



Contemplatio, onis, a beholdynge, special­
ly in the mynde with deuocion to God.



Contemplo, aui, & comtemplor, aris, to be­
holde intentifely with great affection.



Contemporanei, they which be at one time.

 

Contemptibilis, bile, he that is to be despi­
sed, or not regarded.



Contemptor, aris, to sette lyttell by.



Contendo, di, dere, to contende, or resyste,
or stryue, to caste or shote a darte or arow:
to contynue, to make haste, to inforce.



Contentio, onis, resystence, stryfe, or de­
bate. Also a sharpe oration apt to confirme
or repreue, a continuance, an inforcement
or settynge forth with vehemence.



Contentus, ta, tum, that whiche is contay­
ned. also content or satisfied.



Contineo, nui, ere, to contayn, to withhold,
to lette.



Conterraneus, countrey man.



Contestari, to aske to gither wytnesse.



Conticeo, ticui, cére, to hold my peace with
other. Conticesco, idem.



Conticinium, bedde tyme, or the fyrst part
of nyght, whan men prepare to take theyr
rest, and all thing is in silence.



Contingo, aui, are, to raufter a house.



Contignatio, onis, the raufterynge.



Continens, tis, firme lande, that is none ile.
also contynuall.



Continenter, continually, contynentely, or
fyrmely.



Continentia, continence, a vertue, refusing
thinges that are pleasaunt. Also resistence
of ylle.



Contineo, nui, ere, to refrain, to kepe back,
to contayne, to kepe togither.



Contingo, tigi, tingere, to touche.



Contigit,  It hath hapned.



Continuo, aui, are, to contynue.



Continuus, a, um, contynuall.



Continue, contynually.



Contor, aris, to abyde.



Contort&ecedil; res, thinges wounden and twy­
sted. Also suche matter, as oone parte can
not agree with an other.



Contra, agayn a place, a person, or a thing
on the other parte.



Contracto, aui, are, to attayne, or compre­
hende.



Contradico, dixi, dicere, to contrary in wor­
dis, to saye contrary.



Contraeo, to goo contrarye or agaynste
a thinge.



Contraho, traxi, trahere, to gather togi­
ther. Contrahere æs alienum, To be indet­
ted, to commytte, to make a contracte or
bargayne, to drawe togyther. Contrahe­
re, to shrynke. Nerui contrahuntur, the sy­
newes be shrunken.



Contrahere frontem, to lowre. Bona con­
tracta, goodes gotten by conqueste.



Contrarius, a, um, contrarye.



Contrauenio, ire, to happen contrary, come
contrarye.



Controuersia, a controuersie or variance.



Controuersiosus, lytigious, or full of con­
trouersye.



Controuersor, aris, to contende or vary.



Controuersus, a, um, contrary, or in contra­
ry wise. Res controuersa, mater in contro­
uersye.



Contubernium, a felowshyp or a companie.



Contubernalis, a felowe or companyon, or
of one company.



Contumax, macis, disobedient, or frowarde
in opinyon, he that wyl not be perswaded.



Contumacia, dysobedyence, a selfe wylle,
or frowardenes.



Contumelia, a reproche, a thynge done or
spoken to a mans rebuke.



Contumeliosus, he that vseth to speake re­
bukefully.



Contundo, tudi, tundere, to breke to peces,
or stryke downe.



Contuosi oculi, eien loking narowe.



Contus, a longe speare or morys pike. also
a longe pole with yron at the ende, wher­
with shypmen do gauge the water.



Conuallis, a valey hauynge hilles on bothe
sydes.



Conuaso, aui, are, to gather by stelthe.



Conuen&ecedil;, people assembled of diuers coun­
treys, dwelling in one countrey or towne.



Conuenientia, a congruence. Also a comming
togither of people.



Conuenire, to come togither, or to assemble
in one place. Also to agree, to sewe at the
lawe, or bringe in iugement. Also to deter­
mine, to speake with one, to accorde. Con­
uenit inter me atque hunc, it is agreed betwene
him and me, De pretio conuenit, we are a­
greed of the price. In manum conuenit, She
is my wyfe.



Conuent&ecedil;, couenantes of mariage.



Conuenticulum, a congreation, most com­
monly for an yll purpose.



Conuentio, onis, & conuentum, a couenaunt.



Conuentus,  an assembly of people, warned
by the chiefe officers commaundement.



Conuentus maximus, may be taken for a par­
lyament. Minores conuentus, sessions of
the peace.



Conuersor, aris, to be conuersaunt.



Conuersatio,  conuersation or familiaritie.



Conuerto, uerti, tere, to conuert, or tourne.



Conuexum, the outwarde part and rounde­




nes of a thynge that is holowe.



Conuicinium, a neyborhode.



Conuicior, aris, ari, to speake in reproche.



Conuicium, a reproche or rebuke.



Conuictor, oris, a dayly companyon at ta­
ble, or a dayly geste.



Conuiualis, le, pertaynynge to feastes.



Conuiuor, aris, ari, to feaste or bankette, or
to take meales with other men.



Conuiuator, toris, a feaster or banketter.



Conuiua & conuictor, a beden gest, he that
is inuited or beden to dyner or supper.



Conuiuium, a feaste or bankette.



Conuoluolus, a lyttell worme with manye
feete and heary, that eateth the leaues of
vynes. Also an herbe runnynge vppe by
bushes, hauynge a floure lyke to a lyly, but
it hath no sauoure. peraduenture that whi­
che is called withwynde.



Conuoti, sworne bretherne, or men making
one auowe or promyse.



Conus, proprely the pyneapple tre, by tran­
slation it is a figure in facion lyke to a pyne
appull. Also the crest of an helmet or salet.



Coniscare, to bushe or streke heed to heed
as rammes do.



Conoides, pyneappull trees female.



Coos, uel Cos, uel Co, uel Coum, the name
of an yle nigh to the Rhodes.



Cous, a, um, of that yle.



Plautus



Copis, plentuouse.



Copia, plentie, eloquence, power, leaue, or
licence, multitude.



Copiæ cornu, is rehersed, whan we wylle
sygnifie to be plentie of all thinges, in that
whiche we speake of.



Copiosus, a, um, plentuouse.



Copula, a couplyng or ioynyng togyther,
couples or fetters.



Copulatiuus, ua, uum, that coupleth, or may
cowple.



Coquina, a kytchyn.



Coquinor, aris, ari, to do the office of a coke



Coquinaria, cokery.



Coquinarius, a, um, pertaynyng to cokery.



Coquo, coxi, coquere, to seethe or boyle, to
make ripe, to make redy, to digest.



Coquus, a cooke.



Cor, cordis, the herte. somtyme it is taken
for the mynde.



Eras. in
Chilia.



Corne edito, Do not tourment thy mynde
with care or heuynesse.



Cora, a cytie that Dardanus buylded, of
whiche the inhabitantes are called Corani.



Coracesius, a part of the hyll Taurus.



Corallium, a stone callyd corall.



Corallobachates, a stone with golden rays.



Coram, before, openly, in presence.



Corambla, an herbe that maketh the eies
duske and weake of syght.



Corax, acis, a crowe.



Coraxicus, a parte of the hyll Taurus.



Coraxis, a mountayne in Asia, also a flood.



Corbis, a baskette.



Corbita, a great shippe, called a foyst.



Corbona, the treasure of the temple a­
monge the Iewes.



Corchorus, a vyle herbe.



Corculum, sweete harte. also wyse menne
were so called amonge the Romayns.



Corcyra, an yle in Grece.



Cordatus homo, a wytty man, and of great
memorie.



Cordi est, it is to my mind, it contenteth me.



Cordolium, sorowe, grefe at the harte.



Corduba, a citie in Spayne.



Cordus, a, um, that thynge, whiche spryn­
geth or cometh late in the yere. Cordum
fœnum, latewarde haye.



Cordi agni, latewarde lambes.



Coreaceus, a, um, of lether.



Coriago, aginis, the syckenesse of cattalle,
whan they are clunge, that their skynnes
do cleaue faste to their bodies.



Coriarius, a tanner, also a curriar.



Corinthiacus, a, um, of Corinthe.



Corinthia uasa, plate made of the mettal of
Corinthe, whiche was myxt mettall.



Corinthus, a citie in Achaia, which was in
that parte of Greece, that is nowe callyd
Morea: wherof came a prouerbe, Non est
cuiuslibet Corinthum appellere, It is not in
euery mans power to ariue at Corinthus,
whiche doth signifie, It pertayneth not to
euery man to atttempt thingis dangerous,
or harde to acheue. Vide originem in chilia­
dibus adagiorum Erasmi, uel in Aulo Gellio.



Corium, the skinne of a beaste. also lether,
the pane of a wall made with lyme & sande.



Corna, &ecedil;, the name of. ii. cities.



Cornelia, a noble woman of Rome.



Cornetum, a groue of hawthorne.



Corneus, a, um, of hawthornes.



Cornicen, a blower in a horne.



Cornicor, aris, ari, to make a chattryng like
a choughe.



Cornicularius, a certayne offyce in armes,
concernyng capitall sentences.



Cornicum oculos configere, to pricke out the
crowes eien, is a prouerbe vsed, whan we
wold signifie, that one with a newe deuise,
had obscured the doctrine or estimation of
them, which had ben afore him, & had made
them to seeme, that they knewe or see no­
thing. It may be also saide, where one man
wyll make all other men blynde, that haue
ben before him: & reproue or dissolue that,
whiche hath ben allowed by wyse men.






Corniculum, a garment pertainyng to soul­
diours. Also somtyme a towne in Italy.



Cornigenus, a, um, of the kynde, whyche
hath hornes.



Corniger, geris, al thing that bereth a horn.



Cornupes, pedis, euery beaste that hathe
horne on his feete.



Cornix, nicis, a byrde called a chowgh.



Cornu, a horne: by translation, the corners
and wyndinges of ryuers. Also the twoo
endes of a battayle be callid, Dextrum cor­
nu, et sinistrum cornu.



Cornucopi&ecedil;, was a horne that Hercules
plucked from Achelous, whiche horne the
Nymphes or immortall ladyes fylled with
swete flowres and fruites.



Cornupeta, a beaste that stryketh with his
hornes.



Cornus, nus, a hawthorne tree,



Cornutus, a, um, that whiche hath hornes.



Corolla, a garlande.



Corollarium, that whiche is aboue the ve­
ry measure. also a lytell crowne.



Corona, a crowne, a garlande, a chaplette,
a company of people standyng rounde like
a cerkle. Also the cerkle aboute the mone.



Coronamentum, a multitude of crounes, or
garlandes.



Coronarius, ria, a maker of crownes, or
garlandes.



Corone, a towne in Greece in the partes
nowe named Morea.



Coronea, a cytie in the partes of Bœotia, 
in Greece.



Coronis, nidis, the nose of a shyppe. Also
an ende, the extreme parte, the toppe, the
horne, or other lyke.



Corono, aui, are, to crowne, or sette on a
crowne or garlande.



Corporalis, le, corporall.



Corporatio, corporatura, the quantitie, state,
or facyon of the body, corporature.



Corporeus, ea, um, that which is of a bodi­
ly substance.



Ennius.



Corporo, aui, are, to kyll.



Corpulentus, corpulente or grosse in bo­
dy, fleshy.



Corpus, corporis, a body. sometyme it sig­
nifieth but flesshe onely. also sometyme all
maner of substance.



Corrado, rasi, dere, to shaue or scrape, to
take away, spoyle, sell, or alienate.



Corrigo, rexi, rigere, to correcte, or amende.



Corrector, toris, a correcter, or amender.



Corripio, pui, pere, to rebuke. proprely it is
to take a thinge quyckely, and with haste.



Corripitur febre, he is taken with a feuer.



Corripitur somno, He is faste a slepe.



Corriuare, is proprely of beastes, to go to­
gither to watrynge.



Corrugi, furrowes made in hylles, to con­
uey water, to washe the owre of mettall.



Corrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to corrupte, to vi­
ciate, to distroy, to suborne, to tempte, or
procure by gyftes.



Corruptela, corruption or defylynge.



Corsica, an Ile in the myddell see betwene
Gean and the Ile of Sardinia.



Cortex, corticis, a rynde or barke.



Cortina, a dyers fatte. Also it is the table
of Apollo, from the whiche he gaue aun­
swere. Cato taketh it for a vessell, oute of
the whiche oyle is lette runne. Also that
whiche is called a corteyne of lynnen cloth
or sylke. Also places deuided with cortay­
nes be called Cortin&ecedil;.



Cortinale, the place where vesselles be set,
wherin wyne and hony is sodden.



Cortinon, radyshe seede.



Cortona, a citie in Tuscane.



Cortyna, or gortyna, a cite in the ile of Candy



Corus, the northwesterne wynde. Also a
measure contaynynge .xlv. bushels.



Corusco, aui, are, to brandyshe or glytter.



Coruus, a crowe.



Corybantes, the priestes of the Idoll Cy­
beles, which as madde men waggyng their
heedes and daunsynge, playinge on cym­
bales, ranne about the stretes, prouokyng
other to do the semblable.



Coryces, curious persons, crafty inuesti­
gatours or serchers of mattiers. Also a
hylle in Crete, lyenge on the see syde.



Corycium, a gardeuiandes or walet, or o­
ther lyke thynge to put in vitayles.



Corycum, the name of a cytie and moun­
tayne in Sycile.



Corydalus, a larke.



Coryletum, a groue of hasylles.



Corylus, an hasyll and a hasylle nutte, or
fylberde.



Corymbi, bearies of an yuy.



Corymbites, a kynde of spurge.



Coriph&ecedil;us, the chiefe in euery order.



Corythus, a bowe case, or a quyuer for a­
rowes.



Corythus, a town in Tuscan nere to Aretium



Coryza, the pose, or distillation out of the
heed into the eyes and nose.



Cos, cotis, a whetstone.



Cosmeta, a chamberer, or woman, that ap­
parayleth hir maistresse.



Cosmicus, ca, cum, worldly.



Cosmographia, the description of the world.



Cosmographus, he that discribith the world.



Cosmus, a propre name.



Cossi, wormes bredde in trees, which the
people of Phrigia, dyd eate for a delycate




meate. Also men or women that haue their
bodies riueled or full of wryncles.



Costa, a rybbe.



Costus, uel costum, a tree or herbe, whiche
is very soote in sauour.



Cosyros, an Ile in Aphrike.



Coticula, a touche stone, wheron they trye
golde and syluer.



Cotidie, dayly, day by day.



Coton, a hauen made with stoone. Also a
towne in Syria, of the whiche a certayne
kynde of smalle fygges, are called plural­
ly, cotona, uel coctona.



Cotoneum, a quynse.



Cothurnus, a slipper, specially high corked.
somtime it is taken for a hygh and arrogant
forme of speakynge or writynge.



Coturnix, nicis, a byrde named a quayle.



Cotyla, a vessell or cuppe to drynke of, su­
che as Diogenes vsed, before he lerned of
a chylde to drinke out of his hande.



Cotyle, all the holownes of a cuppe: also
a measure aboute the quantytie of halfe a
pynte: also the ioynte of a mans thygh. al­
so a weight of. ix. ounces.



Cotylum, a place in the mountayne of Ida,
out of the whiche rounneth thre great ry­
uers, Scamander, Granicus, & Aesopus.



Couinum, a maner of a chariot.



Couinarius eques, horsemen that faughte
leapyng out of a chariot vnto horsebacke.



Coxa, ex coxendix, dicis, the thigh of a man.
somtyme the hyppe or ioynt of the thigh.



Conuictus, tus, a lyuyng togither in house,
or at one table.



Conuoco, caui, care, to call togyther.

 

¶ C, ante R.

CRabro, onis, a great waspe, callyd a
hornette.



Cranaus, a kynge of Athenes.



Craneum, a place of exercyse atte Co­
rynthe.



Cranium, the foremooste parte of the
schulle.



Crantor, oris, the name of a philosopher.



Crapula, an inflamation and heed ache, whi­
che commeth of excesse of drynkynge. It
is also taken for drunkennes.



Cras, to morowe, in tyme commynge.



Crastino, is the same.



Crassamentum, thyckenesse.



Eras. in
Chil.



Crassa Minerua, a grosse witte, which doth
nothynge exactely.



Crascesco, cessi, cessere, to make fatte, or ful
of fleshe, or thycke.



Crassiore Musa, with a more playne or in­
telligible senes.



Crassus, a, um, fatte, fleshy, thycke, grosse,
poysye.



Crassities, & crassitudo, fatnesse, thicknes,
grossenes.



Crastino, aui, are, to deferre frome daye
to daye.



Crastinus, na, num, pertaynynge to to mo­
rowe, or tyme to come.



Cratera, uel crater, teris, a greatte cuppe.
Also a greatte hoole on the toppe of the
meruaylouse hylle of Ethna in Sycyle, out
of the whiche issueth flames of fyre.



Craterus, the propre name of a manne, of
whom Persius speaketh in his. iii. Saty.



Crates, grates of yron or wodde. Also the
name of a phylosopher, whyche to the in­
tente he moughte the more quietely stu­
dye phylosophye, he beyng ryche, threwe
all his goodes into the see, saying, Hens
with a myschiefe ye vngracyous appety­
tes, I hadde leauer drowne you, thanne
ye shoulde drowne me. Supposynge, that
he moughte not haue vertue and rychesse
togyther.



Crathis, the name of two ryuers, the one
in Grece, the other in Calaber.



Craticula, a gredyron, whereon meate is
broyled.



Cratinas, a ryuer in Affrike.



Cratinus, a poete whiche wrate comedies.



Cratyles, the name of a philosopher, to
whom Plato wrate a boke.



Cratio, iui, ire, to couer with grates.



Cratippus, the name of a philosopher.



Cratos, power, or dominion.



Creo, aui, are, to make of nothynge. Also
to gette chyldren.



Creatura, a creature or thinge made of
nothynge.



Creber, bra, brum, frequent, or accustomed.



Crebro, often.



Crebresco, crebrui, crebrescere, to be wont,
to be commune.



Credibile, that whiche may be byleued.



Creditor, oris, he vnto whom a man oweth
any thynge.



Creditum, that thinge that is owed.



Credo, didi, dere, to beleue, to truste, to com­
mytte, or delyuer a thynge to be saufelye
kepte, to publyshe.



Credulus, he that beleueth lyghtly.



Credulitas, tatis, lyght beleue.



Crementum, increase.



Cremera, a ryuer. 



Cremium, fried meate burned to the panne.



Cremor, oris, the iuyce of barly steapyd in
water, beaten and pressed,



Cren&ecedil;, the dentis about the leaf of an herbe
or tree lyke to a sawe. Also it is the scores,




whiche men vnlerned do make on styckes
for their remembrance. Also Crena, is the
nocke of a bowe or arowe.



Creontes, the name of a king, whose daugh­
ter Iason maried, whan he had left Medea. 



Creophilus, the name of a poete.



Creperus, a, um, doubtfull, ambiguous.



Crepida, & crepis, pidis, a shoe with lachet­
tes, some take it for a corked shoe or slyp­
per, bycause of the noyse, which it maketh
whan a man goeth.



Crepidarius, rii, he that maketh showes or
slyppers.



Crepido, inis, a creeke on the waters side,
wheron the water beateth. Also the mouth
of a well, & the extreme part of any place.



Crepitaculum, a tymbrell, or other instru­
ment, which being touched with the hand,
maketh a sownde.



Crepito, taui, are, to make a noyse or boun­
synge.



Crepitulum, an ornament of the heed, whi­
che with meuynge of the heed yeldeth a
sowne.



Crepitus, a bounse or great dynne or noyse.



Virgilius.



Crepo, pui, pere, to make a greatte noyse or
sowne. Crepere, to be broken.



Crepundia, tryfles or smal gyftes gyuen to
lyttell chyldren, as napkyns, lyttell belles,
tymbrelles, and suche lyke toyes. Also the
fyrst apparayle of chyldren, as swathels,
wastcotes, and such lyke. And by transla­
tion they say, A crepundijs erat uirtuti dedi­
tus, From his chyldhode he was euer gi­
uen to vertue.



Crepusculum, the breake or fyrste sprynge
of the daye, called the twie lyght.



Cresco, creui, crescere, to grow or increase.



Creuit h&ecedil;reditatem, He is increased in his
lyuelode, or he hath taken possession.



Creta, an Ile called nowe Candy: also a
stone called Chalke.



Cretatus, ta, tum, layde with chalke.



Cret&ecedil;us, & Cretensis, a manne of Crete or
Candye.



Creterra, a buckette to drawe vp water.



Cretizare cum Cretensibus, a prouerbe vsed
where a crafty man wyll deceyue hym that
is crafty: a theefe steale from a thefe, or a
lyer lye before them, whiche vse to make
leasynges.
Eras. in
Chil.


Creticus, ca, um, of Crete or Candy. Also
a foote in metre, whiche hath the fyrst and
thyrde syllable longe.



Cretosus, a, um, full of chalke.



Cribro, aui, are, to syfte or sarce.



Cribrum, a sieue or a sarce.



Crimen, minis, a faulte, an offence, blame,
matter layd agaynst one by action or suite.
sometyme a false suspicion.



Criminale, criminalle, wherin is an offence
or faulte.



Criminor, aris, ari, to blame, to rebuke, to
lay to ones charge, to accuse.



Criminosus, a, um, rebukeful, worthy blame



Crimissus, a ryuer of Grece.



Crines, heare of the heed.



Crinire, to laye forth the heare.



Crinitus, he that hath moch or long heare.



Crinita stella, a comete or blasynge sterre.



Crinon, a redde lylye.



Crisa, the name of a towne builded by Cri­
fus, Phocus sonne.



Criticus, he that iudgeth the actes or war­
kes that men do write.



Critici dies, the dayes wherin physytions
gyue iudgement of the contynuance of the
syckenesse.



Crito, a philosophers name of Athenes.



Critobulus, was a phisition, of whom Pli­
nie speaketh lib. vii.



Crobylon, a cawle to weare on ones heed.



Crobylon, a cawle to weare on ones heed.



Croco, crocito, to make a noyse like a rauen.



Crocinum et croceum, colored like saffron.



Crocodilus, a beaste in Aegypte, lyuynge
somtyme in water, somtyme on lande: and
is facioned in the body lyke a dragon, sa­
uinge that he lacketh wynges.



Crocotirium, cakebreade.



Crocotul&ecedil;, garmentis of the color of saffron.



Crocotularius, a dyar.



Crocus, saffron, a spice.



Crocuta, a beaste in Ethiope, whiche with
his tethe breaketh all thynges in pieces, &
deuoureth it, be it wodde or mettall.



Cronia, feastes dedicate to Saturne. 



Crotalum, an instrument, whiche the Egi­
ptians vsed in sacrifice made of. ii. plates,
whiche beaten togither, made an harmony.



Crotalus, he that hath a sownynge voyce,
and a shyll.



Crudaria, a vayne of syluer.



Crudelis, le, cruell.



Crudesco, crudui, crudescere, to be rawe.



Crudus, da, um, rawe, fresh, or newe made,
not rype. Crudus homo, whose stomacke
can not digest well.



Cruditas, tatis, rawnes, or lack of digestion.



Cruento, aui, are, to make blody.



Cruentus, a, um, blody, cruell.



Crumena, a purse.



Cruor, bloudde whiche commethe out of a
wounde.



Crus, cruris, the parte of the legge, why­
che is from the knee down vnto the ancle
called the shanke.



Crusta, the vtter parte of euery thyng that
is not eaten. Also the scurfe of a scabbe or




wounde. also playster of a walle.



Crusto, aui, are, to layplayster, or pargette.



Crustata, wheron is layde playster, or thyn
shardes of stone.



Crustarius, a pargettour.



Crustulata, a meate made of crustes of bred.



Crustulum, crustum, a crowst of bread, of a
pasty, or of rosted, broyled, or fryed meate



Crustumina pira, peares redde on the
one syde.



Crustuminum, a towne in Italy.



Crux, crucis, a crosse, galowhowse, or o­
ther lyke.



Cruciatus, tus, tourment.



Crypta, a secrete place within the erthe.



Crypticus, ca, cum, secrete or hydde vnder
the erthe.



Cryptoporticus, a place vnder grounde,
with wyndowes lyke to a parler, where
men do dyne in the sommer tyme for heate.



Crystallus et chrystallum, a stone callyd cristal.



Cristallina, vessell & cuppes of cristal stone.

 

C, Ante T.

CTenes, certayne teethe.



Cteniatrus, he that healeth diseasis of
horses and catell.



Ctesiphon, the name of a worke man, which
builded the temple of Diana, at Ephesie, a
worke wonderfull, and renoumed through
the worlde: the whiche was after bourned
of one Herostratus, onely bycause he wold
for some dede be spoken of.

 

C, Ante V.

CVbatus, tus, a sittyng on broode, as a
henne dothe.



Cubicularius, a seruant that awayteth
in the chamber: a chamberlayne, or grome
of the chamber.



Cubicularis, lare, that perteynethe to the
Chaumber.



Cubiculum, a bedde chamber.



Cubile, a bedde, sometyme it is taken for a
closet.



Cubito, aui, are, to lye often with one.



Cubitus, et Cubitum, an elbowe, sometyme
a measure called a cubite, that is to say, one
foote and an halfe: but a cubite in geome­
trie conteineth. vi. of our common cubites.



Cubitale, a forsleue of a garmente, whiche
keuereth the arme from the elbowe down­
warde.



Cubo, cubui, cubare, to lye downe, properly
it is of sicke men.



Cubatio, a lyinge.



Cubus, is a figure foure square on all par­
tes like a dyce.



Cucubo, aui, are, to make a noyse lyke an
oule.



Cuculio, onis, a keuerynge of the hedde,
whiche men dydde vse when they walked
in the nyght.



Cuculus, et Cucullus, a byrd called a cuckow.



Cucullus, a cloke to defend rayne & winde.



Cucuma, a chafar, wherin water is het.



Cucumer, eris, et Cucumis, a fruite callyd a
cocumber.



Cucumerarius, a garden where cocumbres
do growe or be kepte.



Cucurbita, a frute called a gourde. Also cu­
curbita, & Cucrbitula, is a cup, wherwith
Surgyons do drawe out bloud with scary­
sying of the skynne, called cuppynge.



Cucurbitarium, a place where gourdes
be sowen.



Cucurbitarius, a louer of gourdes.



Cucurio, iui, iri, to make a noyse like a cock.



Cudo, cusi, cudere, to strike, as smythes do.



Cudere pecuniam, to make or coyne moneye,
also cudere, to breake or broyse.



Cuias, cuiatis, of whense.



Cuius, cuia, cuium, whose. cuium pæcus,
whose catall.



Culcitra, a mattresse.



Culeus, a sacke, also a measure conteyning
xxx. bushels.



Culex, culicis, a gnatte.



Culigna, a bolle or dyshe to drynke of.



Culina, a kechyn, sometyme the meate that
is dressed.



Culinor, aris, ari, to do the office of a cooke.



Culleolum, the vtter shale of a nut, whiche
is grene.



Culullus, an erthen cup, suche as the galye
cuppes be.



Culmen, culminis, the roufe of a house.



Culmus, the reede or strawe of corne, from
the rote to the eare.



Culpa, is an offence done not weetinge, or
not intendynge to do hurte.



Culter, et Cultrum, a knyfe.



Cultellum, a lyttel knife or a whittill.



Cultrarius, was he that kylled the beast, and
diuided him in the sacrifice to Idolles. It
maye nowe be taken for a slaughter man.



Cultus, cultus, apparayle, somtyme it is ta­
ken for honour done to god.



Cum, with, whan, whiles, where, albeit, for
asmoche, as well. Cum mihi tum illi, Aswel
to me as to him. In cum is some thing lasse
vnderstande, in Tum somme thynge more.
Quod cum omnibus confitendum est, tum no­
bis præcipue, whiche thinge oughte to be
confessed of all men, and of vs moste spe­
cially. The auncient wryters, whan it syg­




nifyed whan, where, and forasmoche, they
wrate it Quom. 



Cum dicto, forthewith after that he hadde
spoken.



Cum imperio est, he beareth a rule.



Cum maxime, excedyngly.



Cum potestate est, he is in authoritie, or in
an high offyce.



Cum primis, very. Cum primis nobilis, Ve­
ry noble.



Cum stomacho, dysdaynfully.



Cum tempore, in a certayne space.



Cum uenia tua, with your lycence.



Cuma, a towne in Grece.



Cumæ, a citie in Campania.



Cumanus, a man of that citie.



Cumatilis, tile, a colour called blewe.



Cumera, a greatte vesselle, wherin corne
was kepte.



Cumerum, a vessell vsed at weddynges.



Cuminum, an herbe and sede called commyn.



Cumulo, aui, are, to make an heape, to fyll,
to adde more.



Cumulatim, in an heape, or heaped vp.



Cumulus, an heape.



Cun&ecedil;, et Cunabula, cradels, wherin chyl­
dren be rocked. somtyme it is taken for the
age of infancy.



Cunctator, oris, a tariar, a differrer.



Cuncti, all togither.



Cunctor, et Contor, aris, to tary, to prolonge
tyme, to abyde, to doubte.



Cunctatio, onis, a tarienge, an abydyng, a
prolongynge of tyme, a doutynge.



Cuneus, an axe to cutte woode, whiche is
smalle and thyn before, and brode & thycke
after, that the wodde may ryue the better,
also a wedge to cleaue wodde with. By
translation it is a company of fotemen in ba­
tayle, that goth in a lyke order, smal before,
and brode behynde: there was a lyke forme
in the Theatre or place, where men beheld
playes, it is sometyme taken for a compa­
ny of people.



Cuneatim, in the fourme afore declared.



Cuneatus, ta, tum, that whiche appereth to be
in the sayde fourme of Cuneus. 



Cuniculus, a beaste called a cony.



Cuniculum, an hole in the grounde.



Cunila, an herbe called sauery, wherof be
dyuerse kyndes.



Cunire, to dunge as a childe dothe.



Cunnus, a womans wyket.



Cupa, a cuppe.



Cupedinarius, an hucstar that felleth meate
and drynke.



Cupes, Cupedia, et Cupedula, delicate mea­
tes, or desire of deynty meates.



Cupido, Cupidinis, the sonne of Venus, god
of loue. Cupido in the feminine gender, ve­
hement desyre or appetite.



Cupidus, da, dum, desyrouse. sometyme it
signifieth a louer.



Cupiditas, tatis, couaytise.



Cupide, desirously.



Cuprum, metall called coper.



Cur, wherfore or why.



Cur&ecedil;, care, thought, study, diligence, warke
or labour, also loue.



Curatio, cure.



Curator, gardeyn in socage, or he to whom
the custodye of a man madde or folysshe is
commytted. Also he to whom any thyng is
commytted to suruey, or to prouyde thyn­
ges necessary for a weale publyke, or to or­
der suche thinges as he hath in charge, con­
cernynge as well priuate thynges as they
that do belonge to a comminaltie: he maye
be properly called a suruayour.



Curatorius, a, um, belonginge to surueinge.



Curcura, an ilande in the see Adriatike.



Curculio, onis, a littell worme in grayn cal­
led a myte or wyuell. It is also the wesyll
of the throte of a man, wherby he draweth
wynde.



Cures, a citie of the Sabines.



Curetes, a people of the Ile of Crete or
Candy.



Curia, a courte, that is to say, where the se­
nate is, or officers exercisynge suche thin­
ges as they haue in charge. it is sometyme
taken for the persons in the courte.



Curiales, they whiche be of that courte.



Curio, onis, a bedell or criar.



Curionem agnum, Plautus calleth a leane
lambe.



Curio, also of Varro is taken for a place,
where priestes consulted of thynges con­
cernynge diuine ceremonies.



Curiosus, sa, sum, curiouse, taken sometyme
on the yll parte, where more dylygence is
vsed, than is necessary or expedient: some­
tyme on the better parte, where we be ve­
ry carefull and busy about thynges, concer­
nynge eyther our selfes or other men.



Curiositas tatis, curiosytie, or to moche di­
lygence.



Curius, the name of a noble Romayne, vnto
whom whan the ambassadours of Samny­
tes hadde brought a great somme of golde
for a present from theyr people, desyrynge
hym to take it, and vse it at his pleasure, he
answered, that Marcus Curius hadde le­
uer haue dominion ouer ryche men, than to
be ryche him selfe, and that he, which could
not be vaynquished in battayl, mought not
be corrupted with money.



Curo, aui, are, to care, to be doinge of a




thinge. somtyme to prepare, to heale one
that is sycke, to take refection or comfort.



Curriculo, quyckely.



Curro, cucurri, currere, to runne.



Cursus, us, et cursura, a course.



Cursor, oris, he that runneth in poste.



Cursim, runnynge.



Cursito, aui, are, to runne often.



Curso, aui, are, to runne alway or often.



Cursorius, a, um, pertainyng to runnyng.



Curruca, a lyttell byrde, whiche hatchethe
and bryngeth vp cuckowe byrdes.



Currus, a carre.



Curriculus, a lyttell carre.



Curriculum, a shorte space of tyme. Also a
runnynge place.



Curtus, ta, tum, shorte.



Curuamen, minis, a crookednesse.



Curuesco, uesci, uescere, to be croked.



Curuipes, he that hath a croked fote.



Curulis & curule, were lyttelle carres, or
drayes, hauyng in them chaires of yuorie,
wherin they satte, thyche were heed of­
ficers in Rome. somtyme it is vsed of poe­
tes for the same offycers.



Curuo, uaui, are, to bowe or make croked.



Curuus, a, um, croked.



Cuspis, idis, somtyme signifieth the poynte
of any weapon, sometyme the stele, some­
tyme a speare heed.



Custodia, the custody, kepynge, or warde:
somtyme he that kepeth, somtyme he that
is kepte, somtyme the prison.



Custodio, diui, dire, to kepe, to obserue.



Custoditio, the kepynge.



Custoditus, ta, tum, kepte.



Custos, odis, a keper.



Cutis, the inner skynne.

 

C, Ante Y.

CYamea, a stone, whiche beinge bro­
ken, is lyke to a beane.



Cyaneæ, or Cyanitæ, Ilandes or ra­
ther rockes vnder Thrace Bosphore.



Cyaneus, a, um, & Cianus, a, um, a brighte
blewe colour, or blunket.



Cyathus, a cuppe. it is also a measure, con­
taynynge as moche as a reasonable manne
may drynke at one draught.



Cybele & cybeles, was the wyfe of Sa­
turne, & was named of painims, the moder
of the goddes, whiche hath dyuers other
names, as it shall appere in their places.



Cyclades, yles in the greke see.



Cyclas, cladis, a womans kyrtell.



Cyclus, a rounde place in Athenes, where
thynges were sold. Also a coyne or poyse.



Cyclops, clopis  an auncient people, inhabi­
tynge the yle of Sycile, which were lyke
gyauntes, hauynge but o one eye in theyr
foreheed.



Cydnus, a ryuer of Sicile, the water wher­
of was meruaylous colde. and as Plinie
sayth, auayleable for the goute in the fete.



Cydon, one of the notablest townes of
Candy.



Cygnus, a swanne.



Cylindrus, an instrument, wherwith menne
do beate floores, or doo ramme with. Also
euery thinge that tourneth about quyckly.
Also stones rounde and longe lyke beade
stones, called langattes.



Cylindraceus, a, um, in the fourme of a
langatte.



Cyllene, a hylle of Archadie, where they
say Mercurius was nouryshed.



Cyllenius, one of the names of Mercury. 



Cylydros, a serpent that rolleth hym selfe,
as he gothe.



Cyma, yonge colewortes. Also the tender
parte of the stalke of euery herbe.



Cymatilis, chamlette.



Cymba, a boote.



Cymbalum, an instrument of musike.



Cymbalist&ecedil;, they that play vpon cymbals.



Cymbium, a pece or cup to drynke wine in.



Cyminum, cummyne.



Cyminus, a laake in Italy.



Cynædium, a citie of Archadie.



Cynanche, a syckenes called the squynce,
whiche is in the throte and iawes.



Cynegetica, volumes wryten of huntynge.



Cynici, a sect of phylosophers, whych li­
ued in pouerte without shame, like doggis.



Cyniphes, biting gnattis with long legges.



Cynocephalus, a beaste hauynge the bodye
lyke to an ape, and the heed lyke a dogge.
Also people vnder the greate cane, hauing
heedes lyke dogges.



Cynoglossa, an herbe callid houndes tunge.



Cynomyia, dogge flyes, whiche doo souke
bloode from a beaste.



Cynorrhodos, the floure of Eglantyne.



Cynos, in latyne is canis, a dogge. Also a
citie in Locris.



Cynosbatum, a thorne, the leafe wherof is
lyke the steppe of a mans fote, and hathe
blacke bearies like to grapes.



Cynosura, a figure of sterres in heuen, cal­
led Vrsa minor. 



Cynozoon, a stynkynge herbe.



Cynthia, one of the names of the moone.



Cyparissus, & cyperis, an herbe, hauyng lea­
ues lyke sedges. also a rote like to ginger.



Cyprium æs, copper, mettall.



Cyprus, an yle callyd cypers.






Cyrcerum, a great shyppe, or carrike.



Cyrene, nes, a famouse cytie in Libia. Also
a citie in the yle of cypers.



Cyreneus, a man of that citie.



Cyrnus, the yle whiche is callid Corsica,
or Corse.



Cyrnea, a goblette to drynke wyne in.



Cyrrhea, a citie in the mountayne of He­
lycon.



Cyrrus, the name of .ii. ryuers, one in Ar­
menia, the other in Media.



Cyrus, the name of diuers kinges in Persi.



Cyssus, a kynde of yuye, that groweth a­
lone. also the name of a ryuer.



Cythera, plural. an yle agaynste Candy.



Cytheron, an hylle in Boeotia.



Cytisus, an herbe, whiche is good to gyue
to cattell agaynst the rotte.



Cyzicus, the name of an Ile by Grece.





¶ D, Ante A.

DACIA, a countreye be­
yonde Hungry, on the 
northe parte of the ry­
uer of Dano, or Danu­
bius.



Daci, & Dani, people of
that countrey.



Dacicus, ca, cum, pertay­
nynge to that countrey.



Dacus, ca, cum, idem.



Dactylus, a fynger, a fote in metre, hauing
one longe syllable, and .ii. shorte. it is also
a date.



Dactylides, grapes beinge longe lyke a
fynger.



D&ecedil;dalus, the name of an excellent carpen­
tar of Athenes, whiche fyrste founde the
sawe, the twie bylle, and the awgor: and
made the place in Crete callydde Labe­
rynthus.



D&ecedil;mogorgon, onis, whome paynyms cal­
led the god of the erthe, fyrste creatoure
of the erthe.



D&ecedil;mon, onis, a damned spiryte. sometyme it
is taken for the sowle, beynge in the body
of manne.



D&ecedil;monicus, ca, cum, dyuellyshe.



D&ecedil;monium, a spirite. sometime it is vsed for
a godheed amonge the paynyms.



D&ecedil;moniacus, & demoniosus, possessed with
an yll spirite.



Dalmatia, a countrey on the ryuer of Da­
no, called nowe Slauony.



Dalmata, a man of that countrey.



Dalmaticus, ca, um, of that countrey.



Dalmaticatus, apparailed like a Slauanoise.



Dama, a falowe dere.



Damascus, a citie in Siria.



Damia, one of the names of the goddesse
Cybele. 



Damatris, the prieste of hir temple.



Damnas, condemned.



Damnifico, feci, facere, to do harme.



Damno, aui, are, to condemne, to disherite,
to compell, to delyuer.



Damnum, harme, or hurte.



Damnosus, a, um, harmefull, or hurtfull, or
hauynge moche harme.



Damœtas, a shepardes name in Virgill. 



Damon, a philosophers name of Pytha­
goras secte.



Dan, a towne whiche is the boundes of
Iudea, on the northe parte.



Danaus, the kynge of Argyues, whiche
hadde fyfty doughters, who all, sauynge
one, slewe all their husbandes in one hight.



Danaides, the doughters of Danaus. 



Dani, a people nowe called Danes.



Danisma, vsury.



Danista, he that lendeth for vsury.



Danubius, a famous ryuer, now called Da­
nowe, wherinto do flowe .lx. ryuers.



Danunt, Plautus dothe vse for dant, they
gyue.



Dapalis cæna, a soupper, wherat be many
and dyuers meates.



Dapatice, feastfully, plentuously.



Dapes, delycate and precious dysshes, or
bankettes.



Daphne, the propre name of a lyttell mai­
den, and also of a wodde.



Daphnis, nidis, in latine is a laurell. also the
sonne of Mercurie. It was also a dilec­
table place without the citie of Antioche,
Also it was the name of a porcion of Lycia
by the see syde.



Daphnites, one of the names of Apollo. 



Daphnoides, an herbe lyke to Laurell, now
called Laureole, as I suppose.



Daphnon, a place, where laurell groweth.



Dapifer, he that bearith a dishe at a banket.



Dapino, to gyue, as it were a delicate dishe.



Dapsa, a sacrifice, which was made in win­
ter, and in sprynge tyme.



Dapsile, abundantly.



Dapsilis, abundant, liberall, or large.



Dardanarii, forstallers of markettes, why­
che do bye before hande, to selle dere af­
terwarde.



Dardani&ecedil; artes, witchecrafte.



Dardanus, the name of a prince, reigning in
that parte of Phrigia, where Troy stode,
whiche was of him called Dardania.



Darius, the name of dyuers kynges of
Persia.



Daricus, money of Persia.






Darideus, the name of a kynge of Persia in
the tyme of Tyberius, Caius, and Claudi­
us themperours.



Datarius, a, um, giuen. also an officer in Rome
whiche subscribed the date of letters.



Datatim, one gyuyng to an other, as at the
tossynge of a balle.



Daunia, a parte of Italy, nowe called
Appulia.



¶ D Ante E.

DE, of, ioyned with a verbe, or nowne,
it signifieth withdrawinge or taking
away, as, Decorrico, I barke or take
away the rynde: Depilo, I plucke away the
heare. sometyme it signifieth downeward,
as Deorsum descendo, I go downewarde.
Sometyme contrary, as, Dehortor, I giue
contrary aduyse: Dedoceo, I teache con­
trary. sometyme it sygnifieth for, as, Quan­
tum me amas de fidicina hac ? Howe well
dost thou loue me for this singing wenche?
Terentius


Deambulatorium, an aley to walke in. it may
be somtyme vsed for a galery.



Deambulo, aui, are, to walke vp and downe.



Deamo, aui, are, to loue hartily.



Deartuo, aui, are, to ioynte, or to cut of by
the ioyntes.



Deauro, aui, are, to gylte, to laye ouer all
with golde.



Debacchor, aris, ari, to rage, as it were in
a drunkennesse, to be wodde angrie.



Debello, aui, are, to vanquyshe, or take one
in battayle.



Debeo, bui, ere, to owe, or ought.



Debilis, weake or feble.



Debitor, toris, he that oweth.



Debitio, onis, the acte of owinge.



Debitor, toris, a dettour.



Debitum, a dette or duetie.



Debiti iudicatus, condempned in an action
of dette.



Debrior, aris, ari, to be drunke.



Decachinnor, aris, ari, to skorne.



Decachordum, an instrument with tenne
strynges.



Decacumino, aui, are, to strike of the toppe.



Decalcatum, layde with lyme.



De calcaria in carbonariam, out of the lyme
kyll into the cole pitte. A prouerbe, wher­
by is sygnifyed frome oone myschiefe to
an nother.
Eras. in
Chilia.


Decalogus, the boke of holy scripture, con­
teynynge the tenne commandementes.



Decapolis, a countrey in Iudea, beyonde
the ryuer of slume Iordane, contaynynge
tenne cyties.



Decapulo, aui, are, to empty pottis or cuppes.



Decedo, decedere, to depart from a place,
to mynyshe or appaire.



Decedere uia, to goo out ofthe waye, or to
gyue the way to an other of courteisye.



Decedere de suo iure, to remytte somewhat
of his ryght.



December, the name of one of the twelue
monethes.



Decemiugis, a teeme of tenne horses.



Decempeda, a perche or poll ten fotelonge.



Decempedator, he that meateth with su­
che a polle.



Decendium, the space of tenne dayes.



Decerno, decreui, decernere, to decree, de­
termyne, or discusse.



Decerpo, psi, pere, to pull, or plucke of.



Decerto, aui, are, to contende or fyght
togyther.



Decet, it besemeth, it is conuenient.



Decens, tis, conuenient.



Dedecet, it is inconuenient, vnfyttynge.



Decido, di, dere, to cutte of. also to decide
or discusse a matter in variance.



Decido, ere, to fall of, or away.



Decidua, are those thinges that fall away,
as leaues of trees.



Decima, a tenthe parte.



Decimanus, siue decumanus, na, num, great,
as Decumana porta, The great yate or en­
trie into a campe of an armie.



Decumanus, a generall receyuer or collec­
tour of taxes or subsydies, or other lyke
exactions.



Decimo, aui, are, to take awaye the tenthe
parte from the resydue.



Decimari legiones, was whan the tenthe
persone of euery legion was put to dethe.



Decimus, ma, mum, the tenthe, the chiefe
or principalle, as, Decimum quodque ouum,
Euery tenthe egge.



Decimus quisque fluctus, Euery tenth ryuer.



Decipio, decepi, decipere, to deceiue.



Decipula, a grynne or trap to take byrdes.



Decircino, aui, are, to vnbowe, or to bringe
out of compasse, or roundenesse.



Decius, the name of a noble howse of the
Romaynes.



Declamo, aui, are, to declame, or to exercise
in feyned orations.



Declamatorius, a, um, pertaynynge to such
exercyse.



Declamatio, onis, an exercise in fained ora­
tions.



Declaro, aui, are, to eschewe, to leaue, to
tourne away, to leade away, to alienate.



Decollo, aui, are, to stryke of a heed by the
necke. also to deceyue, or disapoynte. Vna




est, qu&ecedil; decollauit, One womanne there is,
whiche hath deceyued hym.
Plautus


Decolor, oris, ylle coloured.



Decoloro, aui, are, to stayne, to spylle the
coloure.



Decoquo, decoxi, decoquere, to boyle, or
to sethe very moche. somtyme to chaunge,
or digest perfitely. Also to consume or wast
a mans substance, or to brynge detrymente
or losse.



Decoctor, toris, he that hath wasted all his
substaunce, and is brought to extreme po­
uertie, speciallye by lecherye and dyse
playenge.



Decor, decoris, a beautye.



Decoro, aui, are, to beautifie or make faire,
or pleasaunt to the eyes or the eares, to
honoure.



Decorum, a semelynesse, or that which be­
commeth the person, hauynge respecte to
his nature, degree, study, offyce, or profes­
syon, be it in doinge or speakynge, a grace.
sometyme it sygnifyeth honestie.



Decorus, ra, rum, honest, semely, fayre.



Dedecus, dishonestie in acte, reproche.



Decortico, aui, are, to barke.



Decotes, a bare or thredebare garment.



Decrepitus, a very olde man.



Decrepita senectus, extreme age.



Decresco, scere, to waxe lesse.



Decretorius, a, um, iudiciali. Also decreed,
stablyshed.



Decretorium tempus, decretorium sydus,
wherby iudgement is giuen of the increase
that shall succede of any thinge.



Decretum, a decree, a thynge determined.



Decubo, aui, are, to lye downe.



Deculto, aui, are, to hyde vnder.



Decubo, cubui, cumbere, to lye downe, also
to dye.



Decuplatus, ta, tum, tenne tymes dowbled,
or tenne folde.



Decuplo, aui, are, to double tenne tymes. If
it be an aduerbe, it sygnifyeth tenne times,
or tenne folde. Decûplum, like wyse.



Decuppa, he or she that sellethe wyne by
the potte.



Cicero in
Pisonem.



Decurio, onis, an offyce or dignitie, hauyng
authorite either ouer tenne men of armes,
or the tenthe parte of a companye. Also it
was taken for the lorde Chamberlayne to
the Emperour. Also they were in other ci­
ties the same that Senators were at Rome
Suetonius
in Domit.
Cicero.


Decuria, was the order, office, or company,
whiche was vnder the office of Decurio. 
Also the company of iuges, as we haue of
the kynges Benche, Commune place, and
Escheker. And Decurio, he that is chiefe
of theym.



Decurro, decucurri, rere, to runne downe. by
translation it sygnifieth to runne from the
one ende to the other.



Decursio, Iustes, as at the tylte or randon.



Decursionem indicere,  to proclaime iustes.



Suetonius
in Neron.



Decurtatus, ta, tum, shortened, abbreuiated.



Decus, decoris, honour.



Dedecoro, aui, are, to disshonour, reproue,
or defyle.



Decusso, aui, are,  to cutte or drawe oute in
lengthe, or to cut or deuyde in ten partes.



Decussatim, in tenne partis.



Decussis, the perfyte numbre of tenne.
rede in the addition.



Decutio, cussi, tere, to stryke of.



Dedico, aui, are, to dedicate, or tell a mes­
sage.



Dedignor, aris, ari, to disdayne.



Dedisco, dedidici, dedicere, to vnlerne, or
forgette.



Dediditio, a renderynge vppe of a place
besyeged.



Dedititius, a, um, gyuen, or subiecte to an
other mans commandement.



Dedo, dedidi, dedere, to gyue vtterly, or fo
euer: or to become subiecte, to render vp,
or yelde.



Dediditionem facere, sygnifieth the same.



Dedoceo, cui, cere, to teache a manne other
wise, than he hath before lerned.



Dedoleo, lui, lere, to ceasse frome sorowe,
or payne.



Dedolo, aui, are, to hewe or cutte, lyke a
Carpenter.



Deduco, xi, cere, to bryng down, or to leade,
or drawe, or brynge from one place, or one
thynge to an other. somtime to moue from
his purpose. sometyme to bryng home ho­
norably from any place.



Deerro, aui, are, to go out of the right way,
or reason.



Defalco, aui, are, to cutte of, take away, de­
falcate.



Defamo, aui, are, to defame.



Defæco, aui, are, to draw from the dregges,
to clense or fyne.



Defectio, onis, rebellyon, decreasynge, de­
faute, lacke.



Defectus, ta, tum, that whiche faylethe, or
decayeth.



Defectus, tus, lacke.



Defectus solis & lun&ecedil;, the Eclyps of the
sonne and the mone.



Defectus animi, sownynge or lyenge ina
traunce.



Defecta corpora, bodies consumed with
syckenesse.



Defendo, di, dere, to defende, to putte of,
to prohybyte.



Defensito, taui, tare, to defende often.






Defero, detuli, deferre, to brynge to, to dis­
close, to accuse, or appeale, to bestowe, to
giue office or dignitie, to attribute. Deferre
nomen, to complayne.



Deferueo, ferui, ere, to be cold, or pacyent.



Deferuesco, sci, scere, to waxe pacyente or
colde, to appease hym selfe, or withdrawe
his furye.



Deficio, feci, ficere, to fayle, not to suffyse,
to lacke, to leaue, to disagree, to rebelle,
or departe from hym, with whom he is re­
tayned, or goeth frome one Capytayne to
an nother.



Defectus, tus, lacke, rebellion, or departing
agaynste couenant or promyse.



Defector, oris, he that so departeth or re­
belleth, or goth from one to an other.



Defigo, fixi, figere, to sette or fyxe on, or to
perce or thrust through.



Definio, iui, re, to define, determine, or discuss.



Definitio, definitionis, a definition, whyche
expresseth in fewe wordes, what it is that
is spoken of, as, Homo est animal, ratio­
nale, mortale, A man is a thyng lyuely, re­
sonable, and mortalle.



Defio culus, he that lacketh sight in one eie.



Defit, there lacketh.



Deficio, defeci, deficere, to lack, or to be vn­
sufficient. Also to forsake or fayle. Pruden­
tia nunquem deficit oratorem, Prudence neuer
fayleth an oratoure. Quem sanguis uiresque
deficiunt, whom bloode and strength fayl­
leth. Also to forsake his capitayne, and go
to his aduersary. Ab eo defecerat, He went
from him to his ennemye.
Cicero.Cæsar.


Deflacco, aui, are, to weare out.



Deflagro, aui, are, to bourne excedyngly.



Deflecto, xi, tere, to bowe downe.



Defloreo, & defloresco, ere, to fade, or to fal
away as flowres doo: or to lose beaultie.
sometyme it signifieth to burgen or floure.



Defluo, xi, ere, to flowe downeward, to fall
of or away, or come to nothynge.



Defluus, a, um, that whiche floweth or fal­
leth away from any thynge.



Defluuium, defluxus, the fallyng of the heare.



Defodio, di, dere, to burye or hyde a thinge
in the grounde, to dygge downe or into
the erthe.



Defœtus, ta, tum, destytute.



Deformis, me, foule, deformed.



Deformo, aui, are, to destroye, or waste, to
make in picture the fourme of a thing.



Defraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to minisshe or
take away the profyte from an other.



Defrico, caui, are, to rub moch, or to rub of.



Defrigo, xi, gere, to frie moche.



Defringo, xi, re, to breke down, or cut down.



Defrugo, aui, are, to consume or weare out
the profite, specially of grounde, wherof
shulde come corne or frute.



Defrutare, to boyle newe wyne.



Defrutum, sodden wyne.



Defugeo, gi, ere, to refuse.



Defundo, fudi, dere, to poure downe.



Defungor, geris, to vse no lenger, to leaue
or resygne, to perfourme.



Degener, is, he that in his maners is vnlike
to his auncetours, or base of lynage.



Degenero, aui, are, to be vnlyke to his aun­
cetours in maners. It may be said of frui­
tes, whiche waxe wylde.



Degiabro, aui, are, to plucke of heares.



Dego, degi, degere, to leade, to lyue, to ex­
pelle, to pulle of. Degitur corium de tergo
meo, The skynne is pulled of my backe.
Plautus.


Degulo, aui, are, to consume in glotony.



Dehinc, from hensforth, moreouer.



Dehisco, sci, scere, to gape wyde open.



Dehonestamentum, a disfyguringe, or dys­
honestye.



Dehonesto, aui, are, to dishoneste.



Dehonestus, ta, tum, very honeste.



Deianira, the wyfe of Hercules. 



Deidamia, the concubyne of Achilles, on
whom he begatte Pirrhus. 



Deiero, aui, are, to take an othe, to sweare
deepely.



Deiicio, ieci, iicere, to throwe downe, to cast
downe to tourne away, to put out of office.



Dein, moreouer, furthermore.



Deinceps, one after an other in order, from
hensforth, or thensforth, afterwarde.



Deinsuper, vpwarde.



Deintegro, from the begynnyng to thende.



Deiphile, the mother of Diomedes. 



Deiphobus, the name of a sonne of Pria­
mus and Hecuba. 



Deiugo, aui, are, to vnyoke, to vnioyne,
to disseuer.



Deiurium, a great and solemne othe.



Deiurus, he that sweareth solemnely.



Delabor, delabi, to be let downe, or fal dawn
to be consumed or wasted.



Delachrimor, aris, ari, to wepe or sende out
droppes lyke teares.



Delanio, aui, are, to cutte in pieces.



Delapidata, pauementes.



Delasso, aui, are, to make wery.



Delator, toris, a secrete accuser, a complainer



Delatio, an accusation secretely made, or a
secrete complaynt.



Delebile, that whyche maye be put oute, or
put awaye.



Delectatio, delectation in the fences of he­
ryng, seinge, taste, and smellyng.



Delecto, aui, are, to delyte, to leade, to al­
lure to a thynge.






Delector, aris, ari, to take delectation or
pleasure.



Delectus rerum, choyse or election of thin­
ges. Also of men.



Delectum habere, sommetyme signifieth to
take musters for the warres.



Delego, aui, are, to assigne to som office mes­
sage, or other necessary and great busynes,
to commytte a cause or matter to be deter­
myned, to sende in ambassade or message.



Deleo, leui, ere, to distroy, to putte out any
thynge that is writen, to remoue or putte
awaye.



Deleterion, venome.



Deletile, that distroyeth or putteth out.



Deliacus, ca, cum, of the yle of Delus.



Delibero, aui, are, to be aduised, to take ad­
uyse, to determyne, to doubte, to consult.



Deliberatiua oratio, wherin any thynge is
consulted.



Delibo, aui, are, to taste a thynge. somtyme
to vyolate, to distroy, to sacrifice, to drain
water by forowes.



Delibro, aui, are, to pul of the barke or rind
of a tree.



Delibutus, ta, tum, oynted.



Delicatus, cata, catum, delycate, wantonlye
broughte vppe.



Delicias facere, to be wanton, to be squay­
myshe, to play the cockeney.



Delitium, & deliti&ecedil;, a wanton worde, which
vneth may be expressed in englysshe, vsed
betwene a man and a woman in wanton pas­
tyme. Meum delitium, me&ecedil; deliti&ecedil;, my swete
harte, my darlynge, my ioye, and suche o­
ther lyke, expressed best by theym that be
Venus secretaries.



Delico, aui, are, to explane.



Delictum, an offence whan a thinge is vn­
done, omission.



Deligo, legi, ligere, to chose or pyke out.



Delimo, aui, are, to fyle or shaue of frome
any mettall.



Delinimentum, delectation, an allectyue, or
swetenes in feelynge.



Delinio, iui, ire, to anoynte, to rubbe plea­
santly, to towche.



Delinitus, touched swetely, anoynted, pa­
cified, appeased.



Deliniare, to drawe, as a paynter dothe, er
he do lay on colours.



Delitum, blotted.



Delinquo, deliqui, delinquere, to omytte to
do well, to offende.



Deliquium, lacke. Deliquium animi, whan
a man is in a swowne.



Deliquium solis, the eclyps of the sonne.



Deliro, aui, are, to go out of the ryght way,
proprely to go out of the forow, and make
a balke, as ploughmen do. Also to dote.


 
Delirus, he that swaruethe from reason, a
dotarde or dotynge foole.



Deliteo, tui, ere, to hyde me.



Delitesco, I go to hyde me.



Delos, an yle nygh to Grece.



Delphi, a citie and people in Grece.



Delphicus, ca, cum, of that citie.



Delphin, inos, a greatte fysshe, called a
Dolphyn.



Delphis, a temple of Apollo in Grece.



Delubrum, a place, wherin be dyuers ima­
ges of god and sayntes.



Deludo, si, ere, to mocke.



Delumbis, be, weake, somtyme wanton.



Deluo, lui, ere, to wash cleane, or washe out.



Deluto, aui, are, to lay klaye on any thyng.



Demagis, moche more.



Demando, aui, are, to committe holy.



Demarathus, a kynge of Spartan



Demarchus, a ruler of the people.



Demeaculum, a place to descende into a
Cellar.



Demeare, to go downe, or go away.



Demens, tis, madde.



Dementia, madnesse.



Demensus, sa, sum, measured.



Demensum, wages gyuen euery month.
rede in the addition.



Dementio, tiui, ire, to be madde.



Demento, taui, tare, to be madde, to make
madde, to make foolyshe.



Demereo, rui, ere, to wynne or gette.



Demereor, eris, reri, to bynde by frendship,
to wynne ones fauoure, to make a frende,
to deserue moche.



Demetior, to mette diligently, to esteme.



Demeto, tij, tere, to mette.



Demetrias, a towne of Thessalie.



Demetrius, a mans name.



Demiror, aris, ari, to meruayle moche. some­
tyme it signifieth to knowe not.



Demitto, misi, tere, to send downe, to hum­
ble my selfe, to laye downe.



Demissitia tunica, a longe cote.



Demissus, a, um, humble.



Demo, mere, to take away, or abate.



De capite demptum, appayred in substance
or valewe.



Democratia, a fourme of a common welth,
where the people haue authoritie.



Democraticus, he that fauoreth the common
welth, where the people hath auctoritie.



Democritus, the name of a philosopher.



Demodocus, the name of a harper in Homer. 



Demolior, iris, to throwe downe any thing
that is buylded.



Demonstro, aui, are, to shewe openly.



Demonstratiuus, a, uum, that sheweth, or is
shewed, or mete to be shewed.






Demonstratio, onis, a shewynge.



Demonstratiuum genus, a fourme of spea­
kynge, wherin oratours didde either com­
mende or dispraise any man openly.



Demophon, the sonne of Theseus and
Phedra kynge of Athenes.



Demorior, eris, to tary longe, to kepe back,
or cause to tarye.



Demosthenes, the name of a famous orator.



Demulceo, cere, to stryke gentilly and soft­
ly with the hande, as we do to chyldren or
houndes, whan we make moche of them.



Demum, at the laste. sometyme it signifieth
onely, or alway.



Demussata contumelia, displeasure done by
dissimulation.



Denarius, a certayn coyne, after the diuer­
sities of countreys, dyuers in weight. it is
taken nowe for a peny.



Denarius, a, um, that whiche contayneth
the numbre of tenne.



Denarro, aui, are, to tell in order.



Denaso, to cutte or pull of the nose.



Denato, aui, are, not to gyue, or to denye
to gyue.



Denigro, aui, are, to make blacke.



Deni, tenne togither. Cæsar lib. 5. Vxores
habent deni duodenique inter se communes,
They haue wyues tenne and twelue men
togither, commune amonge them.



Denique, in conclusyon.



Denomino, aui, are, to name.



Denoto, aui, are, to blame.



Dens, dentis, a toothe.



Denso, aui, are, to thycken or make thycke.



Densus, a, um, thycke, harde, closed togy­
ther, compacte.



Densitas, tatis, & densitudo, dinis, thicknes.



Dentale, the share of a plough.



Dentatim, in order lyke tethe.



Denticulus, dentatus, ta, tum, dentosus, sa, sum, 
 toothed.



Denticulare, to thruste in his teethe.



Dentifricium, a medycyne, wherewith the
tethe be rubbed, to make them white.



Dentiloquus, he that speaketh betwene the
tethe, or lyspeth.



Dentio, ire, to putte forthe tethe, or breede
teethe.



Dentiscalpium, an instrumente, wherwith
teethe be scraped.



Dentitio, onis, a puttyng forth or growinge
of tethe.



Denubo, psi, bere, to mary or wedde.



Denudo, aui, are, to dispoile or make naked.



Denuncio, aui, are, to shewe or tell a thinge
to an other man, or denounce. Also Denun­
ciare testimonium, to brynge wytnesse into
the courte of iugement, as they doo in the
Chauncerie, where wytnesses are compel­
led to come.



Denuo, agayne.



Deorsum, downewarde.



Depalmo, aui, are, to buffette.



Depango, xi, gere, to plant or sette.



Depeciscor, cisceris, to couenant or promise
or agree, or patise. Depectus, a, um, coue­
nanted or patised. Depectus est cum hosti­
bus, he patised with the ennemies.



Depecto, xui, uel, xi, tere, to keme diligently.



Depexus, a, um, kempte, trymmed.



Depeculor, aris, ari, to robbe a commune
weale, a prince, or a place halowed.



Depelli portenta, whan monstruous or strange
thinges do happen, betokenynge some yll
auenture to happen, to repele it by prayers,
auowes, or other goood dedes.



Depello, puli, pellere, to putte downe, putte
away, or remoue.



Depulsus, putte downe.



Dependeo, ere, to hange downe of a thing,
to depende.



Dependo, di, dere, to paye.



Dependere penas, to be punysshed, to suf­
fre peynes.



Deperdo, ere, to lose.



Depereo, ii, ire, to perysshe, to dye, to loue
inordynately.



Depesco, scui, ere, to dryue cattell.



Depessus, rente, torne.



Depilis, without heare.



Depilo, aui, are, to pull of heare.



Deplano, to make playne.



Deplanto, to sette.



Depleo, pleui, plere, to fylle.



Deploro, aui, are, to lament, to bewayle.



Deploratus, ta, tum, without hope of reco­
uery or remedy.



Depono, posui, nere, to laye downe, to de­
priue or take away, toleaue a thynge in an
other mans custody.



Depositus, ta, tum, layde downe, lefte in an
other mans kepynge. also desperate.



Depopulor, ari, to distroye or waste a
countreye.



Deporto, aui, are, to cary or brynge awaye,
to banyshe.



Deportatus, banysshed.



Deposco, poposci, deposcere, to desyre mo­
che, or requyre.



Depositorius, he that leaueth a thyng with
an other man.



Depositum, that whyche is lefte in an no­
ther mannes kepynge: or that is layde
to pledge.



Depr&ecedil;dor, ari, to robbe a countrey or toune.






Deprauo, aui, are, to make ylle, to depraue.


             
Deprecor, cari, to beseche. Deprecari ueniam,
to aske foryuenes. Also Deprecari, to re­
fuse, to desyre the contrary, to put awaye,
or denye that whiche we wolde note haue,
to haue in detestation, to resyste, to dely­
uer a man by prayer.



Deprehendo, di, ere, to take a man vnwares.



Deprehensus est in sermone, He was taken
in his wordes. Deprehensus est in scelere,
He was taken with the faulte. Also depre­
hendere to knowe, to perceyue.



Deprimo, re, to kepe down, to thrust down.



Depromo, to drawe out, to declare.



Depso, psi, psere, to warke a thynge with
the handes, to the intent to make it soft.



Depuber, depuberis, a chyld or yonge beast,
whiche are not come to ripe yeres.



Depudet, he hath layde asyde shame.



Depudico, caui, are, to dishoneste or vyolate
a womanne.



Depugno, aui, are, to fyght valyantly.



Depurgo, aui, are, to
clense any thing vnder 
fote.



Depuro, to make cleane or
pure.



Deputo, aui, are, to cutte of, to esteme, to
iudge, to repute.



Depuuio, ere, to beate.



Derbij, the name of a people in Asia.



Derce, a well moste colde in sommer.



Derelinquo, dereliqui, derelinquere, to for­
sake vtterly.



De repente, sodaynly.



Derideo, risi, dere, to laugh, to scorn, tomock



Deripeo, ripui, pere, to take away, to dispoil.



Deriuo, aui, are, to deriue from one to an o­
ther, to lay to one, as to lay to a mans de­
fault, or charge, to take from one, and giue
to an other.



Derogo, aui, are, to mynysshe, to derogate,
to take awaye.



Dercæi, a people of Grece in the costes of
Thrace.



Deruncinare, to cut or pull of that whyche
is superfluous.



Deruo, ui, ere, to fall downe.



Def&ecedil;uio, f&ecedil;ui, uire, to be wodde angry. som­
tyme to ceasse to be angry.



Descendo, di, ere, to go downe, to descende.



Descio, iui, ire, to knowe nat.



Descisco, iui, sciscere, to disagree, to leaue
one and go to an other, to rebell.



Descobinatus, wounded or cutte.



Describo, psi, ere, to write out of a copy, to
order or appoynt, to paynte or write aduy­
sedly, to declare or describe.



Deseco, aui, are, to cutte in sonder.



Desido, sedi, ere, to sytte styll, or contynual­
ly, to syt on a thing, to sit on a chamber stole.
it is also proprely whan the erth doth gape
or chinke. Terra desedit, the grounde ope­
neth or gapeth.



Desero, ui, ere, to leaue or forsake.



Deserto, taui, are, to forsake.



Desertus, forsaken, not inhabitable, where
no man dwelleth, a desert or wyldernesse.



Deseruio, uiui, ire, to obey or serue humbly,
somtyme to do yll seruyce.



Deses, desidis, vnoccupied.



Desiderium, a desyre.



Desidero, aui, are, to desyre.



Desiderati, deed or slayne.



Desidia, slouthfulnes.



Desidiosus, a man ful of idelnes, slouthfull.



Designo, aui, are, to assigne, to note or signi­
fie, to do a thinge newely.



Designator, toris, a marshall, which setteth
or appointeth euery man to his place, con­
uenient to his degree or office.



Designatus, assigned, ordeyned.



Desilio, lui, ere, to leape or lyght downe.



Desino, sii, nere, to leaue, to ceasse.



Desinere artem, to leaue the crafte.



Desipio, pui, ere, to do folishly, to wax folish.



Desisto, destiti, desistere, to leaue of.



Desolo, aui, are, to make desolate.



Desolatus, a, um, that is made desolate or di­
stroyed.



Desolor, ari, to
comforte.



Despectio, onis, a despysynge.



Despecto, aui, are, to loke behynde.



Despectus, ta, tum, despised.



Desperatio, onis, despayre.



Despero, aui, are, to despaire.



Desperatus, a, um, desperate.



Despicabilis, to be despised.



Despicientia, despectus,  despectio, dispite.



Despiceo, spexi, cere, to loke or beholde
downe, to despise. Despicor, caris, to dispise.



Despicus, a watcheman, to se who cometh,
as it is in Calyce.



Despolio, aui, are, to dispoyle or to robbe.



Despondeo, di, ere, to affyance or betrouth.
also to promyse.



Despondere animum, to be in desperation,
or wery of lyfe, to despaire of any thynge,
that a man seketh for.



Despondere sapientiam, to despaire, to com
to great wysedom.



Despumo, aui, are, to skymme or claryfye
any lycour.



Despuo, ui, ere, to spet downe, or spette on a
thynge.



Desquammo, aui, are, to skale a fyshe.



Destino, aui, are, to pourpose, to appoynte,
to depute, to prepare, to chese, to tye to a
thinge, to sette a pryce.



Destituo, ui, ere, to forsake, to leaue, to de­
priue or take fro, to lowse, or vnbynde, to
sette downe a man. Destituit omnes seruos




ad mensam ante se, He dyd sette downe all
his seruantes at the table before hym.
Cecilius.


Destringo, xi, ere, to bynde harde or cutte.



Destructile, that whiche shall be distroyed.



Destruo, xi, ere, to distroy or throwe down
that whiche is buylded.



Desubulo, aui, are, to perce, proprely with
an awle or bodkyn.



Desudasco, to sweate.



Desudo, aui, are, to sweate moch or labour.



Desuesco, ueui, scere, to discusse or brynge
out of custome.



Desuetudo, dinis, a disuse.



Desultor, toris, he that can vaunte a horse,
and leape frome one horsbacke vnto an o­
ther. Also those men of warre, that in time
of battaylle wolde leape downe of their
horses quyckely, and fyghte on foote, and
leape vppe agayne as quyckely, were De­
sultores. 



Desultorii equi, horses whiche serued for
that purpose.



Desum, defui, deesse, to lacke.



Desuper, from aboue. Desursum, the same.



Detego, tegi, tegere, to disclose or discouer



Deter, lackynge somwhat.



Detergeo, tersi, gere, to wype of, to make
cleane.



Determino, aui, are, to determin, to discusse.



Detero, teri, terere, to bruse, to beate oute,
as grayne is beaten oute of the eare with
threshyng or treadynge.



Deterreo, ui, ere, to putte in feare, to lette
by feare.



Detestabile, abhomynable.



Detestor, ari, to abhorre. Amonge Ciuily­
ons, detestari is to summon a manne with
wytnesse.



Detestatio, abhorryng, execration, summo­
nyng with wytnesse. Also Apuleius takith
it for geldynge.



Detexo, xi, xere, to weaue, or to wynde.



Detineo, nui, ere, to withholde, to restrayne
from lybertie.



Detondeo, detondi, dere, to sheare or clyp.



Detono, aui, are, to make a great sounde.



Detorqueo, si, quere, to bowe, to turne out
of the ryght waye.



Detracto, aui, are, to eschue, to forbeare, to
hynder by reporte or acte.



Detractores, detracters, backbyters.



Detraho, xi, here, to drawe of, to report yl.



Detrimentum, detriment or damage.



Detrimentosum, that which is cause of mo­
che damage or hurte.



Detrudo, si, ere, to thruste downe. somtyme
to constrayne or inforce.



Detrullo, aui, are, to put from one vessel in­
to and other.



Detrunco, aui, are, to cutte of shorte.



Deturbo, aui, are, to beate downe.



Deturpo, aui, are, to make fowle, or defyle.



Deucalion, onis, the name of a kynge, who
in fables is sayde dydde restore mankynde
distroyed with a floode.



Deueho, xi, ere, to cary from a place.



Deuenio, ueni, nire, to comme downe frome
highe to lowe, from rychesse to pouertie,
from prosperitie to aduersitie.



Deuenusto, aui, are, to make fowle.



Deuerbero, aui, are, to beate moche.



Deuerro, ri, ere, to swepe cleane.



Deuestio, uestii, ire, to vnclothe.



Deuexo, aui, are, to vexe moche.



Deuexus, a, um, holowe or lyke to a valaye.



Deuincio, xi, cire, to bynde faste.



Deuinco, vici, vincere, to vanquyshe.



Deuio, aui, are, to go out of the waye.



Deuirgino, aui, are, to defloure a mayden.



Deuito, aui, are, to eschewe.



Deuius, a, um, out of the right waye.



Deunx, cis, a poyse, whyche is a pounde,
lackynge an ounce.



Deuoco, aui, are, to call asyde, or awaye.



Deuolo, aui, are, to flee or rounne frome a
hygher place to a lower.



Deuoluo, ui, uere, to tumble or roll downe.
by translation it signifieth, it is fallen, or com
from one to an other, or hapned. Deuoluta
est h&ecedil;reditas, The inheritance is fallen, or com.



Deuoro, aui, are, to deuoure. sommetyme to
beare . Hoc t&ecedil;dium mihi deuorandum est,
This labour I must susteyne.



Deuotio, onis, a curse, a vowe to dye, or to
make a man dye.



Deuoto, aui, are, to bynde by a vowe.



Deuotorius, a, um, concerning a vow or curse.



Deuotus, ta, tum, vowed or cursed.



Deuoueo, ere, to vowe or curse, to con­
sente to dye.



D##sp##E##sp##V##sp##S, god.



Dexter, dextri, of the right hande. somtyme
it signifieth apt, conuenient, quicke and dy­
ligent, prosperous, fauourable.



Dexteritas, tatis, aptnes and redynes in the
thing that a man goth about.



Dexter, tra, trum, ryght, or apte.



Dextero, aui, are, to couple horses in a teme.



Dextrale, a bracelet to weare on the ryght
arme. Dextrocherium the same.



Dextrarii, horses ioyned in a teeme.



Dextrorsum, towarde the right hand.



Dextimi, horsemenne beinge on the righte
wynge in battayle.

 

¶ D Ante I.

DIA, an addicion to womens names,
whan theyr folyshe louers wyl make
them equall to goddesses.






Diabolus, the dyuelle. howe be it in greke
it sygnifieth proprely a fals accuser.



Diaconus, a deacon.



Diadema, a cappe, whiche an emperour or
kinge weareth vnder his crowne.



Diæta, a parler to suppe in. Also dyete in
eatynge and drinkyng. Also a place where
iugementes were gyuen.



Diætarii, seruauntes that do awayte on the
table. Sometyme suche as do haunt dyners
& suppers, to the intent to steale somwhat.



Dialectus, a maner of speche, as we wolde
saye diuersities in englysshe, as Northerne
speche, Southerne, Kentyshe, Deuenishe,
and other lyke.



Dialexis, dysputation.



Dialectica, logyke.



Dialis, Iupyter. Also it sygnifyeth of one
day, as Consul Dialis, a Consul of one daye.



Dialogus, a disputation betwene two.



Diameter, a lyne, whiche diuydeth any fy­
gure into two equall partes.



Diana, the doughter of Iupyter, whyche
fleinge the company of men, to the intente
that she wolde not be meuyd with carnalle
lustes, she contynually exercysed her selfe
in huntynge wylde beastes: and for hyr
chaste lyfe, she was honoured of the pay­
nyms for a goddesse. She is also taken for
the Moone.



Diapasma, a sprynkelynge of water, or o­
ther lyke.



Diapason, a concorde in musyke of fiue tu­
nes, and two halfe tunes.



Diapente, of fyue.



Diaphanum, clere throughout, as christall.



Diaphonia, a discorde.



Diaphora, a difference.



Diaphoreticus, ca, cum, that whiche dothe
dissolue and sende forth humoures or va­
pours.



Diaphragma, is a thynne skynne or caulle
in the body, whyche separateth the harte
and lunges from the splene and lyuer, and
is called the Myddrefe.



Diarium, prouysion for oone daye. Also a
boke declarynge what is done day by day.



Diastole, a distinction or poynte, whereby
one worde or sentence is distincte frome
an nother.



Diatessaron, of eyghte.



Diatretum, a cuppe imboced, and cunning­
ly wrought.



Dibapha, purple twyse dyed. Also a gar­
ment therof.



Dica, a cause, an accusation, a iudgemente.



Dicacitas, tatis, scoffynge or bourdynge.



Dicaculus, & dicacula, mery in talkyng.



Dicæarchus, a iuste Prince. Also the name
of a phylosopher.



Dicax, cacis, a rayler, or reprocher.



Dico, caui, to vowe, to offre, to dedicate.



Dico, xi, cere, to saye, to telle, to bydde, to
promyse, to affirme, to defende: as Cice­
ro dixit causam Milonis, Cicero defended
Miloes cause.



Dicere sententiam, to gyue sentence or
iudgemente.



Dicere leges, to appoynte lawes, or con­
dycions of peace, as by the vanquysher to
hym that is vanquyshed.



Dicere diem, to sewe a man, or call him vp,
(as we vse to say) by action, writte, or com­
mandement, proprely to cause a man to be
bounden to appere and make aunswere.



Dicere causam, to make aunswere to action
or playnte.



Dicere mulctam, to sette or assesse a fyne or
summe of money to be payde by hym, whi­
che hath commytted a trespace.



Dicere ius, to gyue commandement or sen­
tence on a peyne. Sometyme it sygnifyeth
to gouerne by lawes a towne or countrey.



Dicere sacramento, to take an oth. proprely
as they do, whiche be retayned in warres.



Dictannus, an herbe called dittayne.



Dictator, the hyghest offyce in the publyke
weale of the Romaynes, whiche was also
called Magister populi, the mayster of the
people: whiche for the space of syxe mo­
nethes, hadde the authoritie of a kynge.
And therfore that dignitie was neuer giuen
but onely whan the state of the citie was 
in any ieoperdie.



Dictatura, the office or dignitie of dictator. 



Dicte, a citie in the yle of Crete or Candy.



Dicteria, tauntes, or quippies, or short and
sharpe reasons.



Dictio, onis, a worde, a forme of speaking.



Dictito, aui, are, to speake ofte or in dyuers
places.



Dicto, aui, are, to speake or declare th at an
other writeth, or beareth in remembrance.
Also to inuestigate or expounde the sence
of any authour. Also to brynge to remem­
braunce.



Dictata, Interpretations, exposytions, or
declarations, made by maysters vnto their
scholers.



Dictum, spoken, or sayde.



Dicta, sygnified mery sentences.



Dicturio, iui, ire, to goo aboute, or prepare
to speake.



Dictynna, one of the names of Diana. 



Dictynnus, a hylle, wherein the temple of
Diana was sytuate.



Dictys, one of the Centaures, and an hy­
stographier of Candy.






Didascalus, a schole mayster.



Dido, the name of a lady that buylded Car­
thage.



Diduco, xi, cere, to brynge into sondry par­
tes, or to diuide or pulle aparte.



Didymæ, arum, ylandes of Aphrike, that
bounde on Aegypte.



Didynnis, the name of a man, and in latine
it signifieth Geminus, in englyshe, a twinne
or double.



Diecula, a lyttell while.



Dierecta, in an yll tyme.



Plautus.



Dies, diei, a daye. Sometyme it sygnyfyeth
tyme or season.



Dies critici, the dayes in whyche phisitions
do gyue a certayne iugement in syckenes.



Diescit, it is daye, it waxeth daye.



Dies legittimi, amonge lawyers be callyd
ordinary dayes, or dayes in courte.



Diem dicere, ante, dicere diem.



Diespiter, one of the names of Iupiter. 



Dieteris, the space of two yeres.



Diffamo, aui, are, to sprede by fame.



Differo, distuli, differre, to spare or deferre.
sometyme to brynge frome one place to an
nother. somtime to report abrode, somtyme
to deuide or cut asonder, somtyme to set in
order. sometyme differ or be in difference.
Cic. At uide quid differat inter meam opini­
onem & tuam, But se nowe what difference
is betwene thyne opinion and myne.



Diffibulare, to vnbuckle, to open, to vngird.



Difficilis, difficile, harde, vneasye.



Diffido, dere, to mystruste.



Diffindo, di, ere, to cleaue in sunder.



Diffinio, niui, ire, to diffine or declare in few
wordes playnely, the sygnyfycation of a
thynge.



Diffinitio, onis, a diffinition, or declaration
of the nature qualitie or propre sygnifica­
tion of a thynge by generaltie, specialtie,
and difference.



Diffiteor, fisus sum, diffiteri, to denye.



Diffluo, xi, ere, to flowe abrode.



Diffugio, gi, gere, to flye asonder, or on dy­
uers partes



Diffundo, di, dere, to powre oute, or scatter.



Diffundere diem, amonge lawyers, to con­
tynue the matter vntyll an other daye.



Digamma, amonge latynes is the letter F.



Digamus, he that hath had two wiues, com­
monly called Bigamus. 



Digama, a womanne that hathe hadde two
husbandes.



Digeries, a disposition or order.



Digero, gessi, gerere, to dispose, to order, to
interprete or make playne, to deuyde, to
dygeste.



Digitalis, le, pertaynynge to the fynger.



Digitali crassitudine, The thyckenesse of
a fynger.



Digitalia, thinges worne on the fyngers.



Digitus, a fynger.



Digitum transuersum, sygnifyeth in a sen­
tence, a lyttell or smalle distaunce. Digitum
transuersum ab eo non discedebat, He went
not from hym a fynger bredde.



Digladiari, to fight togither with swordes.
by translation to contende or stryue.



Dignatio, fauour or familiaritie.



Liuius.



Dignitas, tatis, honour gyuen or dewe to a
man for his merites. sommetyme astate of 
nobilitie, or great authorytie. sommetyme
beautie, proprely of a man, specially in ge­
sture and communication.



Digno, aui, are, & dignor, ari, to iuge one to
be worthy, or to be estemed worthy.



Dignosco, noui, scere, to discerne or knowe
by dyuers meanes.



Dignoro, aui, are, to marke, as men marke
beastes to knowe them.



Dignus, na, num, worthye.



Digne, worthyly.



Digredior, dieris, gredi, to departe or goo
awaye.



Digressio, & digressus, a departynge.



Diiouis, Iupyter. 



Diiudico, caui, care, to iudge betwyxte two
thynges.



Dilabor, eris, labi, to slyppe or go awaye, to
falle downe, as a howse doeth. sometyme it
signyfieth to fayle.



Dilacero, aui, are, to teare or rent in pieces.



Dilapido, daui, are, to consume goodes, or
spende ry ottously or wastefully.



Dilato, aui, are, to stretche out in bredth.



Dilemma, tis, an argument, whiche on euery
parte taunteth him, to whom it is spoken.



Diligens, tis, diligent or louynge.



Diligentia, dilygence or loue.



Diligo, lexi, ligere, to fauour or loue mean­
ly. somtyme to diuyde.
Plautus.


Dilorico, aui, are, to vndo, or cutte a cote, or
other thynge beinge sowed.



Dilucescit, the daye appereth.



Dilucidus, clere, bryghte.



Diluculo, an aduerbe, whiche signifieth be­
tyme in the mornynge.



Diluculo, laui, lare, to waxe daye, to appere
to be daye.



Diluculum, that porcion of daye, whiche is
before that the sonne ryseth.



Diludium, the leauyng of play, or the space
betwene recreations or playes.



Diluo, ui, ere, to wasshe, to make cleane, to
putte away, to release, to alaye, as wyne is
alayde with water: or to tempre, to purge,
or discharg a crime.






Dilutus, ta, tum, alayed or tempred.



Dilutus color, a faynt colour, or vnperfect
coloure.



Dilutum, is wyne or other lycour, wherein
any herbe or other thing is depid by a cer­
tayne space, whiche some phisytions calle 
infused.



Diluuium, is whan the erth is surrounded
or drowned with moche rayne.



Dimano, aui, are, to flowe abrode, as diuers
streames out of one springe.



Dimembro, aui, are, to deuyde.



Dimensum, & demensum, measured.



Dimico, aui, are, to fyght or contende with
some thynge.



Dimidius, a, um, the halfe deale of that whi­
che is diuided.



Dimidium plus toto, is spoken where a
manneintendeth to shewe that the meane
is beste.



Dimidiatus, a, um, the halfe deale of that
whiche is not seuered or diuided.



Diminuo, ui, ere, to minyshe, to cutte of.



Dimissori&ecedil; liter&ecedil;, letters sent from oone to
an nother.



Dimitto, si, tere, to sende dyuers persones
into dyuers places. Somtyme it sygnifieth
to let to departe, to gyue leaue, to ceasse, to
leaue, to lette passe, to suffre, to humble. 
Deiecit uultum & dimissa uoce locuta est, She
dyd cast downe hir loke, and with an hum­
ble voyce sayde. Also to gyue, to let down.



Dimissus, a, um, is sommetyme taken for
abiecte.



Dimulgo, aui, are, to publyshe abrode.



Dynast&ecedil;, potestates.
 


Dindymene, & Dindyme, one of the names
of Cybele, called the mother of the goddes



Dindymus, the rydge of the hylle of Ida
in Phrigia.



Diobolares meretrices, harlottes, whyche
be hyred for lyttell moneye.



Diolares, harlottes, whiche kepe abrode in
the feldes and woddes.



Diœcesis, sios, a iurisdiction, a gouernance.
Also the diocese of a byshop.



Diminutus capite, & diminutio capitis, Vide
ante, capitis diminutio.



Diodorus, a philosopher of Socrates sect,
and Diodorus Siculus, a story writer. and an
other Diodorus, a stoike phylosopher, of
whom Cicero writeth.
Ci. in Bru
to & Tus.
lib.5.


Diogenes, a famous philosphers name.



Dione, a goddesse of the see, mother of
Venus. 



Dioptra, a geometricall instrument, to dis­
cerne altitudes and distaunce. Victruuius
vseth it for wayinge or pluckynge vppe of
water.



Dioscoron, an yle in the borders of Italy.



Diospolis, a cytie of Aegypte. There be
foure other of the same name in Aegypte,
but very small cities in comparyson of this.



Diot&ecedil;, vessels of erth with handels, wher­
in wyne was kepte.



Diphthera, a shepeherdes cote made with
shepe skynnes.



Diphthongus, two vowels ioyned togither
called a dipthonge, as æ, œ, au, ei.



Diploma, tis, a Charter of a prince or cytie,
or a wrytte.



Diplois, idis, any garmente lyned, but it is
taken for a doublette.



Dipondium, a weight of two pounde.



Dipsacon, whyte brere.



Dipsas, a serpent, of whom if a man be bit­
ten, he dyeth for thyrste.



Dyrrachium, a citie in the realme of Naples.



Dir&ecedil;, cursynges.



Dirce, a womans name, the wyfe of Lucus
kynge of Thebans.



Diribitores, distrybuters of money, or paye
maysters.



Dirigeo, gui, gêre, to shrynke for colde, or
for feare.



Dirigo, exi, gere, to make streight, or ryght.



Directus, a, um, ryght or streyght.



Directé, streight, or in a right fourme.



Dirimo, remi, ere, reptum, to breke or leaue
of. Ea res consilium diremit, That thynge
brake or dissolued the counsayle. also to put
of, or deferre.



Diripio. Vide in deripio.



Diris, an hygh hylle of Maurytayne nowe
callyd Atlas.



Dirus, ra, rum, vengeable.



Diritas, tatis, crueltie, vengeance.



Dirumpo, rupi, rumpere, to braste or breake
a sonder.



Diruncio, iui, ire, to wede out, or purge that
whiche is nought.



Dis, ditis, callyd the god of rychesse, some­
tyme it signifieth ryche.



Discapidino, aui, are, to vnclose or open.



Discedo, scessi, dere, to departe. sometyme
it signifieth an exception: as, Quum disces­
serim a fratre, nemo est mihi te charior, Ex­
cepte my brother, no manne is to me more
dere than thou arte. Also it sygnifieth dy­
uysion or openynge. as, Quum terra disces­
sisset, magnis quibusdam imbribus, discendit
in illum hiatum, whan the erthe by thocca­
syon of moche rayne opened, he wente
downe into the cleft or swalowe.



Discepto, aui, are, to dspute or contende.



Disceptatio, disputation or contencion.



Discerniculum, diuersytie.



Discerno, decreui, cernere, to depart or sun­




dre one thyng from an other. Also to striue
or varie, to knowe distinctly.



Discerpo, psi, ere, to pluck or teare in piecis.



Discinctus, dissolute, or neglygent, or vna­
ble for the warres, cowarde.



Seruius.



Discindo, scidi, scindere, to cutte of.



Disciplina, lerning as it is perceyued of the
scholer. It is also a good forme of lyuing.



Disciplinosus, apte to lerne.



Discipulus, a scholer or disciple.



Discludo, si, dere, to shutte out.



Disco, didici, discere, to lerne.



Dedisco, ere, to forgette that whiche was
ones lerned.



Discobolus, he that throweth a dyshe.



Disconuenio, ni, nire, to disagree or discord.



Discordia, discorde.



Discors, dis, he that agreeth not with an
nother.



Discrepo, aui, are, to disagree or discorde.



Discretio, onis, a separation. somtyme elec­
tion of good from yll, discretion.



Discretus, seuered or parted. Valla saythe,
that it is he that discerneth the qualyties
of men, and value of thinges.



Discrimen, minis, diuersite or difference. al­
so the shedynge or partynge of the heare.
Also it sygnifieth peryll.



Discriminale, an instrument, wherwith the
heare is parte or shadde.



Discriminatim, a sunder here and there.



Discrimino, aui, are, to deuyde.



Discrutior, ari, to be moche vexed or trou­
bled in mynde.



Discumbo, cubui, cumbere, to syt at meales.



Discuneatus, opened with a wedge or other
lyke thynge.



Discurro, rere, to runne hither and thither,
or wander.



Discus, a dyshe. Also a rounde thynge of
wodde or mettalle, whiche in playinge is
throwen from one man to an nother. It is
sometyme taken for the hole fygure of the
sonne or the moone.



Discutio, ssi, tere, to caste or shake downe,
to remoue, to examyne, or discusse.



Disertus, eloquent in wordes.



Disiicio, disieci, disiicere, to caste a sonder.



Disiungo, xi, ere, to vnioyne, to separate.



Dispalescere, to publyshe abrode.



Dispalo, aui, are, to wander.



Dispalati, scattered.



Dispello, dispuli, dispellere, to expelle or put
from many places or many wayes.



Dispendiosus, sa, sum, harmful, vnprofitable.



Dispendium, losse by neclygence, or super­
fluous expenses. Also it signifieth harme.



Dispendo, di, ere, to spende, also to stretch out.



Dispenno, ere, to stretche.



Dispensator, toris, a stewarde, or other of­
fycer, layinge out money for howseholde:
a disposer of thinges.



Dispenso, aui, are, to laye out money.



Dispereo, rii, rire, to be loste vtterly.



Disperdo, di, ere, to lose.



Dispergo, spersi, gere, to sowe abrode, or to
scatter.



Dispertio, tiui, ire, to gyue parte to one, part
to an nother.



Dispesco, cui, ere, to dryue beastes frome
their pasture.



Dispesso, ssi, ere, to sprede abrode.



Dispicio, xi, ere, to discerne, to espye, to
consyder.



Dispicientia, circumspection, aduysement,
diligent consyderation.



Displodo, si, dere, to sprede.



Dispondæus, a fote in meter, that hath four
syllables longe, as Oratores. 



Dispono, sui, ere, to dispose, to order.



Dspungo, xi, gere, to take accompt, or exa­
myne any maner of thinge writen.



Dispunctio, an examination.



Disputo, taui, tare, to dispute, to make plain
to be vnderstande.



Disquiro, siui, rere, to inserche diligently, to
inquyre.



Disquisitio, where euery mans opinyon is
asked in a matter, whiche requyreth iuge­
mente.



Disraro, raui, rare, to make thynne that whi­
che is thycke.



Dissuauior, ari, to kysse swetely, and with
moche delectation.



Dissecatus, ta, tum, cutte as a bodye is in an
anotomye.



Dissectio, onis, an Anotomie.



Disseco, caui, care, to cutte in pieces.



Dissentaneus, a, um, not accordinge.



Dissentio, tire, & dissentior, tiri, to think con­
trary, or to disagree.



Dissero, rui, rere, to sowe sedes, sometyme
to dispute or declare.



Desserto idem.



Dissertio, a particion of landes.



Dissideo, ere, to be at variance or discorde.



Dissidium, variance or discorde.



Dissilio, liui, ire, to lepe down from a place,
somtyme to braste.



Dissimulo, aui, are, to dissemble or fayne a
thynge, whiche is not as it semeth to be.



Dissipo, aui, are, to scatter or sprede abrode
or dispatche. also to bringe vnto noughte.



Dissitus, ta, tum, sette farre of, distant.



Dissoluo, ui, uere, to lose or vnbynd, to spede
to paye seuerall dettes.



Dissolui, to be paide or discharged.



Dissoluere religionem, to do agaynst the re­




lygion, to breake the relygion.



Dissonus, na, num, that whyche dothe not
accorde.



Dissulto, taui, tare, to leape hither & thither.



Disto, aui, are, to differre, to be distant.



Distantia, distaunce.



Distendo, di, dere, to stratche out, or retche,
to fyll, as a bottell is fylled.



Distentus, fulle.



Distero, terere, to breake smalle, to pounde
or to braye fyne.



Distichon, two versis.



Distillo, aui, are, to distylle, or drop downe.



Distillatio, onis, a distyllyng, specyally from
the heed, callid a reume or catarre, the pose.



Distineo, nui, ere, to lette or withholde with
busynesse, or vrgente causes, to holde or
putte backe.



Distinguo, xi, ere, to dyuide. Also to make
dystinction.



Distito, aui, are, to stande aparte, or be dy­
stant one from an other.



Distraho, xi, here, to plucke away, or to dy­
uide, or to with drawe a thynge. sometyme
by translation it is taken for to sell. Also to
fynisshe or conclude matters in variaunce.
Controuersias distrahere, to ende contro­
uersies or suites.



Distribuo, ui, ere, to dystrybute, or gyue in
sondry partes to dyuers persones.



Distringo, xi, gere, to bynd fast, or to strain
harde, to rubbe of or clense the fylthe or
soyle of the body, to thretten to stryke, or
to drawe out a swerde. Gladium distrinxit,
He drewe out his sworde. Sommetyme to
gather, as, Sereno cælo manibus distringi
oliuam oportet, In a fayre cleere daye the
olyues must be gathered by hande. Distri­
ctus negotiis, lette with busynesse.
Columel.


Distorqueo, distorsi, quere, to drawe awrye,
or asyde.



Disturbo, aui, are, to caste downe.



Disulcus, an hogge, which hath the bristils
of his necke deuided.



Diteo, & ditesco, sci, scere, to make ryche,
or be ryche.



Dithyrambus, a verse made in the honoure
of Bacchus. 



Ditio, onis, a domynion.



Dito, aui, are, to make ryche.



Ditroch&ecedil;us, a fote of four sillables in verse,
hauynge one longe, an other shorte, an no­
ther longe, the fourthe shorte.



Diu, longe tyme. also the day tyme. wher­
of commeth Interdiu, in the day tyme.



Diutius, lengar. diutissime, lengest.



Diuagor, ari, to wander from place to place.



Diuarico, aui, are, to stryde, or to spred wide
one from an other, as bowghes of a tree.



Diuello, li, ere, to pull away by violence.



Diuendo, didi, dere, to selle to dyuers per­
sones, or in dyuers parcelles.



Diuerbia, the partes of a comedy or inter­
lude, where many persons speke togither.



Diuersito, aui, are, to turne often to a thing,
or to resorte.



Diuersor, ari, to resort, or repaire to a place.



Diuersorium, an inne, wherto men in iour­
ney doo resorte to bayte or be lodged: a
lodgynge.



Diuersorius, a, um, pertaynynge to an inne,
or lodgynge.



Diuersus, a, um, dyuers or separate.



Diuerticulum, a bywaye, or syde way, oute
of the high way.



Diuerto, ti, tere, to tourne from one thinge
to an other, to take lodgynge, or to bayte.



Diuerto ad te & apud te, I come to lodge
with the, or to tary for a tyme with the.



Diues, diuitis, ryche. ditior, rycher, ditissi­
mus, rychest.



Diuexo, aui, are, to vexe or trouble.



Diuidia, tediousnes. somtime it betokeneth
discorde.



Diuidiculum, an heed of a cundyte.



Diuidium, a particion or diuident.



Diuido, si, dere, to diuide or parte in sonder.



Diuiduum, that whiche may be seuered or
diuyded.



Diuinipotens, he that hath power in diuine
thynges.



Diuinitus, godly, or of god.



Diuino, aui, are, to telle truthe, as well of
thynges present, as of thinges passed. for
the more parte it signifyeth to coniecte of
thinges present, what shall happen.



Diuinatio, onis, a foreiugement or coniec­
ture. Also where a matter cometh in iuge­
ment, without writinge or wytnesse on any
of the partes, that iudgement may be cal­
led Diuinatio, a diuination.



Diuinus, na, num, that whiche pertayneth
to god, diuine.



Diuisio, onis, wherby we declare what is
in variance, or whereby we doo expresse of
what thinges we wyll treate. Also a diuy­
syon into sondry partes.



Diuisor, oris, amonge the olde Romaynes
was he, whiche at the election of greatte
officers, diuidid or gaue money to the peo­
ple, in the names of them whiche sued for
the office, to thintent for to attayne it.



Diuiti&ecedil;, diuitiarum, diuitiis, diuitias, ryches.



Diuito, aui, are, to make ryche.



Dium, the day light vnder the fyrmament.
whan we say, Sub dio aliquid fieri, it sygni­
fieth some thynge to be doone abroode, or
out of the house.






Diunt, old writers vsed for dant, they giue.



Diuortium, a dyuorse, or separation of a man
and his wyfe. sometyme a departyng from
any other thynge.



Diurno, aui, are, to lyue longe.



Diurnus, na, num, pertayninge to daye, as
Diurni libri, bokes conteynynge the actis
done euery day. sometime a dayes hyre.



Dius, dia, come of a gentyll stocke.



Diutulé, a lyttell whyle.



Diutinus, tina, num, longe contynuynge.



Diutissimé, very longe, or to longe.



Diuturnus, na, num, longe continuynge.



Diuus, ua, uum, worthy a diuine remembrance,
Nowe they take Diuum, & diuam, for a man
or woman saynct.

 

¶ D Ante O.

DO, dedi, dare, to gyue. Also to offre,
or proffre. Vt res dant sese, As thyn­
ges offre them selfes. Also to bryng.
Magnam dabit ille ruinam arboribus, He shall
brynge a great fall vnto trees. Also to say,
Quamobrem has partes didicerim paucis da­
bo, For what cause I lerned that parte, I
wyll telle the in fewe wordes. Also to o­
beye, to conforme. Da te mihi, Conforme
the to my wylle. Also to committe or doo.
O Aeschine, pol haud paternum istuc dedisti,
O Eschines, in good faith in this thou hast
not done lyke a father.
TerentiusVergilius.Terentius


Dare operam, to applye, to gyue or take
hede, or to helpe.



Do manus, I render me, or I am vanquished.



Dare pœnas, to suffre punyshement.



Dare ueniam, to forgyue.



Dare potestatem, to commytte authoritie or
power, or remyt a thinge to an other mans
pleasure or lybertie. Suarum ominum rerum
illi potestatem dederat, He gaue hym the rule
of all that he had.



Dare fidem, to promyse faithfully.



Dare facultatem, to gyue lybertie or power
to do a thynge.



Dare manum, to putte into his hande pry­
uily, as they do to men of lawe, or priuy so­
lyciters, or corrupt offycers.



Dare damnas, to pay damages, or to make
satisfaction.



Dare auribus, to flatter, or speake to please.



Salustius.



Dare negotium, to assigne or appoynte bu­
synesse, or a thynge to be done.



Ci. Teren.
Plaut.
Eras. in
Chilia.
Vergilius.



Dare in uiam, to take a iourney.



Dare in pedes, to flee or runne away.



Dare uerba, to deceyue by fayre promyses,
or pleasant demonstration.



Datum est, It is predestinate.



Doceo, cui, cere, to reache or gyue knowe­
lege, or to informe, to aduyse.



Docibilis, apte to be taught.



Docilis, lyghtly taught or instructed.



Docilitas, aptenes to lerne.



Doctrina, æ, doctrine, whiche procedeth of
the teacher. Disciplina, lernynge taken of
the scholer.



Documentum, a lesson.



Doctus, ta, tum, lerned, that is to say, kno­
wynge a thynge without experience. Vi­
de peritus.



Dodona, a citie in Greece, whereby was a
woode, in the whiche men thoughte that
trees spake.



Dodone, the daughter of Iupiter and Eu­
ropa. 



Dodra, was a drinke made of nine thinges,
herbes, iuyse, water, wyne, salt, oyle, bread,
hony, and pepper.



Dodrans, antis, a poyse waying. ix. ounces.



Dogma, atis, a certayn determination, whi­
che in sectes of philosophers euery oone
had, without the whiche the secte fayled.
sometyme they be called placita.



Dolabra, a carpentars axe.



Dolabro, aui, are, to hewe as a carpentar.



Dolentia, griefe.



Doleo, ui, ere, to fele peyne or grefe.



Dolere caput, pedes, oculos, the heed, fete,
or eyen to ake.



Doleo tuis rebus aduersis, I am sory for thy
mysfortune or trouble.



Doleo tuam uicem, I am sorye on thy be­
halfe.



Dolium, any great vessel of wine, as a tunne,
pipe, butte, or hoggisheed.



Doliaris, great as a tunne. Doliaris heluo, a
gorbelyed glutton.



Doliarium, a wyne sellar.



Dolichus, a space of grounde contaynyng
xii. furlonges.



Dolo, aui, are, to cutte or hewe with an axe
or sythe.



Dolio, iui, ire, to graue in mettall.



Dolobella, an hatchette.



Varro.



Dolon, the propre name of a man of Troy,
that was very swifte of fote.



Dolones, a scourge, hauynge a dagger, or
other lyke thyng closed within it. It is al­
so a certayne taklynge of shyppes. Also a
lyttell sayle called a trynkette.
Seruius.
Liuius.


Dolopes, a people of Thessaly.



Dolor, is, griefe or paine of body or mynd,
also sorowe.



Dolorificus, ca, cum, that whiche makethe
griefe or sorowe.



Dolus, deceypte.



Dolus malus, euery crafty deceite to com­
passe a man, wherby he receiueth damage.






Dolosus, deceytefull, or crafty.



Doma, tis, a solar or flatte keuerynge of a
howse. it is somtyme taken for the house.



Suetonius



Domesticatim, by householdes.



Domesticus, ca, cum, pertainynge to hous­
holde. sometyme it sygnifieth tame.



Domestici, householde seruantes.



Domicilium, a mansyon place.



Domicœnium, an home suppar.



Dominor, ari, to rule or haue souerayntie.



Domiporta, a pylar or other lyke thynge,
that beareth vp an house.



Dominus, a lord or maister, to whom other
doo seruyce.



Dominium, a lordeshyp or rule ouer other.



Domis, was taken of olde wryters for
dominus. 
Lucretius.


Domitalis, apte to be tamed or broken.



Domitura, the acte of tamynge or brekyng
of any wylde beaste.



Domo, aui, are, to make tame, sommetyme
to vaynquyshe, as Domare hostes, to vayn­
qhyshe ennemyes.



Domitor, oris, a tamer or breaker of that,
whyche is wylde.



Domitio, onis, a retournynge home.



Domus, mus, mui, a house generally.



Domus, domi, mo, a dwellyng house.



Domuncula, a lyttell or poore house.



Donum, a gyfte or rewarde.



Donarium, a howse, where suche thynges
were kepte, that were gyuen to the god­
des. It is sometyme taken for a gyft or re­
warde.



Donatiuum, a gyfte in money or grayn, gi­
uen by emperours vnto the people. also to
sowldiours aboue their wages.



Donatiuus, he that is able to gyue.



Donatus, he to whom any thynge is giuen.
rewarded.



Donax, cis, a reede or cane, whereof they
made arowes.



Donec, vntyll. sometyme as longe. Donec
uiuo, as longe as I lyue.



Dono, aui, are, to gyue lyberally and frely.



Donysa, an yle in the see Aegeum.



Dorcas, cadis, a bucke or a doo.



Doria, & Dorica, names of countreys ioy­
nynge to Athenes.



Dorion, a towne of Achaie.



Dores, people in Grece nygh to Aetolia.



Doris, a Nimph of the see, and is interpre­
tate bytternesse.



Dormio, miui, ire, to slepe.



Dormito, aui, are, to slepe soundely.



Dorsualia, panels, which horses do weare
on their backes, whan they carie or drawe.



Dorsuarius, ia, um, that whiche beareth or
carieth any thinge on the backe.



Dorsum, a backe of man or beaste.



Dorilaus, the name of a riuer in Phrigia.



Doryphorus, a yoman of the gard, or other
lyke, whiche for gardyng of his maysters
person, beareth alway a iauelyn or byll.



Dos, dotis, dowery, lande gyuen in mary­
age, to the husbande or wyfe, for cause of
the mariage onely.



Dotes animi, indowmentes of the sowle,
that is to say, vertues and good maners.



Dotes corporis, indowmentes of the body,
that is to say, beautie, strength, helth.&c.



Dotalis, le, that pertayneth to dowerie, as
bona dotalia.



Doto, aui, are, to indowe.

 

¶ D ante R.

DRachma, æ, a poise or weyght, pon­
derynge. lx. whete cornes, taken out
of the myddes of the eare. Also a
coyne of Athenes, signed with a bullocke.



Draco, nis, a dragon.



Draconarius, a standerde bearer.



Dracones, of Plinie be taken for old bran­
ches of vynes. also it is an herbe, which is
otherwise called Pyretum, it bourneth and
byteth the tongue, as welle the leafe as
the roote.



Draconites, a precious stone, taken out of
the heed of a dragon, whyle he lyueth.



Dracontium, an herbe called dragons.



Dracunculus, a lyttell dragon.



Dragma, a grype or hande full.



Dracontia, an herbe called dragons.



Drama, matis, where in a comedy or inter­
lude, dyuers personages be broughte in,
some abydyng, some departynge



Drangiana, a prouince in Asia the more.



Drepanum, the name of a citie.



Dromedarius, a beaste lyke to a camell, but
of a wonderfull swiftenes.



Dromus, the place where men do rounne
horses.



Drup&ecedil;, a kynde of olyues.



Drusus, the name of a Romayne, of ryght
noble lynage, and eloquence: but he was
proude and ambicious.



Dryas, the propre name of a man of Thes­
saly, frende of Nestor. 



Dryades, were fairies of woddes.



Dryid&ecedil;, siue Druid&ecedil;, were in the olde tyme
religious, or rather superstitious persones
in Fraunce, whiche vsed arte magike.



Drylon, a ryuer of Dalmacie.



Drymodis, afterwarde Pelasgus, is nowe
called Archadie.



Dryos, slyme growynge in okes.



Drypet&ecedil;, a kynde of olyues.






D, ante V.

DVbio, aui, are, to be in doubte.
Dubiat quid agat. He is in doubte,
what he shulde do.
Plaut.


Dubito, aui, are, to be in doubte, or to tracte
tyme.



Dubitatio, & dubietas, doubte.



Dubitanter, dubitatim, doubtfully.



Dubius, a, um, doubtfull, Dubius is he that
hath two wayes, and woteth not whiche to
take.



Ducatus, tus, the act of a capteyn, or guyde.
Also a duchy. also Ducatus, ti, a coyne callid
a ducat.



Ducenarius, a captayne of .CC. men.



Duco, xi, cere, to leade them that by wyl­
lynge, to haue respecte to a thynge. some­
tyme it signifieth to allecte or styrre with
some pleasaunt meane. also to reuolue: also
to drawe, as a man draweth a sworde, also
to gette. sometyme it signifieth doinge, as
Ducere somnos, to slepe. Also to buylde or
make vp. somtyme to tourne away. as Du­
cere uultus, to tourne awaye the visage. to
delaye or prolonge. to go downe. Ego me
duco ab arbore, I wente downe of the tree.
Also to wedde, or do the act of mariage.



Varro.



Duco, aui, are, to gouerne.



Ductarius funis, a corde that is drawen.



Ductilis, & ductile, easy to be drawen.



Ductim, with leysour.



Ductito, aui, are, to leade aboute often.



Ducto, aui, are, to leade aboute.



Dudum, but late.



Duella, a poyse, contaynynge .ii. drammes
and .ii scruples.



Duello, aui, are, to fyghte within lystes, or
in battayle.



Duellator, he that dothe battayle.



Duellona, men in olde tyme called Bellona.



Duillus, a citesens name of Rome, whiche
fyrst tryumphed for victorie on the see.



Duellum, battayle.





Duis, of the auncient writers was vsed for
dederis. 



Dulcadium, euery swete meate.



Dulcis, & dulce, swete.



Dulcedo, Dulcitas, Dulcitudo, & Dulcor, 
swetenesse.



Dulcesco, sci, scere, to become swete.



Dulciarius panis, a marchepayn made with
almondes and sugar.



Dulciarius, a pastlar.



Dulcifluus, flowynge swetely.



Dulcisonus, sownynge swetely.



Dulco, caui, dulcare, to make swete.



Dulia, the seruyce of a bondeman or slaue.



Dulichium, an ile in the see Maliake, or as
some saye, Ionio.



Dum, sometyme signifieth whan, or whiles,
as, Dum dormis, fures domum intrant, whyles
thou slepest, theues entre in to the house.
somtyme vntyll, somtyme as longe. Also it
signifieth wherfore: also, so that. somtyme it
doth but make vp a worde: as, Adesdun, pau­
cis te uolo, Come hyther, I wolde a fewe
thynges with the.



Dummodo, so that.



Dumtaxat, onely.



Dumetum, a thorny or busshy grounde.



Dumus, all kyndes of thornes or breres.



Duo, two.



Duo, dui, ere, to gyue.



Plautus.



Duodeni, twelue togyther. Vide deni.



Duplaris numerus, a nombre doubled.



Duplares, knyghtes, or suche souldiours as
had double alowaunce.



Duplex, duplicis, double, or two.



Dato de re
rustic.



Duplico, aui, are, to make double.



Dupli, double so moche.



Duplus, a, um, double.



Durabile, durable.



Dutacin&ecedil; vu&ecedil;, grapes with thicke skynnes.



Duram, some thinke to be the name of a ry­
uer, nere to whiche the gyantes made the
towre Babel: Some woll it to be a fielde,
as in Daniel.



Daniel.3.



Duramen, & duramentum, the arme of a vyne.



Durateus, ea, um, wodden, or of wodde.



Dure, & duriter, hardly, or cruelly.



Dureo, rui, ere, to be harde or cruell.



Duresco, sci, scere, to waxe harde.



Dureta, the Spayniardes call a vessell, that
they vse to wasshe and bayne them in.



Duria, or Turia, the name of a ryuer nere to
Valentia.



Duricia, & duricies, hardnes.



Duro, aui, are, to indure, to sustaine or suffre.



Durus, ra, rum, harde, paynfull, or cruell.



Dux, ducis, a capitayne or leader.

 

D ante Y.

DYnastes, a lorde, a prince, a ruler.



Dynastia, myght, power.



Dyrrachium, a citie in Cicile, whiche
fyrst was called Epidamnus.



Dys, in composition, signifieth yuell, diffi­
cile, or impossible.



Dyscolia, difficultie.



Dyscolus, intractable.



Dysenteria, freatynge of the guttes.



Dyspnœa, difficultie in fetchynge breth.



Dysuria, a syckenes, whiche letteth a man
that he can not pysse, called the strangurie.










E##sp##R##sp##E  T##sp##V##sp##A, pertainyng
to thy profyte.



E Republica, concerning
the common weale.

 

E ante A.

EAntes, the name of
a story wryter, whi­
che was inthat age,
that Pygmalion reigned in the east parte.



Eatenus, vnto that, in that maner of wyse.

 



Ebenus, uel ebenum, a tree, which is blacke
in colour, and is odoriferous, whanne it is
bourned, it hath vertue to clense the eyen.
This tree groweth in India, which beinge
cutte, waxeth as harde as stone. Sola India
nigrum fert ebenum, India alone bryngeth
forth blacke Ebenus. Virg.2. Geor.



Eboratus, a, um, of yuorie without.



Eboreus, ea, um, of yuorie.



Ebosus, an yle, betwene the Iles Ophiu­
sa and Pythiusa, the erthe of whyche yle
serpentes can not abyde.



Ebrio, aui, are, ebriulo, to make drunke.



Ebrius, ia, um, drunken. sometyme abundant.



Ebrietas, tatis, drunkennes.



Ebriosus, a, um, often drunke.



Ebron, a mountayne in Palestina.



Ebudes, yles in the see aboute Englande,
where the people do lyue by whyte meate
and fysshe.



Ebuleus, the sonne of Iupyter and Pro­
serpine. 



Ebullo, aui, are, to braste out, or bubble vp,
as water dothe whan it rayneth.



Ebulum, an herbe, of some called walwort.



Ebur, & ebor, oris, yuorie.



Eburones, people of the countreye called
Liege, or Luke, beyonde Brabant.

 

¶ E Ante C.

ECbasis, a fygure in speakynge, callyd
digression, where a manne leaueth for
the tyme the principall matter.



Ecbatana, the chiefe citie of the royalme
of Mede. There is a citie in Syria of the
same name, sommetyme called Ephiphania,
and maye be writen Egbatana.



Ecce, an aduerbe demonstratiue, whiche sy­
gnyfyeth, Lo, see, proprely where a thyng
sodaynly happeneth. Ecce tibi, wylt thou
see, take hede.



Ecclesia, an assembly, a counsayle. Amonge
christen authours, it signifieth the congre­
gation of people in the faythe of Christe.



Ecclesiastes, a preacher.



Eccubi, lo where.



Eccum, eccam, eccos, eccas, lo he is here: lo
she is here, lo these men be here, loo these
women be here.



Echemythia, taciturnitie, or stylnesse.



Echeneis, a lyttell fysshe, whyche retay­
neth a shyppe vnder saylle, that he canne
not moue.



Echidna, a water serpent.



Echinades, bene Ilandes in the see Ma­
lyake.



Echinus, the vttermooste shaale of a che­
ston nutte. It is also an Hedgehogge. Al­
so a fyshe lyke to the same beast, also a ves­
sell of tynne, wherein cuppes be wasshed.
Also the name of a citie.



Echion, a certayne medicyne.



Echioni, Thebans, soo callyd of Echyon,
oone of the fyue, that holpe Cadmus to
buylde Thebes.



Echites, a stone specked lyke a Serpent.



Echo, a sounde, whyche reboundeth to the
noyse or voyce, that is made in a valay, or
in great woddes.



Eclegma, atis, a medycyne, whyche muste
not be eaten or chewed: but beinge in the
mouthe, suffred to styll downe into the sto­
macke by lyttell and lyttell.



Eclipsis, a wantynge or faylynge.



Econa, an ymage.



Econcula, a lyttell ymage.



Econtrario, contrary wyse.



Ecphrasis, a playne interpretation of the
letter.



Ecquando, at what tyme, or lo whan.



Ecquis, but who, see who.



Ecquid, but what, lo what.



Ecstasis, a stonye, a dampe, a traunse, whan
a man forgetteth hym selfe.



Ectasis, a fygure, whereby a syllable natu­
rally shorte, is produced.



Ecthlipsis, where, in, ioyned with a vowell,
is not sowned.



Ectropium, whanne the nether lydde of
the eye falleth, and canne not ioyne with
the ouer lydde.



Hecyra, a mother in lawe.

 

¶ E Ante D.

EDax, edacis, a greatte eater or con­
sumer.



Edo, edonis, the same.



Edentatus, tootheles.



Edento, aui, are, to make tootheles.



Edentulus, toothelesse.



Edera, Iuye



Edessa, a Cytie beyonde the ryuer of Eu­
phrates.



Edico, xi, cere, to commaunde, to ordeyne,
to declare.






Edicta, ordinaunces or commaundementes
of them, whiche be in great authoritie.



Edo, es, edi, esum, uel estum, to eate or fede.



Ede nasturtium, is applied to a dull & grosse 
persone: and for as moche as Nasturtium, 
called Cressis, being eaten, dothe make the
nose tynkell, and therby causeth the dulle
spirites to wake, therfore by this prouerb
is ment, Plucke vp thy spirites: or, awake
dullarde or luske.



Edituus, a sextan of a churche.



Edilia, all thynges that appertayne to
be eaten.



Edissero, edisseris, to explane, to declare. E­
dissere fabulam hanc, Declare this fable.
Pac.


Edolo, aui, are, to hewe or cutte cleane and
smothe.



Edom, Esau was soo called, and the coun­
trey where he reigned.



Edomus, a hylle nere to Pangeum in the
borders of Thessalye.



Edones, people of Thrace, nere to the see
cooste.



Edonides, were women which sturred with
a diuyne furoure, dydde celebrate the my­
steryes of Bacchus. 



Edonii, people of Thrace.



Edonus, a hyll, where the same people in­
habyteth.



Cicero in
Phil.



Edormire crapulam, to slepe out a surfette.



Educo, xi, cere, to bryng forth, also to drawe
out, as, Hoc dicens, eduxit corpore telum,
That sayenge, he drewe the weapon oute
of his bodye. Sometyme to reyse vp.
Virgilius.


Educo, aui, are, to nouryshe or brynge vppe
from chyldehoode.



Educatio, nourishyng or bryngyng vppe of
chyldren.



Edulco, aui, are, to make very swete.



Edulis, le, that may be eaten.



Edulium, is what so euer is set on the table
at diner & supper to be eaten, saue the breed.



Edurum, not harde.

 

E ante E & F.

EEton, Andromaches father, that rey­
gned at Thebes in Cilicie.



Effartio, effarsi, ire, to stuffe or fil a thing.



Effari, to speake.



Effaxillo, aui, are, to cut of by the arme pit.



Effero, extuli, efferre, to cary out or put out.
sometyme to ouercome or subdue. also to
commende: somtyme to holdevp, to set forth:
somtyme to mynisshe or appayre.



Effero, aui, are, to make ymages of wylde
beastes.



Efficax, acis, effectuell.



Efficatia, effect or vertue.



Efficio, eci, icere, to brynge to effect.



Effectus, effect.



Effigies, a signe made to the lyuely simili­
tude of man or beast.



Effigia, the same.



Effingo, xi, gere, to make lyke.



Efflagito, aui, are, to desyre or aske a thynge
importunately.



Efflictim, excedyngly.



Efflo, aui, are, to blowe away, or blow forth.



Effloreo, & effloresco, to blo, as a flour doth
at the first commynge out.



Effluo, uxi, ere, to flowe or rounne out, as
water dothe out of a fountayne.



Effodio, ssi, & di, ere, to dygge oute.



Effœmino, aui, are, to effeminate or make
delycate.



Effœminati, menne wanton and delicate, or
tender, enduryng no hardnesse.



Effœta, she that hath lately brought forthe
a chylde. Also a womanne paste teemynge.
Terra effœta, land spent or worne with bea­
rynge of moche grayne.



Effœtus, ta, tum, barayne, consumed, feble.



Effrenus, na, num, without a brydell.



Effugio, gi, ere, to escape.



Effundo, fudi, ere, to powre out. somtyme it
signifyeth to consume, to put out.



Effusus, sa, um, discomfited, scattered, putte
oute, or powred out.



Effugium, discomfiture, or flyght.



Effutio, iui, ire, to speake vnadvisedly, or fo­
lyshely, or hastily.

 

¶ E ante G.

EGelaste, a towne in the hyther Spayn.



Egelidor, aris, to relent or dissolue, as
yse that thawith.



Egenus, nedy, or lackynge somwhat.



Egeo, egui, ere, to nede or lacke.



Egens, lackynge.



Egesta, a citie in Sicile, whiche Aeneas
buylded.



Egestas, tatis, necessitie or lacke of thynges
necessary, pouertie.



Egero, ssi, rere, to beare out.



Egestosus, a, um, very poore.



Egredior, eris, gredi, to go forth, or go out.



Egregius, a, um, excellent.



Egregie, excellently.



Egurgito, aui, are, to drawe out, as lycoure
out of a place.

 

E ante H, & E ante I.

EHo, an Interiection of callynge. it si­
gnifieth howe. Eho dum ad me, Howe
come hyther to me.



Eia, sommetyme it exhorteth, sommetyme
it blameth.



Eiiceo, eieci, eiicere, to cast out, or put out.



Eiectitius, a, um, beinge caste out.



Eiulo, aui, are, to crie oute, to wayle.



Eiurare, to do besyde the lawe.






Eiusmodi, & eiuscemodi, the same.



Eiusdem farinæ, of the same sort or condicion.



Eiusdem notæ, of the same estimation or state.

 

¶ E Ante L.

ELabor, eris, elabi, elapsum, to slyppe or
slyde. sometyme to escape.



Elaboro, aui, are, to labour.



Elacatena, a sawce vsed in the olde tyme.



Elamit&ecedil;, be called the prynces of Persy­
anes, of Elam the sonne of Sem, as Iose­
phus sayth.



Elatus, proude, hyghe.



Elea, a citie in the countrey of Lucania.



Eleates, a man of that citie.



Electio, onis, an election, an approbation.



Electo, aui, are, to chose.



Electrum, that whiche is in englishe called
ambre, wherof beades be made, It is al­
so taken for a mettalle, parte golde, parte
syluer. Plin.



Eleemosina, almesse.



Elegans, tis, elegaunte, fresshe, gorgyous,
cleane, polyte.



Elegantia, elegancy, gorgiousnes, clennes,
beautie in wordes.



Elegia, a lamentable songe or verse.



Elegus, the same.



Elegiacus, ca, cum, pertaynynge therto.



Elegiographus, a writer of lamentable ver­
sis, or balades.



Elego, elegi, eligere, to chose.



Elei, people in Grece in the countrey some­
tyme called Peloponessus, nowe Morea.



Elementa, the fyrste or pryncipall mattier,
wherof al thinges do take their beginning:
whiche be foure in numbre, fyre, ayre, wa­
ter, and erthe. Also the letters, wherof sil­
lables be made, are called elementa. 



Elenchus, an argument, reprouynge subtil­
ly an other argument. It is also a table in a
boke, to shew the places by letter or other
wise. It is moreouer a great perle, or other
precious stone, whiche women were wont
to hange at their eares.



Eleo, eui, ere, to spotte, or soyle.



Elephas, antis, uel elephantus, ti, a beast, cal­
lyd an olyphaunt. It is sometyme taken for
yuory. sometyme a syckenes callyd lepry.



Elephantezographi, be called these peyn­
ters, whiche peynt with yuorie.



Elephantia, seu elephantiasis, a kynde of le­
prie, wherin the flesshe dothe swelle, and
is full of spottes.



Elephantiacus, a lepre.



Elephantini libri, amonge the olde Romay­
nes were bokes, wherin their lawes were
written, whiche concerned the nobilitie.



Elephantinus, pertaynynge to an olyphant.



Eleus, a ryuer, whiche watereth a greatte
parte of Media.



Eleuies, a purgation.



Eleuo, aui, are, to lyfte vp. somtyme to take
away, to mynyshe, to extenuate.



Elusa, an yle agaynst Cypers.



Elusis, & elusin, a Cytie in the prouynce of
Attica, not farre from Athenes.



Eleusina sacra, ceremonies of Ceres the
goddesse.



Elutherius, the name of a man, and is inter­
pretate, free, gentyll.



Elutheria, freedome, gentylnesse.



Elices, sorowes in the fieldes, to conueye
water.



Elicio, cui, cere, to brynge out, to drawe out,
to prouoke.



Elicito, to drawe often.



Elico, aui, are, to tourne vp so downe.



Elico, onis, he that tourneth thynges oute
of order.



Elido, si, dere, to hytte agaynste a thynge, to
breake, to presse out, to exclude, to stran­
gle, to kylle.



Eligo, legi, eligere, to chose.



Elimino, aui, are, to putte or cast forth from
a place ferre of.



Elimo, aui, are, to putte out.



Elinguis, without a tunge, specheles.



Elinguo, aui, are, to plucke out ones tunge.



Eliquo, aui, are, to melte.



Elis, a citie of Archadie.



Elissa, one of the names of Dido.



Elixo, aui, are, to sethe or boyle.



Elixus, a, um, sodden or boyled.



Elychnium, the matche, whiche is in a lampe,
and standeth in oyle.



Elogium, a testification or witnesse in wor­
des, of praise or dispraise, of honoure or
reproche.



Elocutio, onis, a propre fourme of wordes
and sentences.



Elongo, aui, are, to remoue fer of, to make
longe, to deferre.



Eloquentia, eloquence.



Eloquium, speche in a pleasant maner.



Eloquor, eris, qui, to speke. proprely it is, whan
I set a thynge forth in speking, that the he­
rers may vnderstand it, as I conceyue it.



Elot&ecedil;, among the Lacedemonians was as
moche to saye, as commune mynysters or
seruauntes, as sergeauntes, or suche as in
London they do call yomen.



Elpenor, a companion of Ulysses, whiche
with other, Circe tourned into an hogge.



Elucesco, sci, cescere, to be very bright.



Elucifico, caui, care, to depriue of lyght.



Elucus, he that issycke of the drynke of
yesterday. Also a louer of trifles.






Elugeo, gi, gere, to leaue mournynge.



Elucido, aui, are, to shyne or make bryghte
outewarde.



Eludo, si, ere, to mocke or deceyue, Also to
leaue playenge.



Elumbus & elumbis, he that hath feble loi­
nes, and can not stande vpright.



Eluo, lui, luere, to washe out.



Eluo, aui, are, to lyue in glotony, or to spend
superfluousely.



Elusco, aui, are, to make one purblynde.



Eluto, aui, are, to soke out water.



Elutrio, aui, are, to powre out of one vessell
into an other.



Eluuies, ordure or fylthe caused of aboun­
dance of water, or other lycour.



Elysium, a place where poetes dyd suppose
the sowles of good men to dwell.



Elysii campi, the same place.

 

E ante M.

EMacio, aui, are, to make leane.



Emancipo, aui, are, to infraunchyse or
make free, or sette at lybertie. somme­
time it is vsed in the contrary sence, to bynd
or make bonde. It is most commonly where
a man dispossesseth him selfe, and doth alie­
nate his lande to an other.



Emancipator, a feffour, or alienour.



Emaneo, emansi, emanere, to dwelle out of
a place.



Emano, aui, are, to issue or flowe out.



Emansor, oris, he that wandreth longe, and
at the laste retourneth home: a lurker.



Emargino, aui, are, to take awaye scurse a­
boute the brymmes of woundes or soores.



Emasculo, aui, are, to gelde, or to take away
the courage of a man, or to abuse a manne
chylde in lechery.



Emath, a citie that is nowe called Antioch.



Emathia, a parte of the realme of Mace­
donia.



Emaus, a notable citie of Palestine, which
nowe is called Nicopolis.



Emax, cis, he or she that is redye to bye
any thynge.



Emacitas, tatis, redynes or custome to bye.



Embamma, matis, sawce.



Emblema, blematis, pictures made of wod,
stone, or mettal, of one colour, set in wodde
stone or mettall of an other coloure: as we
see in chesse bourdes or tables, callid coun­
ters: it is moche vsed in Italy.



Embrio, onis, signifieth the childe concey­
ued before it receiueth perfecte shappe of
a man or woman.



Emedullo, aui, are, to take out marowe.



Emendico, caui, care, to aske in fourme of
beggynge.



Emendo, aui, are, to amende.



Emergo, emersi, gere, to issue or come oute
of the place where a thinge is drowned.



Emereor, emereri, to deserue to the vtter­
mooste.



Emeriti milites, old worne souldiours, whi­
che were pardoned of warres, & not with­
standynge had pencyons, which were cal­
led Emerita stipendia. 



Emineo, eminui, eminere, to shewe or excel
aboue all other, to be higher than other.



Eminulus, a, um, a lyttell rysynge in height.



Eminus, ferre of.



Emissarium, a sluse, or place to lette water
out of a ponde or ryuer.



Emissarius, sommetyme it signyfieth hym,
whiche is sent before in battayle to espie,
or to skyrmyshe. sometyme a seruant, whi­
che is alway at hand, redy to be sent forth.
Also it signifieth suche a persone, whyche
is ordeyned of him that is in any great of­
fice or authoritie, to aduaunce his bribery.
Also it sygnifyeth a horse stalyon, whiche
serueth to gette coltes.



Emississius, a spyall.



Emitto, misi, mittere, to sende forth, to pu­
blyshe, to manumise.



Emo, emi, emere, to bye.



Emodus, a hyll, whiche aboute the border
of Indie, is diuided into two bowghtes.



Emolumentum, profyte gotten of labour.



Emortualis dies, the day of dethe.



Emorior, emori, to die vtterly.



Empedocles, the name of a Phylosopher,
which supposed all thynges to haue theyr
beinge of amitie, and variance.



Emphasis, an expresse signification of that,
whiche is intended.



Emphyteosis, the making of a thynge bet­
ter than it was, whan it was receyued or
letten, as lande.



Emphyteota, he that taketh a thynge, and
promyseth or couenaunteth to make it bet­
ter than he receyued it.



Emphracta, shyppes or barges kouered.



Empiricus, a phisition that practiseth.



Emplastratio, is graffyng betwene the bark
and the wodde.



Emplastrum, a playster.



Emporetica charta, paper, wherin marchan­
tes or grossers do putte their wares.



Emporium, a place wherin is kept a marte
or fayre.



Emporeuma, shepmanshyppe.



Emptitius, a, um, that whiche is or maye
be boughte.



Emptito, aui, are, to vse to bye.



Emunctorium, an instrument, wherwith the
snuffe of a candell is taken away, a snuffer.






Emungo, xi, gere, to snuffe a candelle. Also
to make cleane a mans nose. somtyme it si­
gnifyeth to dispoyle a man of money, pro­
prely by crafte.



Emunctus auro, spoyled of his treasure.



Terentius
Horatius.



Emunct&ecedil; naris, of a cleane and sure iudge­
mente.



Emusicata, made or wrought by rule.

 

E ante N.

EN, loo, see.



Energia, a demonstration, whan a thing
is so discryued, that it seemeth to the
reder or herer, that he beholdeth it, as it
were indoinge.



Enc&ecedil;nia, an innouation or renewynge. It
was amonge Jewes the feaste of dedicati­
on of their temple.



Encanthis, a disease in the eies.



Encaustum, vernyshe, enamyll, or other pyc­
ture, wrought with fyre.



Enchiridion, a handell of a thyng. somtime
a dagger, somtyme that part of an ore, that
the waterman holdeth. It is vsurped for a
boke in so lyttell a volume, that a man maye
alway carye it with hym.



Enchiros, a beaste bredde in the oriente, as
great as a bull.



Enchrista, thynne oyntementes.



Encimibomata, maydens kyrtelles, or pe­
ty cootes.



Encyclios, & Encyclia, the cyrkle or course
of all doctrines.



Encyclop&ecedil;dia, that lernynge whiche com­
prehendeth all lyberall sciences & studies.



Endelechia, a consummate perfection, whi­
che Aristotle dyd put besides the foure e­
lementes.



Endeploro, aui, are, to make intercessyon
with teares.



Endoprocinctum, whan men wente oute of
the campe vnto battayle.



Endromis, midis, a mantell suche as Irishe
men and women do nowe weare.



Endymion, the name of a manne, whiche
founde the course of the mone. wherfore
the poetes fayned, that the moone loued
jym, and descended downe to kysse hym,
whyles he slepte.



Energia, an efficacie or operacion.



Energisicus, effectuall.



Eneruo, aui, are, to debilitate or make feble.



Eneruis, & Eneruus, without synewes.



Engaddi, a citie in Iudea, from whens the
precious balme cometh.



Enim, forsothe. sometyme it is expletiue,
and dothe but fylle vp a sentence, to make
it sounde well. sometyme it is a copulatiue:
Sed enim, but forasmoche.



Enipeus, a ryuer of Thessaly, nere to whi­
che the battayle was fought betwene Ce­
sar  and Pompey. 



Eniteo, tui, tere, to indeuour, to inforce to
do a thynge.



Enitor, teris, enixus sum, eniti, idem quod
eniteo.



Enixe, & Enixum, dilygently with all force.



Enna, a cytie of Sycile, sytuate in a hyghe
place.



Ennius, the name of an auncient poete.



Enoch, a mans name in holy scripture.



Enodis, enode, without a knotte.



Enodo, aui, are, to cutte away the knottes,
or to vnknytte.



Enormis, enorme, great out of measure.



Enos, is interpretate a very man.



Ens, entis, the beinge of euery thynge.



Ensis, a sworde.



Enthymema, enthymematis, a shorte or im­
perfect syllogisme.



Enucleo, aui, are, to take out the kernell of
a nutte. It is also to declare or make playne
a sentence.



Enascor, sceris, sci, to growe or sprynge of
a thynge.



Enarro, rare, to tell out at length.



Enarratio, a playn declaration or exposition.



Enyalius, the sonne of Bellona. 

 

¶ E ante O.

EO, is, iui, ire, to goo.



Eo uenum, ire uenum, to be solde.



Eon, the compas of the eie.



Eò, therfore, forasmoche, vnto that.
	 


Eous, the easte.



Eo usque, in so moche.

 

¶ E ante P.

EPaminondas, the name of a valiant ca­
pitayne of the Thebans.



Epanalepsis, a replication or repetition.



Ephabus, the sonne of Iupiter that builded
Memphis in Aegipte.



Eparcus, the presydent of a prouince.



Epauxis, an increase.



Ephebia, the age wherin oone entreth into
the state of a man .xv. or .xvi. yeres.



Ephebus, he that is of that age.



Ephemeris, a boke, wherin is written that,
which is done daily, or a boke of reckning.



Ephemerinos, a feuer contynuyng one day.



Ephi, a measure conteynynge .iii. bushels.



Ephippium, the harneis of a horse or mule.



Ephori, greate officers amonge the Lace­
demonians, by whome the kynges power




was restrayned.



Ephira, re, or Ephire, res, a towne of A­
chaie, whiche nowe is called Corinthus.



Epialos, a feuer caused of fleume.



Epibata, a souldiour on the see.



Epibatra, the ladder that gothe vp to the
toppe castell.



Epicharmus, the name of an excellent phy­
losopher of Syracuse.



Epicheremata, argumentes made in rea­
sonynge.



Epicedium, versis in commendacion of a deed
man, a gay laude.



Epictetus, the name of a stoik philosopher.



Epicurus, the name of hym, which dyd put
the principal goodnes in voluptuositie.



Epidamnus, a cytie in Sycile, but the Ro­
maynes after they had subdued it, wolde
haue it called Dyrrachium.



Epidaurus, a cytie in Grece.



Epidicticon, demonstratiue.



Epidromes, the armynge of a nette.



Epiglossis, a small thynge in the innermost
parte of the tunge, lyke a littell tunge.



Epigramma, a superscription.



Epigrammatarius, he that wryteth verses,
called Epigrammata. 



Epigriphus, he that hath a croked nose.



Epilepsia, the fallynge syckenes.



Epilepticus, he that hath that disease.



Epilogus, a conclusion in writing or speking.



Epimenides, the name of a philosopher.



Epinicia, verses contaynyng prayses.



Epinyctides, a wheale or pushe, whiche ry­
seth on the skynne by nyght.



Epiphanes, notable, or famous.



Epiphania, a manyfestation. It is also a
solemne feaste in the churche.



Epiphonema, an exclamation.



Epirrhedium, a waggen, or carte.



Epirus, a countrey in Grece.



Episcopatus, a byshopryche.



Episcopium, a byshoppes palays or house,
or a place to espie out of.



Episcopius, a, um, pertaynynge to espiall.



Episcopus, a byshoppe, sometyme an espie.
sometyme a clerke of the markette.



Epistola, a letter sent from one to an other.



Epistolium, a lyttell epistle.



Epistomium, a spowte sendynge forth wa­
ter from a cundite.



Epistylium, the chapiter of a pylar.



Epitaphium, a scripture written on a graue
or sepulchre.



Epithalamium, a songe beinge songe atte a
weddynge, or verses made in the praise of
them that are maried.



Epithema, a medicine layde to the regyon
of the harte or lyuer, to coole it.



Epithetes, a disceyuer.



Epitheton, an addition, proprelye applyed
to a thyng for some notable qualitie, which
it sygnifieth, as Seuum mare, The rough see,
Garrula pica, The chatterynge pie. Crude­
lis Nero, The cruel Nero. Campi florigeri,
The flouryshynge fieldes.



Epithymia, mi&ecedil;, concupiscence, desyre.



Epitogum, i, a garment worne vpon a gowne.



Epitome, mes, a brigement, or breuiate.



Epitritus, a foote of foure sillables, or whi­
che one differeth euer from the other thre.



Epitrope, procuration, wardshyp.



Epityrum, a chese cake.



Epithyrum, a meane to conserue olyues.



Epos, epodos, a kynde of verse, or songe,
which contayneth thynges concernyng as
well god as manne. Also whiche hath the
fyrst verse lengar than the seconde, as,
Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis
Vt prisca gens mortalium.



Epul&ecedil;, meates.



Epulum, a greate feaste, whervnto all the
people assembled, whiche amonge the olde
Romayns was made either to the honour
of some of their goddes. or at the burieng
of some notable personage. It may be now
taken for a churche feest, or feest of a bro­
therheed, or dyner made at a buriall or in­
terment. It hath bene sometyme vsed for a
uate bankette.
Cicero pro
L. Planco.


Epularis, are, bilongynge to a feaste or ban­
ket, as Epularis sermo, communication mete
for a feaste or bankette.



Epulor, ari, to eate at feastes or bankettes.



Epulatorius, ia, ium, apt to be eaten at a feest
or bankette.



Epulis, fleshe that groweth on the gummes
about a mans tethe.



Epulo, nis, plurali epulones, men boden to a
great feaste, or they which come vnboden,
to eate the reuercion. Amonge the gentils
they were called by the pristes, to eate that
whiche was lefte of the sacrifice.

 

¶ E ante Q.

EQuarius, ia, ium, pertainyng to horses.



Vale. Max.



Equarius medicus, a horse leche



Eques, a horseman, contrary to a fote
man. sometime it is taken for a knight. But
I suppose, that amonge the Romaynes,
Equites, were taken for theym, whome we
calle gentylmen.



Equester, equestris, equestre, pertaynynge
to eques, as, Equestris ordo, the state or
degree of gentylmen. Equestres copi&ecedil;, the
numbre or company of horsemen.



Equestria, the places assigned to gentilmen,




where they satte to beholde any solempne
fyghtes or playes.



Equidem, verily.



Equiferus, a wylde horse.



Plinius.
Varro.



Equila, a lyttell mare.



Equile, a stable for horses.



Equimentum, the hyre of a stallyon to sea­
son a mare.



Equinus, na, num, of a horse.



Equio, iui, ire, whan a mare desyreth to be
seasoned.



Equiria, runnynge with horses: a playe de­
dicate to Mars. 



Equisessor, a man on horsbacke.



Equiserum, an herbe called horsetayle.



Equiso, onis, a horsebreaker.



Equitabilis, bile, able to be riden, also a place
in whiche horses might easily walke.



Equitatus, an hoste of horsemen. also the
acte of ridynge. sometyme the state or or­
der of gentylmen.



Equitium, the esquirie or companye of the
stable.



Equitius, the propre name of a manne, and
surname of a familye in Rome.



Equito, aui, are, to ryde.



Equitatio, a rydynge.



Equuleus, a horsecolt. Also a maner of tur­
ment made of bournynge plates, lyke to a
horse, wherin men were tourmented.



Equulus, a nagge or lyttell hors.



Equus, a horse.



Equa, a mare.



Equus citatus, a horse taken vp.



Equus carpentarius, a carte horse.

 

¶ E ante R.

ERado, asi, ere, to scrape of, or out of a
thynge.



Erasinus, the name of a ryuer.



Erasistratus, the name of one of the Musis.



Eratosthenes, the name of a philosopher.



Erciscere, to diuide, proprely landes.



Erciscund&ecedil; famili&ecedil;, of householde to be de­
uided or parted amonge dyuers heires.



Ercinia, a wonderfull greatte wodde in
Germany.



Ercius, one of the names of Iupiter. 



Erebus, one of the ryuers of Hell.



Eregione, on the other syde.



E re nata, by occasion wherof.



Erembi, people in Arabia, which go naked.



E re mea, uel tua, for my profite or thyne.



Eremodicium, a discontynuance of action,
doone throughe absence or neglygence of
the parties.



Eremus, a deserte or solytary place.



E republica, for the profyte of the publyke
weale.



Eretum, a streate of the Sabynes.



Erga, towarde . Erga festum natalis Christi,
Agayne Christmasse.



Ergasterium, a warkehouse.



Ergastes, siue ergasticus, a workeman.



Ergastulum, a house, where men were com­
pelled to worke on stone or mettall. Nowe
is it taken for a prysone, and sometyme for
the prisoners.



Ergastularius, the gayler or keper of the
prysone.



Ergastulus, a gayler. sometyme it signifieth
a labourer.



Ergasylus, the propre name of a man.



Erginus, was a tyranne, whiche Hercules
subdued and slewe. 



Ergo, therfore. somtyme it is spoken dys­
daynously. Fac ergo quod libet, Than doo
as the lyste. sometyme exhortynge. Ergo
age, go to. sometyme it signifyeth bycause,
Illius ergo, for his sake. Virtutis ergo, by­
cause of vertue.



Ergatum, an engyne to drawe vp thynges
of great poise or weight, callid a crane.



Erguminus, a man possessed with an yl spirite



Eribœa, the stepmother of Mercury. 



Erica, an herbe growynge in woddes, and
is lyke to maioram.



Ericthonius, the fyrste kynge of Athenes,
whiche inuented a chariotte.



Eridanus, a ryuer in Italy, now called Po.



Erimantus, a diuinour.



Erinaceus, an hedgehogge or vrchyn.



Erinnys, the name of oone of the furyes
of helle.



Eriphyle, the wyfe of Amphiaraus, & systar
of Adrastus, whiche betrayed hir husbande
for a bracelette at the siege of Thebes.



Eripio, pui, pere, to take awaye, to delyuer.
Eripuisti mihi pecuniam, Thou haste taken
my money from me. Eripuisti me a periculo,
Thou haste delyuered me frome perylle.
Eripuisti a me librum, Thou haste taken my
boke from me. sommetyme to make haste.
Eripe fugam, Flee away in haste.



Eris, an herbe growynge in Aegypte, and
may be interpretate contention.



Erodius, a fowle, the greattest that fleeth,
and ouercometh and eateth the Egle.



Erogo, aui, are, to distribute.



Errabundus, moche wanderynge, or va­
cabunde.



Erraticus, ca, cum, that crepeth here & there,
as, Vitis erratica, a crepyng vine, that sho­
teth out in dyuers places.



Erratus, tus, erratum, ti, an errour or synne.






Errones, startars asyde, vagabundes.



Error, errour, properly where falsehode is
affirmed or taken for trouth: or trouth for
falsehode.



Erro, aui, are, to erre, to wander.



Erubesco, bui, are, to be ashamed, or to
blusshe.



Eruca, an herbe called Rokat. also a worme
called the canker worme, whiche commonly
is vpon kolewortes.



Eructo, taui, tare, to belke or breake wynde
out of the stomacke.



Erudero, aui, are, to throwe out, or cary a­
waye rubbell, as morter, stones, and other
lyke thynges of olde buyldynge decayed,
or pulled downe.



Erudio, iui, ire, to teache any arte or science.



Eruditio, doctryne or teachynge.



Eruditus, lerned or taught.



Eruila, a grayne called tares.



Erunco, caui, care, to wede out.



Eruo, ui, ere, to drawe out with force.



Eruum, a kynde of pulse.



Erugo, an vnkindly moisture, wherby corne
growynge is putrified.



Erymanthus, a mountayn in Archady, where
Hercules ouercame a bore, that destroyed
the fieldes. There are also a wodde and a
ryuer of the same name.
Plin. lib.4


Erythace, bees meate, whyle they labour.



Erythacus, a byrde called Robyn redbrest.



Erythea, an Ile, the countraye of Gerion,
where the ayre is so benigne, that men well
nere are there immortall.



Erytheus, was a kynge of Athenes.



Erythios, an herbe called redde betes, as I
do suppose.



Erythræum, is called the redde see, this see
is betwene the Indie & Aethiope occean.



Eryx, the name of a mountayn in Cicile, and
of a citie theron buylded, wherin was edi­
fied a temple to Venus, wherof Venus is
called Erycina. 
Quid geminas Erycina meos fine fine dolo­
res? O Venus, why doest thou continually
double my sorowes? 
Ouidius.
 

¶ E Ante S.

ESca, all maner of meate, as welle for
men, as beastes.



Escarius, a, um, pertaynynge to meate.
Escaria mensa, a table, wherat men do eate
meate.



Esculentus, ta, tum, any thynge to be eaten.



Esculus, an oke bearynge acornes.



Esito, aui, are, to eate.



Ess&ecedil;i, certayn religious men of the Iewes.



Esseda, a wayne.



Essedones, a people, whiche doo eate theyr
frendes, whan they be deed, and drynke in
the sculles of their heedes.



Esto, be it.



Esuriales feri&ecedil;, wake dayes.



Esuries, hunger.



Esurio, iui, ij, ire, to be a hungred.

 

E Ante T.

ET, and, as well. Te admirantur & ciues
& hospites, As well thy countrey men
as straungers do wonder at the. some­
tyme it signifieth but, by an interrogation,
sometyme, That is to saye, Annos natus iam
sexaginta, & senex, Nowe thre score yeres
olde, that is to say an olde man.



Etsi, all be it.



Etenim, for.



Etesi&ecedil;, wyndes which do commonly blowe in
sommer, about the canicular dayes.



Ethalia, the name of an yle in the see called
mare ligusticum, whiche is by Ieane.



Ethanion, the name of a certayne vessell.



Eteocles, the sunne of Oedipus and Iocasta
his mother.



Ethicus, morall.



Ethmus, the myddell brydge of the nose.



Ethnicus, a gentyle.



Ethologos, he which with voyce, gesture,
and countenance expresseth the maners of menne.



Etiam, also, moreouer, ye, ye forsothe.



Etiamnum, also.



Etymologia, true sayenge, or true exposy­
tion, or reason.



Ethopeia, an imytation of other mennes
maners.



Ethici pictores, paynters, whiche in pyc­
tures doo lyuely sette out the maners and
affections of men.

 

¶ E Ante V.

EVado, si, uadere, to escape, to passe with
daunger, to appere, to clymme, to de­
lyuer, to be, to come to.



Euadne, Mars daughter, of Thebes, the
wyfe of Aesopus: and the wyfe of Capa­
nei was soo called, whyche louyd her hus­
bande so feruently, that whan she harde he
was take at Thebes, she fell nere deed in a
swowne, and after whan his funerall was
celebrate, she lepte into the fyre.



Eu&ecedil;netus, a kynge of the Lacedemonians.



Eualeo, lui, ere, to waxe hole or stronge.



Eualesco, scere, to waxe very stronge.



Eualuo, aui, are, to putte or sette out of the
doores.






Euan, an exclamation to the praise of Bac­
chus, and is as moche to saye, as Bone pu­
er, O good chylde.



Euander, the propre name of Carmentis
sonne, and is interpretate a good man: he
lefte his countrey Archadia, and came into
Italy, and entryng into the mouth of Ty­
ber, and expulsyng the inhabitantes, rested
in the hylle Palatine, where he beganne to
buylde the towne Palanteum.



Euaneo, et euanesco, scere, to vanishe away.



Euangelium, good tydynges.



Euanidus, a, um, vnfruitefull.



Euapelus, a foole or ideote.



Plautus.



Euax, an interiection of reioycynge. Euax
iurgio uxorem tandem abegi, Heida, I haue
yet at the laste dryuen my wyfe away with
chydynge.



Eubœa, an yle in the greke see, & the name
of a citie situate in the same.



Eubulus, the name of a storie writer, and is
interpretate prudente.



Eucarpia, a citie of Phrigia, where growe
great plentie of very fayre grapes.



Eucharistia, good grace, a renderynge of
thanke. It is nowe taken for the sacrament
of the aultar.



Euchila, meates of good iuyce.



Euclides, the name of a famous Geome­
trycian.



Eueho, euexi, euehere, to cary out. somtyme
it sygnifyeth to extoll or lyfte vp.



Lactantius.



Euemerus, the name of an old story writer



Euenire, to happen by chaunce.



Euênus, a ryuer descendyng from Thrace,
and deuydynge Calydonie.



Euentus, tus, happe. somtyme it is taken
for the ende. or conclusion of a thynge.



Euenta, thynges whyche happen in con­
clusyon.



Euentum pr&ecedil;stare, to waraunt al that, whi­
che shall happen.



Euerriator, he that hath goodes of the te­
statour with condicion, that if he performe
not his laste wyll, or do distourbe it, he shal
lese all that he hath.



Euerro, rri, rere, to swepe cleane.



Euerto, ti, tere, to tourne vp so downe.



Euestigio, by and by, at an instant.



Euganei, people of Venece.



Euganei montes, mountaynes in Italy by
Padowe.



Euge, well done.



Euidens, entis, euident, apparant.



Euilla, a countrey in the orient, aboute the
whiche the ryuer Phison, whiche we calle
Ganges, that commeth out of Paradyse,
dothe rounne.



Euiratus, of womanly or chyldyshe condi­
cions. also he that lacketh his genitours.



Euiro, aui, are, to take away a mannes mem­
bres of generation.



Euescero, aui, are, to bowel or drawe out the
guttes of any thinge.



Euito, aui, are, to flee, to eschew, or beware.



Eulogium, a worde well spoken, a praise, a
benediction.



Eumelus, the sonne of Admetus, kynge of
Thessaly, gotten on Alcesta his wyfe.



Eumenides, furies of helle.



Eumolpus, a mans name of Athenes, whom
Suidas writeth to be the sonne of Muse­
us the poete.



Eumonides, a mans name of Thebes.



Eunucho, & eunuchiso, to gelde men.



Eunuchus, a man gelded.



Eunomia, a iuste constitution or ordynance
of lawes.



Euoco, aui, are, to call out, to call forthe, or
calle away. Euocare testes, to brynge forth
wytnesse.



Euacati, souldyours, whiche for some ne­
cessitie be sodaynely called out of the fiel­
des vnto battayle.



Eupalia, a towne in Locris, whiche somme
call Eupalion, and some Eupolyon.



Euphonia, a good sounde.



Euphorbium, an herbe.



Euphorion, a poetis name of Calcidonye,
whom Gallus did translate.



Euphrasinum, an herbe called Buglosse.



Euphrates, one of the ryuers, that comme
out of Paradyse, whiche passeth through
the citie of Babylon.



Euphrosyna the propre name of a woman.



Eupilis, a laake in France Cisalpine.



Euryale, the daughter of kynge Minois,
whiche brought forth to Neptune, Orion.
ther was an other of that name, the daugh­
ter of Prœtus, kyng of Argiue.



Euryalus, the name of one of the princis of
Peloponnese. Virgil feineth a Troyane to
be so callyd.



Euripides, the name of an excellente poete
amonge the Grekes.



Euripus, a small cundyte rysynge of a great
height. Also a diche made to inclose places
to play in, in the stede of hedges. some do
take it for a small ponde or stewe.



Euripus, an arme of the see, or a narrowe
passage betwene two places.



Euronotus, a northeaste wynde.



Europa, that parte of the worlde, whyche
we do inhabyte, so named and called of Eu­
ropa, the daughter of Agenor, kynge of
Phenice.



Eurotas, a ryuer that rounneth before the
towne of Lacedemona.






Eurus, the easte wynde.



Euricion, the name of a goldesmythe.



Euricratidas, a man of Lacedemonye.



Euridamas, a man of Troye.



Virgi.
Plut.
Ouid.
Herod.



Euridame, was the wyfe of Leutichis,
kynge of Spartans.



Eurydice, the wyfe of Orpheus. 



Eurylochus, the kyng of Phlegia, whiche
distroyd Thebes, before Cadmusbuildid it.



Eurypylus, one of the sonnes of Hercules
that reigned in the yle Cous.



Euterpe, one of the Musis.



Eutheca, a storehouse.



Euthymia, quietenesse, suertie of mynde,
or hartis ease.

 

¶ E Ante X.

EX, sygnifyeth of, or fro. 
Ex fide, fama Cic. ad Atticum, Summa
erit h&ecedil;c, statues, ut ex fide fama, reque
mea uidebitur, This shall be the hoole ef­
fecte, that thou doo, as it shall seeme to be
for myne honestie, accordynge to the trust
that I putte in the, and for my profyte.



Ex dignitate tua, et ex repub. facis, Thou
doest accordynge to thyne auctoritie, and
for the weale of thy countrey.



Exactio, a pyllynge of the people.



Exactor, a demaunder of money. some en­
glyshe it a Comtroller.



Exactus, ta, tum, passed, verye dylygente,
exacte.



Exacerbesco, ere, to waxe sharpe.



Plautus.



Ex&ecedil;difico, aui, are, to buylde perfectely. al­
so to dryue out of the house.



Exaggeratio, a heapynge togyther.



Exagito, aui, are, to vexe, to angre.



Exalto, aui, are, to mounte or lyfte vp, some­
tyme to prayse very moche.



Examen, minis, a swarme of bees, Also the
nedyll or tounge in balaunces and beames.
Sommetyme it sygnyfyeth a iuste examy­
nacyon.



Examino, aui, are, to examyne.



Examurco, aui, are, to drawe oyle cleane
from the mother.



Examussim, iustely by rule.



Exanclo, aui, are, to drawe oute cleane, to
emptye, sommetyme to suffre, to make. Non
potest hic fine tua opera exanclari clauus. This
nayle can not be made without thy helpe.
Pac.


Exanguis, exangue, without bloode, tymo­
rous, or fearefull.



Exanimalis, without sowle or lyfe.



Ex animo est, It is as nature requyreth.



Ex animo facio, I do it with my good wyll,
or as my mynde gyueth me.



Ex animi sententia, accordynge to myn ap­
petyte, or as I wolde desyre it.



Ex animo illi fauco, I fauour hym with all
my harte.



Ex animo, aui, are, to kyll, somtyme to make
aferde. Priusquem intus redii exanimatus fui, Or
euer I came in agayn, I was made aferde.
Multos exanimauit rigor insolitus niuis, The
vnaccustomed chyllyng of the snowe depri­
ued many of their lyues.
Plaut.Q Curtius.


Examinus, ma, mum, & exanimis, exanime, 
deed, put in feare.



Exanimatus, ta, tum, made aferde, or trou­
bled in mynde: somtime it signifyeth deed.



Exanio, aui, are, to put cleane away.



Columel.



Exanthema, a wheale or a pusshe in a man­
nes skynne.



Exarefio, exarefiere, to be dried vp.



Exaresco, sci, scere, to drie.



Exarmo, aui, are, to make tame, proprelye to
breake to tethe of wylde beastes.



Exarmare, to vnarme, or to take harneysse
from a man.



Exarmare nauem, to take away the taklyng
from a shyppe.



Exarmare actionem, to make the accyon
faynte or feble.



Exaro, aui, are, to eare well, also to write.



Exasceare, to polyshe, or make playn, as car­
pentars doo after that they haue hewed.



Exaspero, aui, are, to make sharpe, Also to
make very angrye.



Ex asse, of the hole. Hæredem fecit ex asse,
He made him heire of all the hole.



Exauctoro, aui, are, to putte out of wages,
somtime to disgrade a knight, or other like.



Exauctorati, souldiours or seruantes putte
out of wages, or dismissed of their seruice.



Exauctoratus, deposed, or put out of office.



Exaudio, iui, ire, to here beneuolentelye or
perfectely.



Exbalisto, aui, are, to trumpe or deceyue.
Ego hunc communem meum, atque nostrum
omnium hostem exbalistabo lepide, I wolle
feately deceyue this min cenmy, and al ours
in commune.



Excandescentia, vehement angre or wrath.



Excanto, aui, are, to charme. sommetyme to
shutte out.
Plaut.


Excandesco, sci, ere, to be very angry.



Excandefacio, feci, facere, to chaufe, or make
angry, or to make very hote.



Excarnificatus, torne or rente with tour­
mentes.



Excarnifico, caui, care, to rente or cutte in
pieces.



Excedo, cessi, dere, to departe or go forthe,
to passe or excede.



Excello, li, ere, to excelle.



Excelsus, a, um, hyghe or great.






Exceptio, an exception.



Excepto, aui, are, to take or drawe to.



Exceptor, oris, he that wryteth faste that
whiche other men do speake.



Excerebro, aui, are, to beate out the braynes
of any thynge.



Excetra, a serpent, of whom the heed being
cutte of, thre came vp for it. It was also cal­
led Hydra.



Excerno, excreui, excernere, to shite. propre­
ly it is to trye out the yll from the good.



Excerpo, psi, pere, to gather here and there
the chiefe of any thynge.



Excidium, the sackynge of a towne or citie,
or the vtter destruction therof.



Excido, excidi, dere, to fall out of a thynge.
excidere, to cutte out of a thynge.



Excidere animo, to be forgoten.



Excidere formula, to lose his action.



Excieo, exciui, ire, to moue or shake out.



Excio, ciui, ire, to moue vehemently, or to
call out, to waken.



Excipio, excepi, excipere, to excepte, to take
or receyue, to trye or inserche, to separate,
to take by crafte, to gather, to hyde, to suc­
cede, to resyst without any busynesse.



Excipere notis, to wryte in cyfer, or other
compendiouse fourme.



Excipula, a weele to take fysshe.



Excipuus, a, um, wherwith any thing is taken.



Exciso, aui, are, to crop, to teare, orto beate.



Excisus, a, um, gelded.



Excito, aui, are, to stire, procure, or incorage.



Exclamo, aui, are, to crye oute, to calle for
alowde.



Excludo, to shytte out, to deliuer, to hatche
egges, to make to appiere.



Excolo, excolere, to garnyshe or decke.



Excomposito, in order appoynted.



Excorio, aui, are, to plucke of the skynne or
hyde of a beaste.



Excors, excordis, a foole, or a man hartles.



Excreo, aui, are, to spytte out.



Excrementum, thinges of dygestion expul­
sed moyste or drie, vrine, or siege.



Excresco, excreui, excrescere, to grow oute,
or to growe moche.



Excretum, the refuse or offall of any thing.



Excubi&ecedil;, biarum, watche, as well by daye as
by nyghte.



Excubitor, he that watcheth.



Excubitus, watche.



Erasmus in
Chiliad.



Ex diametro opposita, so contrarye the one
to the other, that they may neuer agree.



Excubo, aui, are, to watche, as they whiche
in battaylle, or in the garde of a pryncis
personne doo.



Excudo, excusi, excudere, to beate or stryke
out, sometyme to fynde out with study. Vt
primum silicis, scintillam excudit Achates,
As soone as Achates had stryken fyre of
the flynte. Also to hatche.
Vergilius.


Excurio, aui, are, to put out of court. Apol­
lonium ideo excurauit, quia nihil habebat,
Therfore dyd he put Apolonius out of the
courte, bycause he had nothyng.
Varro.


Cæsar.



Exæuire, to be pacified, to be assuagid of ire



Excursio, a digression in speakynge, a skyr­
myshe in warres.



Excuso, aui, are, to excuse.



Excusatoria epistola, a letter of excuse.



Excussorium cribrum, a rengyng fyue. also
a bulter.



Excutio, ssi, tere, to shake, to choose.



Excussus, a, um, shaken.



Excussores equi, gambaldynge horses.



Exdecimo, aui, are, to tythe out.



Exdisposito, by an order, of a purpose.



Exdorsuo, aui, are, to breake the backbone.



Execo, aui, are, to cutte withoute.



Exectus, gelded.



Execro, aui, are, to abhorre, to curse.



Execratio, cursynge.
 


Exedo, di, dere, to eate, as a worme or soore
dothe, to eate vp.



Exedra, a parlour, or other lyke place.



Exegematicus, a forme of spekyng, where
the poete onely speaketh.



Exemplum, an example to folowe, eschewe,
or beware.



Exemplar, a sample, wherby we attempt to
make a thynge lyke to it. somtyme the one
is vsed for the other. oftentymes they doth
do signifye an example, where one thynge
is compared with an other.



Exemptus, exempt or priuileged.



Exemptus est rebus humanis, he is deed.



Exemptilis, exemptile, that whiche may be
taken away, or taken out.



Exeo, exiui, exire, to go out, to exchewe, to
braste oute. In memoriam exire, to be in re­
membraunce. Exit in fabellam, It is made a
fable. Exit de potestate, He is not able to go
uerne hym selfe: he is in warde, or vnder a
gardayne.



Exentero, aui, are, to make a hole in a thing.



Exequi&ecedil;, funeralles, the whiche are doone
in the buriall of any person.



Exequior, aris, ari, to execute the funerals.



Exequor, eris, qui, to do or execute. somtime
to declare or expresse.



Exerceo, cui, cere, to exercyse. sometyme to
driue out of the house, to sette on warke,
to vse. Exercere discordias, et simultates, To
haue variance or contencion. also to get or
wynne. Exercere sumptus, To gette theyr
expenses. Exercere tellurem, to tylle welle
the grounde.






Exercio, ciui, ire, to amende or repaire.



Exercitium, exercise or vse.



Exercito, taui, tare, to exercise.



Exercitatio, exercyse, vse, or custome.



Exercitus, ta, tum, exercised, vsed in labour,
weried, hardned.



Exercitus, tus, an hoost of men of warre.



Exero, erui, erere, to go forth, to drawe out,
as a man wyll drawe out a sworde. Fulgen­
temque exerit ensem, And he drewe oute his
bryght sworde. Also to lyfte vp.
Statius.


Exertus, ta, tum, shewed forthe.



Exerto, aui, are, to shewe forth abrode.



Exfio, I pourge or clense.



Exhæredo, aui, are, to disherite.



Exhalo, aui, are, to puffe oute.



Exhaurio, iui, rire, to drawe oute cleane, to
make empty.



Exherbare, to plucke vp herbes or wedes.



Exherbandus est locus, The place muste
be weeded.
Columel.


Exherbatio, weedynge.



Exhibeo, bui, bere, to proffre, to set abrode,
for all men to beholde.



Exhibere negotium, to putte to busynesse,
or trouble.



Exhomologesis, confession.



Exhorreo, rui, rere, to feare horryblye, or
with tremblynge.



Exibilo, aui, are, to whistyll or hisse a manne
out of the place. Exifilare, idem.



Exigo, exegi, exigere, to expell or shutt out.
also to require, to inquyre, to do.



Exigere pecuniam, to demaunde money.



Exactus, ta, tum, expelled, demanded, per­
fectly done, or perfourmed.



Exilium, exyle.



Exilio, lii, ire, to goo out hastilye, or to
leape out.



Eximium, excellent, very great.



Eximo, exemi, mere, to take away, to except



Eximor ex reis, Eximor nox&ecedil;, I am acquite
or discharged of the offence or trespas.



Eximor ex ærariis, I am clerely discharged
of all paymentes.



Eximere actionem, to barre the action.



Exin, from thensforthe.



Exinanio, niui, ire, to emptye, to brynge to
nowghte.



Exinsperato, vnloked for, whiche no manne
hooped.



Existimo, aui, are, to trowe or suppose, to
decerne or iudge.



Existimatio, supposel. somtime reputation.



Existo, extiti, existere, to be, to appere, to be
sette vp, or aduanced.



Exitiabilis, bile, deedly.



Exitialis, le, deadely, or that causeth dethe,
or myschiefe.



Exitium, dethe, or mischiefe.



Ex iure manum conserere, to derayne bat­
tayle in the triall of ryght.



Exlex, he that lyueth without loue, or oute
of loue.



Exodium, a songe at the ende of a comedy
or interlude. also the ende of a matter.



Exolesco, exoleui, exolescere, to leaue gro­
wynge. sometyme to growe mightily.



Exoletus, he that is passed growynge. also
olde, or out of vse, it signifieth also a manne
childe abused agaynste nature.



Exoluo, ui, uere, to vnbynd, to pay al clere­
ly, to recompence or gyue in rewarde, to
delyuer. Suspitione exoluere, to deliuer from 
suspicion. Exoluere religione, to discharge
from vowe or conscience.



Exoculatus, he that hath his eien put out.



Exomida, a garmente without sleue s, a ta­
berde or chymere, or suche as hermytes
do weare, or munkes whan they do ride.



Exopolis, he that dwelleth in the subbar­
bes of a towne or citie.



Exorabulum, a crafty forme of desyryng or
askynge a thynge.



Exorbito, aui, are, to go out of the track or
carte lose, or to go out of the right way.



Exorcismus, an adiuration of coniuryng.



Exorcista, an adiurour or coniurour.



Exorciso, aui, are, to adiure or coniure.



Exordine, without ceassynge.



Exordior, iris, iri, to begynne.



Exordium, a begynnynge.



Exorior, iris, riri, to be borne, to appere out,
to ryse, as the sunne dothe, to inuade.



Exorno, aui, are, to garnyshe or make faire,
to apparayle rychely, to ordeyne. Somme­
tyme to make foule, or out of apparayle.



Exoro, aui, are, to induce or optayne by de­
syre, to desyre hartily.



Exors, exortis, out of felowshyppe.



Exos, without bones.



Exosso, aui, are, to bone, or plucke out boo­
nes. Also to pulle oute the strynge of a
lamprey.



Exoticus, a, um, a stranger, that is come out
of another countrey, and dwelleth here.



Expalpo, aui, are, to grope out.



Expando, di, ere, to sprede out.



Expapillo, aui, are, to make nakyd to the
pappes.



Expato, aui, are, to come abrode, or into an
open place.



Expecto, aui, are, to tarye or abyde, to ob­
serue or take hede. Expecto quid uelis, I
marke what thou wylt saye: or elles I de­
syre to knowe what thou woldest. Also to
hope. Expectate uenis, Thou comest euen
as I wolde haue the.






Expectoro, aui, are, to put out of the breste
or stomacke.



Expeculiatus, he that hathe nothynge of
his owne.



Expedio, iui, ire, to delyuer, to spede, to ca­
rye out. Expedire manus, to holde vp the
handes. Expedit, signifyeth also, It is ex­
pedient or necessary. it is come to passe.



Expeditus, ta, tum, delyuered.



Expediti milites, souldiors in light harneis.



Expeditio, a settyng forth toward battayle.



Expello, expuli, pellere, to expell or put out.



Expendo, di, ere, to ponder or weye, to ex­
amyne straytely, to paye truely, to spende
moneye.



Expens&ecedil;, expenses, or dispenses.



Expensum ferre, to spend or lay out money.



Expergiscere, Expergefacere, Expergificare,
to wake a man out of his slepe.



Expergiscor, eris, Expergisio, I am wakyd,
or wake.



Experrectus, Expergefactus, ta, tum, wake­
ned. Expergitus, slepte ynough.



Expergo, experrexi, expergere, to waken.



Experientia, experience.



Experior, iris, iri, to attempte, or assaye, or
proue.



Expertus, ta, tum, attempted, taught.



Expertus, a man of experience.



Expers, tis, without any parte, lackyng ex­
perience. Expers doloris, withoute peyne.
Expers mortis, neuer dyenge. Expers lucis,
without lyght.



Expersus, persa, persum, spronge with licour
or wette.



Expes, without hope.



Expero, iui, tii, to desyre moche, or co­
ueyte, to happen, to wylle. sommetyme to
take, to passe ouer.



Expilo, aui, are, to robbe, polle, or take by
extorcion, or deceyte, to spoyle.



Expio, aui, are, to pacyfie god with satis­
faction or prayer, whan we thynke that he
is displeasyd.



Expiro, aui, are, to dye.



Expiscor, aris, ari, to seke for fysshe, to fishe
out, or serche priuilye, to gette or wynne.
Tandem nescio quid ab eo expiscatur, Fy­
nally I can not telle what he wynneth or
getteth by hym.



Explano, aui, are, to make playne.



Ter. Heau.



Expleo, eui, ere, to fylle, fulfylle. also to sa­
cyate, to comforte.



Explico, plicaui, plicare, to extende. Al­
so to vnfolde, to declare. Explicat ensem,
He draweth out his sword. Explicat & cæ­
nas unica mensa duas, He maketh two sup­
pers at one table.
Ouidius.Martialis.


Explodo, osi, dere, to dryue oute with noise
or rebukes, or clappynge of handes.



Explosus, sa, sum, conuicted, or reiected.



Exploro, aui, are, to bewayle with exclama­
tion, to serch out diligently, to proue with
serchynge, to be aduysed, to drye or ex­
hauste.



Explorator, an espie, or priuye serchour.



Exploratus, a, um, well knowen.



Expono, sui, nere, to expowne or declare,
to set or brynge a thyng out of that, wher­
in it is. sometyme to caste out a thynge, to
thintent that it may perishe. Also to spend,
to sette forthe.



Expositio, an exposytion or declaration, of
anye thynge diffyculte or harde to be vn­
derstande.



Expositi, chyldern cast out, to be perished.



Exposititij, the same.



Exposco, exposcere, to aske or desyre in­
stauntely.



Expostulo, aui, are, to complayne, to make
a quarell. also to wyl. Expostulare iniuriam,
To complayne of wronge or displeasure,
to hym that dothe wronge.



Expostulatio, a quarell or complaynt.



Expostulator, he that complayneth of wrong
done by his frende.



Exprimo, to presse or wring out, to expresse
or declare playnely.



Exprobro, aui, are, to imbraide or twyte. al­
so to lay in reproche.



Expromito, misi, mittere, to promyse or vn­
dertake for an other.



Expromissor, he that promiseth, or is sure­
tie for an other.



Expromo, prompsi, mere, to shewe forthe,
or open.



Expugno, pugnaui, are, to wynne by assault
or force.



Expulso, aui, are, to meue a thyng with mo­
che thrustynge, or to put awaye.



Expulsor, & Expultrix, a putter awaye, man
or womanne.



Expungor, geris, expungi, to be cancelled or
put out, or rased. it is also spoken of iuges,
whan they be put out of commission. It is al­
so to quyte, as, Munus munere expungitur,
One good tourne is quyte with an other.



Expungo, punxi, pungere, to putte awaye,
or remoue.



Expuncti, were souldiours discharged, or
put out of wages.



Expuo, pui, puere, to spytte out.



Exputo, aui, are, to shrede or loppe a tree,
to vnderstande perfytely.



Exquili&ecedil;, a mountayne in Rome, where
watche was kepte.



Exquilinus mons, the same mountayne.



Exquiro, exqhisiui, exquirere, to serche out.






Ex syngrapha agere, to do thinges extrem­
ly or rigorously: as it were that one sued a
nother vpon an oblygation sealyd.



Exta, the inwarde: as the harte, the lyuer,
the lunges or lightes, and the splene.



Extemplo, forthwith.



Extemporaneus, ea, eum, sodayne.



Ex tempore, sodaynly, without study, or for
the tyme.



Extemporalis, & extemporanea oratio, an
oration or matter spoken or wrytten with­
out studye.



Extendo, di, dere, to extende.



Extenuo, aui, are, to mynyshe or make lytle.



Exter, tera, terum, straunge, comen farre of.



Exterus, tera, terum, idem.



Exterebro, aui, are, to perce through. Also
to enserche curiously.



Extermino, aui, are, to dryue out, or pulle
downe.



Exterminatus, banysshed.



Pacuusus.



Externo, aui, are, to make madde.



Externus, na, num, whyche is not of that
countrey, a straunger.



Extero, teri, terere, to beate out. also to
whette or grynde.



Exterreo, ui, rere, to put in feare.



Extillo, aui, are, to droppe out.



Extimesco, extimui, extimescere, to dreade
moche.



Extimus, a, um, the outwardemost, or laste.



Extinguo, xi, guere, to put out, proprely as
fyre, whiche may be eftesoones kendlyd:
sometyme it signifieth to slee, or destroye:
sometyme to make a distynction or dyuer­
sitie betwene thynges.



Extispices, sothesayers by lookynge in the
inwardes of beastes.



Extispicium, & extispicina, the crafte of soth
sayenge.



Exto, extiti, extare, to be, to remayne, to
be apparant.



Extollo, extuli, extollere, to aduant or praise.



Extorqueo, torsi, quêre, to fynde oute the
trouthe by tourmentes, to take awaye by
force, or plucke away.



Extorris, is he that is made to voyde, or is
dryuen out of his countrey: also a vagabund.



Extra, without.



Ex tripode, whan we speake of thynges,
whiche are very true, and nat to be douted,
as it were spoken of goddis own mouthe.



Extrarius, he that is not of the same house
or kynredde.



Extrema linea, is spoken, where a man wold
signifie a thing to be laste, & after all other.



Extremis digitis attingere, to towche with
the fynger toppes, is spoken, where is sy­
gnified, that a manne hath vnneth touched
or felte a thynge.



Extra telorum iactum, out of arowe shotte,
out of gunne shotte, signifieth out of daun­
ger, or in safegarde.



Extremus, a, um, sometyme it signifyeth the
begynnynge, sommetyme the ende, somme­
tyme the warste.



Extrico, aui, are, to delyuer, to shake of any
thynge that letteth.



Extrinsecus, outwarde.



Extro, aui, are, to goo out.



Extrorsum, from without.



Extrudo, si, dere, to thraste oute.



Extruo, si, truere, to ordeyne, to buylde or
sette vppe.



Extubero, aui, are, to swelle moche.



Extundo, tudi, tundere, to fynde oute with
moche labour.



Exturbo, aui, are, to put away, or to put oute
or from a thynge by vyolence.



Exubero, aui, are, to abounde.



Exuccum, without iuyce.



Exudo, aui, are, to sende forth lycour.



Exugo, exugi, gere, & exugeo, to sucke out.



Exul, exulis, a banyshed man.



Exulo, aui, are, to be banysshed, to lyue in
exyle.



Exultabundus, reioysynge very moche.



Exulto, aui, are, to reioyce excedyngely, to
bragge, to leape oute.



Exundo, aui, are, to ouerflowe.



Exuo, ui, uere, to putte of, to dispoyle, or
vnclothe.



Exupero, aui, are, to excede.



Exurdo, aui, are, to make deaffe.



Exuui&ecedil;, clothynge. Also hydes or skyn­
nes of beastes. Exuui&ecedil; serpentis, an Ad­
ders skynne.



Exy ba phon, a salate of herbes

 



¶ F Ante A.

F##sp##A##sp##B##sp##A, a beane.
Faba cudetur in me, The
beane shall be knockyd
on me, sygnyfyeth the
peine or blame shal light
on me.



Fabacia, a beane cake.



Fabalia, the refuse or of­
fall of beanes.



Fabari&ecedil; Calend&ecedil;, the Calendes of Iune.



Fabarius, fabaria, fabarium, pertaynynge to
beanes.



Fabella, a shorte tale.



Faber, fabri, almoost euerye craftes manne
that warkethe with the hande. Faber lig­
narius, a carpenter: Faber ferrarius, a smith.
Auri faber, a goldesmythe.






Faber, fabra, fabrum, pertaining to a smith.



Fabre, workemanly.



Faberrime, kunningly, very craftily, or wel.



Fabianus, the propre name of a man.



Fabitor, in the ancient tyme was taken for
a maynteyner.



Fabius, the name of a noble Romayne.



Fabrefacio, fabrefeci, fabrefacere, to warke
cunnyngly, to buylde.



Fabrica, a warkehouse, or forge. sometyme
the frame or warke.



Fabritius, a noble Romayne, who beinge
wonderful pore, not withstandyng refused
a great some of money, sent to him by king
Pirrhus, towchynge with his handes all
his membres, and saying vnto the kynges
messangers: As longe as he mought rule
all that, whiche he touched, he coulde
lacke nothynge.



Fabrico, caui, are, & Fabricor, cari, to make,
to inuente.



Fabrilis, fabrile, bilonging to handy craftis.



Fabula, a fable or tale.



Fabula palliata, a comedy of Greke.



Fabula togata, a comedy of latyne.



Fabulator, a teller of fables.



Fabulor, aris, ari, to talke.



Fabulosus, moche talked of.



Facesso, cessi, cessere, to go aboute to doo a
thynge: sommetyme to go awaye. Facesse
hinc, Get the hens. Facessit tibi negotium,
he putteth the to busynesse.



Faceti&ecedil;, mery wordes or deedes withoute
dishonestie.



Facetus, ta, tum, mery, pleasant.



Facete, meryly, pleasantly.



Facies, a face, sometyme the proporcion of
all the body.



Facile, lyghtly, or easily, withoute lette or
doubte.



Facilis, facile, lighte, easye, good to be en­
treated.



Facilitas, easynesse, gentylnesse.



Facinorosus, full of myschief, vngracious,
harmefull.



Facinus, an acte or dede. sommetyme an
ylle dede.



Facio, feci, facere, to doo, to be occupied, to
make. Facio plurimi, I make moch of. Floc­
cifacio, I sette not a strawe by it. Facere
uerba, to speake. Facere lucrum, to wynne.
Facere sumptum, to bestowe coste. Facere
iter, to go or ryde. Facere terrorem, to put
in feare. Facere copiam, to gyue leaue. Fa­
cere iacturam, damnum, naufragium, to lose,
to take harme, to go to wrecke. Facere, is
also to sacrifyce, to profyte. Faciam ut te
plurimum amem, I woll loue the moche.
Fac te esse qui sum, ymagin that thou were
as I am. Facere conuicium, to rebuke, or
putte to rebuke. Facere nomina, to gette
dettours, as by lendyng: as they do nowe
by exchaunge, and in shyftes, proprely cal­
led vsury: and in bargaynes of corne, cat­
tell, and other lyke, or in letting of landes.



Factio, a diuisyon of people in sondry opy­
nions. also an acte.



Factitius, a, um, made or counterfayte.



Factito, aui, are, to do often tymes.



Factor, oris, a maker, a factour.



Factum, a dede.



Factum atque transactum, done and brought
to good passe.



Factura, the warke.



Facturio, iui, ii, ire, to desyre to do.



Factus, tus, the dede.



Facula, a lynke, or lyttel torche.



Facularii, torche bearers.



Facultas, tatis, power to do or speake. some­
tyme rychesse. also facultie.



Facundus, a, um, eloquent, well spoken.



Facundia, eloquence, or sw eete and plea­
sant speche.



Fæcatum uinum, wyne that drynketh of
the lyes.



Fæciniæ uuæ, grapes, whereof commethe
wyne, hauynge moche lyes.



Fæculentum, full of lyes or dregges.



Fæcutinus, na, num, pertaining to dregges.



Fæx, fæcis, lyes, dregges, or groundes of
any kynde of lycour.



Fagus, gi, a beche tree.



Fala, a tower made of tymber.



Falcarius, he that fyghteth with a byll.



Falcarius, ia, um, pertaynyng to a bylle.



Falcatus, ta, tum, hooked, also any thynge,
wheron be hookes or other lyke thynge.



Falcicula, a lyttell hoke or byll.



Falcidia lex, wherby legacies were defal­
cate or cutte of, where the fourthe part of
the goodis were not assignid to the heires.



Falcifer, he that beareth a byll or hooke.



Falcito, aui, are, to cut with a byll or hooke.



Falco, aui, are, to cutte of or mowe.



Falco, conis, a hawke.



Falernus, a countrey in Campania, now in
the royalme of Naples, wherin grewe the
beste wynes of Italy, callyd falernum. 



Falisci, people in Italye. Also a kynde of
puddynges.



Fallaci&ecedil;, deceytefull wordes.



Fallaciter, deceytefully.



Fallax, acis, a person deceytefull.



Fallo, fefelli, fallere, to deceyue, also to be
hydde.



Falsarius, a forger of wrytynges.



Falcidicus, & falsiloquus, a lyer, or false
reporter.






Falsifico, aui, are, to forge dedes, writinges,
or seales.



Falsitas, tatis, falsehode.



Falso, aui, are, to forge.



Falsum habere, to deceyue.



Falx, falcis, a hooke or bylle.



Fama, fame or renome. somtyme opinion.



Famelicosus, often hungrye.



Famelicus, ca, cum, hungrye.



Famen, faminis, speche.



Fameo, famui, ere, to be hungry.



Fames, hungre.



Famiger, geris, a spreder of fame.



Famigerabilis, famous.



Famigerator, a tellar of newes or tydyn­
ges, or a spreder of fame.



Famigerulus, the same.



Familia, a householde, a family, or kynred.



Familiaria, were places of buryall for men
and their seruantes.



Familiaris, are, pertaynyng to householde,
also familyar.



Familiariter, famylyarly.



Famosus, a, um, famous, as well in good, as
in ylle.



Famulanter, humbly, seruysably.



Famularius, a, um, seruisable.



Famulatio, householde, or meyny.



Famulatus, & famulitium, seruyce.



Famulus, & famula, a housholde seruant.



Famulor, ari, to serue.



Fanaticus, madde. In the olde tyme before
that Christe expelled the dyuel, whan that
dyuelles were honoured in ydols, certaine
persones, aswell men as women, were pos­
sessed with dyuels, which lad them, where
they lysted, agaynste their propre wylles,
and caused them to speke wonderful thin­
ges, some also sodaynely, and often tymes
telle what shoulde happen: wherfore they
were thought to be inspired with goddis:
those persons were called Fanatici. Some
tyme Fanaticus, is taken for the keper of
the Temple or chappell, where the deuyll
gaue answeres.



Fanesii, people in the northe partes of the
worlde, whose eares be so great, that with
them they keuer all their bodies.



Fanum, a Temple, where the dyuell gaue
answeres out of an ydoll.



Far, farris, sometyme sygnyfyeth all maner
of corne. All be it among auncient phisyti­
ons it is taken for wheat meale.



Cælsus
lib.15.



Farratia, amonge the olde Romaines were
the ceremonies of matrimonie.



Farcimen, minis, a puddynge.



Farcio, ciui, cire, to stuffe. Also to franke or
fede, to be fatte, to cramme.



Farfarus, or Farfar, a ryuer of Syrie.



Faris, fatus sum, fari, to speake.



Farraca, meates made of meale.



Farrago, ginis, a myxture of sondrye kyn­
des of grayne and corne. Sometyme it is
taken for a myxture of thynges good and
badde.



Farreatio, a sacrifyce made with cakes.



Farreum, a wheaton cake.



Farrinus, na, num, & farrinaceus, a, um, per­
taynynge to wheate.



Farrinarium, a place where wheate or meale
is kepte.



Farcilis, le, any thynge stuffed.



Fartile, stuffynge, or that wherewith any
foule is crammed or franked.



Fartim, full stuffed or crammed.



Fartores, & fartrices, puddynge makers.



Fartum, a puddynge.



Fartura, the crafte or maner of stuffynge
or crammynge.



Fas, lefull before god.



Fascelis, a name of Diana. 



Fascia, a swathell or swathynge bande, or o­
ther lyke thynge. sometyme any gyrdell.



Fascior, fasciari, to swathe a chylde.



Fasciculus, a grype, or thyng bounden to­
gither. It is also a nosegay, or any thynge
knytte togyther, whiche maye be borne in
a mannes hande.



Fascino, aui, are, to transforme by inchaunt­
ment, or to bewytche.



Fascinus, & fascinum, & fascinatio, an in­
chauntmente to transfourme or disfygure
any thynge. whiche so inchanted, is of the
commune people called, taken, or forspoken,
or forlooked.



Fasciola, a lyttell bande.



Fascis, is a burdeyn or knytche of wodde,
or any other thyng. Also Fascis sagittarum
is taken for a sheffe of arrowes.



Fasces, roddes bounden togyther, and an
axe in the myddell, whiche were borne be­
fore the chiefe offycers of Rome, in decla­
rynge their authoritie, whereof some had
syxe, and some mo.



Fasellus, a boote.



Fasti dies, were certayne days, wherin the
offycer of Rome, called Prætor, mowghte
speake onely these three wordes, Do, di­
co, addico. It maye be nowe vsed for ho­
ly dayes.



Fasti, were certayne ceremonies and cau­
ses of sondrye thynges amonge the Ro­
maynes, concerninge their feastes and so­
lemnities, whyche were longe kepte from
the knowlege of the common people, vn­
tyll they at the laste were deuulgate by one
Caius Flauius. 






Fastidio, iui, ire, to contemne with disdayne,
to abhorre or haue in abomination.



Fastidiosus, a, um, full of disdayne.



Fastiditus, ta, tum, hatred, abhorred, abho­
myned.



Fastidium, hated, proprely where one ab­
horreth the sight or presence of any thing.



Fastigio, aui, are, to make or rayse vp in
heyght.



Fastigium, an altitude, or the top or height
of any thynge. Sometyme it signifieth the
state of a persone in any dignitie, somtyme
the ende of a thynge.



Fastigium imponere, is spoken whan a man
wyll signifye a matter or thynge to be fy­
nysshed and brought to a poynt.



Fastus, tus, hautenes of mynde, pryde.



Fatalis, le, pertaynynge to destenye, fatall.
somtyme mortall.



Fateor, fassus sum, fateri, to affirme, to con­
fesse.



Fathisco, scere, to gape wyde, as the erthe
dothe in a greate drythe.



Fatidicus, fatidica, a reder or teller of deste­
nyes, or a southsayer.



Fatifer, fatifera, a brynger of deth or pesty­
lence.



Fatiloqua, a witche.



Fatigo, aui, are, to make wery, to trouble
moche, to stryke, to stere or prouoke, to re­
strayne or lette.



Fatiloquus, fatiloqua, a sothsayer.



Fatisco, fatiscere, to be wery.



Fator, aris, ari, to speake moche.



Fatuitas, atis, folyshnes.



Fatum, the ordinance and disposition of al­
myghty god. Desteny, goddis prouidence.
somtyme deth.



Fatuus, an ydiote, that lacketh naturall
knowlege.



Fauentia, a citie in Italye.



Faueo, ui, fauere, to fauour.



Fauere linguis, to kepe silence.



Fauilla, a sperke of fyre.



Fauni, goddis of the woodes.



Fauonius, one of the wyndes, called the
southwest wynde.



Fauorabilis, fauoured of many.



Gel.



Fauorinus, the name of a philosopher.



Faustulus, a shepeherde, whiche was the
nourisher of Romulus and Remus. 



Faustus, a, um, prosperous.



Fauste, prosperousely.



Fauulus, a lyttell hony combe.



Fauus, a hony combe.



Faux, faucis, a cheke.



Fauces, strayght passages.



Fax, facis, a torche, a candell, or other lyke
thynge, whiche brennynge gyueth lyght.



Faxim, let me do.



Faxint, let them do.



Faxo, I wyll or shall do.

 

¶ F Ante E.

FEbricito, aui, are, to be sycke in a feuer.



Febricula, a lyttell feuer.



Febriculosus, he that hath often the
Feuer.



Febrilis, le, pertaynyng to a feuer.



Febrio, iui, ire, to haue a feuer.



Febris, a feuer.



Februarius, the monthe of Februarie.



Februo, aui, are, to pourge sowles by sacri­
fyce or prayer.



Februa, sacrifices and ceremonies for pur­
gynge of sowles.



Februatus, ta, tum, that which was so purged.



Februum, in the Sabines tounge is callyd
purgynge or clensynge.



F&ecedil;cialis, was a certayne offycer of armes,
whiche denounced warre or peace, where
as was hostilitie or cause of battayle: whi­
che may nowe be taken for an ambassadour,
sent for suche a purpose, or for an Heralde.



Fel, fellis, the gaulle. sometyme it is taken
for griefe of the mynde.



Felis, a Catte: sommetyme it sygnifyeth
a weasyll.



Fello, aui, are, to soucke.



Femen, minis, plurali femina, the inner and
backe parte of the thygh.



Feminalia, the keuerynge of the thighes.



Femur, femoris, the thygh. some englysshe
it the hamme.



Femoralia, breeches.



Fenestella, the propre name of a story wry­
ter, whiche flourished in the later dayes of
Tyberius Cesar. 



Fenestra, a wyndowe, sometyme an entrie
into a thynge.



Fenestratus, ta, tum, open. Nulla est fenestra­
tior domus, No howse is more open.



Plaut.



Fenestrenula, a lyttell wyndowe.



Ferabites, wylde.



Feræ, ferarum, feras, wylde beastes.



Feralis, le, deedly or mortall, lamentable.



Feralia, & feralis dies, a day dedicate to the
infernall goddis, to pacifie them towarde
the soules departed.



Feralia, were also the sacryfyces doone
for sowles.



Feralia amicula, wyndynge shetes, and su­
che lyke thynges, wherin deade bodyes
were lappyd.



Feralia officia, solemnities about deed bodies



Feralis cultus, mournynge apparayle.



Feralis dies, the daye of buryenge.



Ferax, acis, fruiteful, or that bryngeth forth




moche fruite.



Ferbeo, bui, ere, to boyle or sethe.



Ferculum, a dysshe with meate. Also a pa­
gent, caryed or borne to be loked on. some­
tyme it signifieth the stage or place, wherin
the pagent is.



Fere, almoste, nygh, welnygh.



Ferentarii, men armed in lygyt harnes, redy
to come quickly to socours: whiche fought
with dartes, swordes, or slynges.



Ferentinum, a citie, whiche after Plini. stan­
deth in the fyrst region of Italye. 



Ferentum, a towne of the Sabins, or Sam­
nites.



Feretrius, a name of Iupiter, gyuen by Ro­
mulus, the first kynge of Romanes.



Feretrum, a beere, wheron deed bodies are
borne. somtyme a thinge, wheron ymages,
relikes, or iewelles are borne.



Feretrus, a mountayne, of whiche the house
of Pheretre was named, of which the duke
of Urbyne is descended.



Feri&ecedil;, feriarum, ferias, holy dayes.



Ferinus, na, num, wylde as a beast.



Ferio, percussi, ferire, to stryke, to stablyshe,
to knocke.



Ferire fœdus, to make a league or truse.



Ferire iugulum, to slee, to hit the marke.



Ferior, aris, ari, to cesse from labour.



Feriatus, vnoccupyed or ydell.



Feritas, tatis, a naturall wyldnes.



Ferme, almoste, welnygh.



Fermentescere, to increase or waxe.



Fermento, taui, are, to meddel or myxt well
togyther, as leuen with dow. also to leuen.



Fero, fers, tuli, ferre, to beare, to suffre, to
leade or brynge, to saye, to name, to desyre,
to brynge forth, to haue, to boste. Ferre ad
populum, to aske the people aduyse. To take
away, to receyue, to optayne, to accustome.
Ferre fortunam, to vse fortune: Ferre in ocu­
lis, to fauour moche.



Ferre acceptum, to receyue, to wryte that
whiche is receyued, to knowlege to haue
receyued a benefyte or profyte.



Ferre expensum, to spende or laye out, to
wryte expenses, to bestowe.



Ferocio, ciui, cij, cire, to be fierse.



ferocitas, tatis, fiersnes.



Ferociter, fiersely.



Feronia, the goddesse of woodes. also a ci­
tie vnder the hyll Soractes.



Ferox, ferocis, fierse, hardy.



 Ferramentarij, they whiche warke in yron.



Ferramentum, an instrument or tole of yron.



Ferraria, an yron Myne.



Ferrarius, a, um, pertaynyng to yron, or of yron.



Ferre iudicem, to agree to the sentence or
iudgement.



Ferreus, ea, eum, of yron.



Ferro, aui, are, to sette yron on.



Ferratus, ta, tum, hauyng yron on it, or clo­
syd in yron.



Ferrugineus, a, um, grene coloure.



Ferrugo, ginis, ruste of yron, a murray co­
lour, some calleth it a sadde blewe.



Ferrum, yron, sometyme weapon.



Ferrumen, minis, glewe, syse, sowder, or su­
che other byndynge or cleauynge matter.



Ferrumino aui, are, to ioyne or myxe togy­
ther, proprely mettalles, to sowlder.



Fertilis, le, fertile, or fruitefull.



Fertum, a Cake made of sondry graynes
and spyces.



Ferueo, es, is, iui, ere, to be chauffed or hette.



Feruefacio, to cause to boyle.



Feruidus, a, um, feruent, dilygent.



Ferula, a rodde or stycke, wherwith chyl­
drens handes be striken in schooles. also a
cane or rede. also a potte stycke.



Ferulatius, a, um, lyke a cane or rede.



Feruor, oris, heate.



Ferus, a, um, wylde, cruell, terrible.



Feritas, tatis, wyldenes, crueltie.



Fescenini, versis sunge at weddinges.



Fessus, a, um, werye.



Festinanter, hastily, quyckely, or swyftly.



Festinato, spedily, in haste.



Festino, aui, are, to make hast, to be troublid.



Festinus, a, um, hasty, quycke.



Festina lente, spede the slowely, is spoken,
where a man wyll sygnifye a thynge to be
done, neither to hastyly nor to slowely, but
in a conuenient temperance. See my booke
of the Gouernour, in the chapiter of Ma­
turytie.



Festinatio, haste or spede.



Festiuitas, tatis, myrthe.



Festiuo, aui, are, to kepe holy day.



Festiuus, a, um, mery, prouokynge myrthe,
ioyous. also pertaynyng to holy dayes.



Festuca, the yonge tender spring of a tree,
or herbe. Also a moote.



Festus, ta, tum, feastfull or solemne.

 

¶ F Ante I.

FIber, a beaste called a beuer, whiche is
also called Castor, whose stoones are
vsed in medicine, and are called Castro­
reum. It is also a kynde of waspes.



Fibr&ecedil;, are the extreme partes of the liuer,
the hart, or the lunges, or of other thinges
wherin is any diuysyon, they maye be cal­
led lappes, brymmes. Also the spires of
herbes or trees newe sprongen.



Fibula, a buckle of a girdell, or other thing
lyke therto.






Fibulo, aui, are, to buckle, to ioyne togither
tymber, or bordes, or other lyke thinges.



Ficaria, a fygge tree.



Ficarius, an eater of fygges.



Ficedula, a byrde.



Ficetum, a place where figge trees do grow.



Ficetor, oris, he that loueth or gadereth
fygges.



Ficolea, a staffe or stake of a fygge tree.



Ficosus, full of sores in the heed or berde.



Fictilis, fictile, erthen, or made of erthe.



Fictitius, tia, um, fayned, or dissembled, or
counterfayte.



Fictor, oris, a counterfayter, a fayner.



Ficulnea, a fygge tree.



Ficulneus, a, um, & ficulnus, a, um, of a
fygge tree.



Ficus, in the masculyne gender is a fygge:
in the feminine gender, is a figge tree. it is
also a soore or scabbe, growyng in the pla­
ces of a mans body, where that heare is.



Fidei commissarius, a scoffe of trust.



Fide bona, without fraude or couyne.



Fideicommissum, a scoffement of truste.



Fidei committo, misi, tere, to infeffe.



Fideiussor, oris, a suretie, or borowe.



Fidelia, a vesselle seruyngeto dyuers pour­
poses.



Fidelis, faithfull, loyall, trusty, or sure.



Fidelitas, tatis, faythefulnesse, loyaltie, or
suretie.



Fidem astringere, to promyse faithfully.



Fidem fallere, to breake promyse.



Fidem labefactare, to lose credence.



Fides labefactata, credence loste.



Fide sua, mea, tua, iubere, to vndertake.



Fidena, a towne in Italy.



Fidentia, confidence.



Fides, fidei, belefe, truste, promyse. It is a
stablenes and truthe in promyses and co­
uenauntes. It is also a faythfull execution
of thinges commytted or promysed.



Fidem habere, to beleue.



Fidem accipere, to be beleued.



Fidem liberare, to kepe promyse.



Fides, fidis, the strynge of any instrument.
sometyme a harpe or lute.



Fides publica, the credence or promyse of
all the people and rulers.



Fidicen, cinis, a harpe: it may be called a
fyddell. it is also he that playeth on the in­
strument.



Fidicina, a woman harper or luter.



Fidicula, a rebecke, or gytterne.



Fidicul&ecedil; plurali, a tourment made with cor­
des or strynges, wherwith menne be tour­
mented. to make them to confesse treason
or felonye.



Fido, fisus sum, fidere, truste.



Fidutia, trust, confidence: somtyme hope:
it is proprely that truste, wherin any thyng
is deliueryd by one man to an other, to the
intent that he shall redelyuer it, whan he is
required.



Fiduciaria possessio, a possession to an other
mans vse, or vpon condicion.



Fiduciaria mancipatio, aut uenditio, a state in
landes made vpon confidence of truste, or
a morgage.



Fidus, a, um, trusty.



Figmentum, the warke or warkemanshyp:
sometyme a lye, or a thing fayned.



Figo, xi, figere, to thruste in. sommetyme it
sygnifyeth to driue or fasten in the erthe.
Palum humi fixit, He droue the stake into
the grounde. also to plant or sette. Ipse fera­
ces Figat humo plantas, He wolle sette in
the grounde the fruitefull plantes. some­
tyme to stryke.
Columel.
Virg. Ge.
lib.4.Iuuenal.


Figlina, æ, a potters warkehowse, or pot­
ters crafte.



Figlina, plurali, vessell of erthe.



Figulus, a potter.



Figura, a fygure.



Figuro, aui, are, to make or fourme.



Filiaster, a sonne in lawe by an other wyfe,
or an other husbande.



Filius terre, a newe begunne gentylman, or
a gentylman of the fyrste heed.



Filicula, ferne growynge on trees, callid in
a greke name polypodion.



Filius, a sonne, filia, a doughter.



Filii, somtime dothe conteyne both sonnes
and doughters.



Filistim, a countreye, that is nowe callyd
Ascalon.



Filix, licis, ferne.



Filum, a threde. sometyme the proporcion
of a thynge.



Filo, aui, are, to spynne or make a threde.



Fimbria, the skyrtes or hemme of a gar­
mente.



Fimetu m, a dunge hylle.



Fimum, a boxe, out of the whiche men doo
caste dyse.



Fimus, dunge of cattell.



Finalis, le, fynall, or laste.



Findo, fidi, findere, to cutte, to cleue.



Fissilis, le, that whiche may be cutte.



Fissura, a cutte or clefte.



Fingo, xi, gere, to make, to forme, to fayn.



Finio, iui, ire, to fynyshe or ende.



Finis, the ende, the conclusyon. also intente
or purpose, whervnto any other thing hath
relation, or is made or done for.



Fines plurali, the borders or marches of a
countrey, boundes.



Finitimus, ma, um, nygh ioynynge.






Finitio, a definition.



Finitor, oris, a setter of boundes.



Fio, fieri, to be, to be estemed.



Firmamentum, a suertie or stabylitie. also
that, whyche is called the grounde of a
cause or matter. Also the firmament or he­
uen vysyble.



Firmo, aui, are, to make stable or sure.



Firmus, stable, constant, well fortified.



Firmitas, & firmitudo, stablenes, constance,
surenesse.



Fiscalis, le, pertaynynge to the kynges
treasure.



Fiscella, a chiefe fate. Also it is a thynge
made with withes and halters, wherewith
cattell were so moselled, that they mought
not byte anye yonge sprynges or buddes
of trees.



Fiscellus, a lyttell hyll in Italye, not farre
from Tyber.



Fisci, fiscinæ, fiscell&ecedil;, greate sachels, wher­
in were put great sommes of money.



Fiscus, the priuate treasure of princis.



Fiscum, the kynges escheker.



Fiscina, a greatte baskette.



Fiscibilis, le, that maye be cutte or slytte. fi­
scilis, the same.



Fistula, a pype, as well to conuey water, as
an instrument of musyke. Also the wesell
or throte bolle. also a tappe or faucette. al­
so a disease or soore, whiche commeth of a
putrified humour, and contynually runneth.



Fistulosus, full of holes lyke a spunge.



Fistuca, an instrumente, wherwith piles of
wodde be dryuen into the ground. and sto­
nes in pauynge, called a rammer.



Fistucatio, pylinge, or pauynge.



Fitiges, be beastis of Aethiope, of a browne
colour, hauynge two pappes in the breste,
as man hath: nor they be not so wylde, but
they may be tamed, nor so tame, but they
woll hurte those, that greue them. 



Fixus, a, um, fyrme, faste.

 

¶ F Ante L.

FLabellum, an instrument, wherwith in
the heate of sommer wynde is fanned
blowen into mens visages, to koole them.



Flabrum, a blowynge or puffe of wynde.



Flacceo, & flaccesco, ere, to wydder, or
waxe feble.



Flaccidus, a, um, wythered, feeble, weake,
hangynge downewarde, lollynge, or flag­
gynge.



Flaccum, bruysed.



Flaces, the ortes of olyues.



Flagella, the smalle braunches or twigges
of trees or vynes. sometyme scourges or
flayles, wherwith corne is threshed.



Flagello, aui, are, to scourge, to thresshe, to
blame or rebuke.



Flagitiosus, an vngracious persone, full
of myschiefe.



Flagitium, an yll or myscheuous dede, wor­
thy rebuke and punyshement.



Flagito, aui, are, to as ke importunately and
with clamoure.



Flagratores, they whiche for moneye doo
suffre them selfes to be beaten.



Flagrio, onis, a slaue.



Flagro, aui, are, to bourne with a flame of
fyre. Sommetyme to loue or desyre inor­
dynately.



Flamea, clothe or sylke of vyolette colour.



Flaminica, the priestes wyfe, or a wedding
gowne of vyolet colour.



Flameum, a typpet of vyolet sylke, whiche
the newe wedded wyfe dyd weare.



Flamen, hoc, the blaste in an instrument.



Flamen, the great prieste amonge the gen­
tyles.



Flaminia, the house of the archeprieste.



Flamineum, a kerchiefe or typpette.



Flamma, a flame. sometyme peryll.



Flamescere, to be inflamed.



Flammeus, ea, eum, burnynge or flamynge.



Flammiuomus, sendyng out flames.



Flandria, a countrey called Flaunders.



Flaueo, & flauesco, aui, ere, to be lyke golde,
or of yelowe colour.



Flauus, a, um, yelowe, or of the coloure of
golde.



Flebilis, le, lamentable.



Flecto, & flexo, xi, tere, to bowe, to bende,
to leade.



Flegma, fleume.



Fleo, eui, ere, to wepe.



Fletus, wepynge.



Flexanima oratio, an oration or spech, wher­
by a mans mynde is stirred to pitie, re­
ioysynge, or other lyke affection.



Flexilis, le, any thynge that may be easylye
bowed or bente.



Flexura, the bowynge.



Fligo, xi, ctum, to tourment or vexe.



Flo, aui, are, to blowe. also to make coyne
of mettall.



Floces, lyes or drastes of wyne.



Flocci, flockes of the shearynge of wol­
len clothes.



Flocculi, fyne flockes.



Floccifacio, & floccipendo, I set nought by.



Floralia, florales ludi, plays made in the ho­
nour of Flora, an harlotte, whiche gaue a
great treasure vnto the people of Rome.



Floreo, rui, ere, & florido, aui, are, to flourish
or to haue floures. Also to excell. somtime




to prosper.



Flos, floris, a floure.



Floresco, sci, scere, to bourgen or to brynge
forth floures.



Floreus, a, um, made of floures.



Floridus, da, dum, garnyshed with floures.
sometyme freshe or lusty.



Floriger, eris, bearynge floures.



Florulentus, ta, tum, full of floures.



Fluctio, onis, the reume or pose.



Fluctiuagus, wandring in riuers or waters.



Fluctuo, aui, are, to be tossed as a shyppe is
in the see. also to doubte.



Fluctuatim, troublously, doubtfully.



Fluctuosus, a, um troublous, vnquiete, stormy.



Fluctus, a floudde, a waue of water styred
by tempeste.



Fluentum, a ryuer, or streame.



Fluescere, to be resolued or relented.



Fluidus, da, dum, flowynge, relentyd, re­
solued.



Fluito, aui, are, to flowe contynually, some­
tyme to flytte or swymme.



Flumen, inis, a great ryuer. sometyme the
course of the water.



Flumineus, a, um, of the ryuer.



Fluminosus, a, um, full of ryuers.



Fluo, xi, ere, to rounne, as water dothe, to
procede or come of a thynge, or to growe.



Fluor, fluxus, & fluxio, a slyxe.



Fluta, a fyshe, lyke to an eele, callyd a
Lampreye.



Fluuialis, le, of the ryuer.



Fluuiatilis, le, that whiche is in the ryuer.



Fluuius, a floudde or ryuer.



Fluxura, lecherye.



Fluxus, a, um, vnstable, or that whyche du­
reth but a whyle, large, or wyde, relented,
lecherous, and wanton.

 

F, Ante O.

FOcale, a kerchiefe, whiche menne and
womenne dydde weare aboute theyr
cheekes.



Focaneus, a braunche of a vyne, whyche
groweth out of a twyste or forked bough.



Focaria, a fyre panne.



Focatius, bread baken on the hote coles.



Focillo, aui, are, to nouryshe.



Focula, nourishynge meates.



Foculo, aui, are, to nouryshe or sustayne.



Foculus, a litle panne, wherin fyre is borne.



Focus, a panne or herthe, wherein fyre is.
sometyme it sygnifieth fyre. somtyme pri­
uate houses or tenementes.



Fodico, aui, are, to dygge.



Fodina, a place where a thyng is dygged.



Fodio, fodi, fodere, to delue.



Fœcundo, daui, are, to make fruitefulle, or
plentuouse.



Fœcundus, a, um, plentuous, or fruitefull.



Fœcunditas, plentie.



Fœdo, aui, are, to polute or defyle, to de­
stroye, to rent or teare, to consume.



Fœdero, aui, are, to confederate.



Fœderatus, a confederate.



Fœdifragus, a breaker of leage or truse, or
entercourse.



Fœdus, da, dum, fowle, defourmed, cur­
sed, or cruelle.



Fœdus, deris, a leage betwene princis, an
entercourse, a truse after battayle: some­
tyme it signifyeth a lawe made in the tyme
of warres.



Fœlicitas, tatis, felycitie, prosperitie, abun­
daunce of all thynges.



Fœlicito, aui, are, to make prosperous.



Fœlix, licis, hauing abundance of al thinges,
prosperous, commodious, or profytable.



Fœmina, a womanne. Also in beastes the
female.



Fœnarius, ia, um, pertaynynge to haye, as
Falces fœnari&ecedil;, hookes or sythes for to
cutte haye.



Fœnebris, bre, pertaynyng to vsurye, or vn­
reasonable gayne.



Fœneratitius, a, um, the same.



Fœnerator, oris, an vsurer or lender for vn­
reasonable gayne.



Fœnero, aui, are, & fœneror, rari, cum datiuo,
to lende for vsurie. Fœneror cum ablatiuo,
To borowe, or make a shyfte, or to laye to
morgage.



Fœniculum, fenell.



Fœnile, an hey howse.



Fœnisecium, haye haruest.



Fœnisex, secis, a mower of haye.



Fœnogræcum, fenegreke.



Fœnus, noris, vsurye, vnreasonable, or vn­
lefull gayne, commyng of that thyng, whi­
che is lente.



Fœteo, tere, to stynke.



Fœtidus, a, um, stynkynge.



Fœtifico, aui, are, to brynge forth, most com­
monly as a beast or a byrde dothe.



Fœto, taui, are, the same.



Fœtor, oris, stynche, or yll fauour.



Varro



Fœtuosus, a, um, full of bredynge.



Fœtura, the tyme from the conception vn­
to the byrthe. Also the increase of cattell.
sometyme it signifieth the increase or com­
mynge forth of other thinges.



Fœtus, tus, all thynge that is brought forth
by generation, somtyme the fruite of trees.



Fœtus, ta, tum, full, or great with yonge, as
a woman with chylde or a beaste.






Foliacius, a, um, full of leaues.



Foliatus, ta, tum, leaued, or hauyng leaues.



Folium, a leafe.



Follico, caui, care, to snuffe or fetche backe
wynde with the nosethrylles.



Folliculus, the huske, wherein the eare of
wheate or other corne is inclosed, whan it
is grene, called the hose. Also for a sacke,
wherin corne is putte.



Follis, a belowe, wherwith fyre is blowen.
also a ball blowen full of wynde: semblably
a bedde stuffed onely with w ynde. it is also
a bagge, wherin money is.



Fomentum, a nourishment of natural heate.
It is also any thynge layde to the bodye in
the fourme of a playster, to mytygate the
peyne or griefe of any disease, callyd fo­
mentation.



Fotus, the same.



Fomes, fomitis, any matter, wherwith fire
is kendlyd and kepte burnynge. sometyme
it sygnifieth that, whych feruently styreth
vs to do any thynge.



Fons, fontis, a fountayne or well.



Fontanus, a, um, of a fountayne: as Aqua
fontana, well water.



Fonticulus, a lyttell well or sprynge.



Foramen, minis, a hole.



Foras, without.



Foratia, a market woman, whyche selleth
egges, chykens, and other lyke thynges
at the markette.



Foratus, tus, a hole.



Forbea, a kynde of hotte meate.



Forcipes, a payre of tonges or other lyke
instrument.



Forcus, a propre name of a man.



Forda, a mylche cowe that bryngeth forth
caulfes.



Forem, res, ret, I shuld or had be, thou shul­
dest or had be, he shulde or had ben.



Fore, to be hereafter.



Forensia, habytes or robes, worne onely in
places of iugement.



Forensis, se, pertaynyng to places of iuge­
mente or courtes, where lawes be exer­
cysed: also a iurrour.



Fores, doores.



Forfices, sheares.



Forficuli, lyttell sheares.



Fori, the hatches of a shyp, or place where
men beinge in the shyppe, do walke vp and
down. Also stages or galeries, from whens
the noble men of Rome beheld the playes
callyd Circenses.



Foruli, huches, wherin bokes were kepte:
nowe be they taken for keuerynges of
bookes.



Foria, dunge that is lyquide or thynne.



Forica, commune draughtes or Iakes.



Foricul&ecedil;, lyttell doores.



Forio, iui, ire, to discharge the bealy of or­
dure.



Foriolus, lose bealy, or he that hath a laske.



Forma, forme or shappe. somtyme beaultie.



Formiæ, a towne in Campania.



Formica, an Emote, or Ant, or Pismere.



Formicatio, that whiche is commonly cal­
lyd a rynge worme.



Formidabilis, le, that whiche is to be drad.



Formido, dinis, drede or feare.



Formido, aui, are, to haue great feare.



Formidolosus, he that feareth other: also
he that is feared of other.



Formo, aui, are, to forme, to make in facion.



Formosus, a, um, fayre.



Formucales, a peyre of tonges.



Formula, an instrument or dede in writing,
a style in wrytynge, and a fourme in plea­
dynge.



Formula iniuriarum, an action of trespas.



Formulam intendere, to brynge an action.



Fornacalia, dayes whan the women dydde
nought els but bake breadde.



Fornax, a chymney, or ouen.



Fornax calcaria, a lyme kylle.



Fornax lateraria, a brycke kyll.



Fornicarii, they which haue stalles or bou­
thes vnder the vaultes or arches of chur­
ches or palayces, where they sel theyr wa­
res to them that passe by, as they do in west­
mynster halle.



Fornicarius, ia, um, pertaynyng to lechery.



Fornico, aui, are, to make an arch or a vault.



Fornicor, ari, to commytte fornication.



Fornix, nicis, an arche or a vaulte.



Foro, aui, are, to perce or boore a hole.



Forpices, cyssars to clyppe heare.



Forte, peraduenture, perchaunce.



Fortasse, fortassis, forsan, forsitan, the same.



Fortesco, sci, scere, to waxe stronge.



Forticulus, a lyttell stronge.



Fortifico, aui, are, to fortifie or make stronge.



Fortis, stronge, puissant, valyant of corage.
also fayre, sometyme ryche.



Fortitudo, dinis, strength, valyant courage.



Fortuitus, ta, tum, that hapneth by chaunce.



Fortuna, fortune.



Fors fortuna, good fortune or chaunce.



Fortunat&ecedil; insulæ, the fortunate ilandes, be
so callyd of the abundaunce of fruites, of
whiche Strabo writeth .li. i.



Fortunatim, fortunately.



Fortunatus, ta, tum, fortunate.



Fortuno, naui, are, to make prosperous, to
augment with good fortune.



Forum, a market, where thynges be solde.




Also a place where iudgementes are prac­
tised, and matters in lawe pleaded. Forum
whan it is taken for a market, hath com mon­
ly an other worde ioyned therwith, as Fo­
rum boarium, the markette where cattell
is solde. Forum holitorium, the markette
where herbes be solde. Forum piscarium,
the fyshe markette.



Forum Iulium, a region or countrey of Italy
whiche somtyme was called Iapidia.



Forum Cornelii, a cytie of Italye, whyche
nowe is callyd Imola.



Fossa, a dyche, or dyke, or a mote.



Fossilis, le, that whiche is dygged, or maye
be dygged.



Fossio, dyggynge.



Fossitius, a, um, that is dygged.



Fossor, oris, a digger or dycher.



Fossula, a lyttell dyche.



Fossura, a dyggynge.



Fotus, ta, tum, nourished.



Fouea, a denne.



Foueo, ui, uere, to nouryshe, to sustayne, to
maynteyne, to weate or washe a thynge, to
ordeyne or sette, to defende.

 

¶ F Ante R.

FRacesco, sci, scere, to putrifie for age.



Fracidus, da, dum, more than rype, rot­
ten as fruite is.



Fræno, aui, are, to brydell, to restrayne.



Frænum, a brydell.



Frænum mordere, to take the bytte in the
teethe, sygnifieth to set naught by.



Plautus
in Amp.



Frætus, ta, tum, trustynge, ayded.



Fr&ecedil;ti uirtute & uiribus, ayded with strength
and puissance.



Fraga, strawberies.



Fragesco, sci, scere, to braste.



Fragilis, le, brokell, soone broken.



Fragilitas, brotylnes, inconstancy.



Fragiliter, weakely, inconstantly.



Fragitides, the two great veynes, whyche
do appere on eyther syde of the necke.



Fragmen & fragmentum, a pece or gobette
of a thynge broken.



Fragor, oris, the noyse, whyche is made at
the fallynge of any great thynge, rushyng.



Fragosus, a, um, vneasy to clymme.



Fragro, aui, are, to render a great sauour.



Fragrans, tis, hauyng great or sote sauour.



Framea, a speare, or iauelyn.



Frango, fregi, frangere, to breake.



Franosus, a deceyuer.



Frater, tris, a brother.



Fraterculus, a lyttell or yonge brother.



Fraterne, brotherly.



Fraternus, na, um, of a brother.



Frater patruelis, a brothers sonne.



Fratilli, the fringe of tapesry, that hangeth
next the grounde.



Fratrare, proprely is sayde of chyldernes
brestes, whan they do growe, to waxe im­
bocyd.



Fratria, a brothers wyfe.



Fraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to disappoynte.



Fraudare genium, not to satisfie the neces­
sitie of nature, or carnall appetite.



Fraudulenter, deceytefully.



Fraudulentus, full of deceyte.



Fraudulosus, a begyler.



Fraus, fraudis, deceyt. Also peryll, danger.



Fraxinus, an ashe.



Fraxo, aui, are, to go in watche.



Fregella, a lyttell towne in Italy.



Fremitus, a rorynge, proprelye of waters.
sometyme a murmuryng, rumble, or noyse
of people assemblyd togyther.



Fremo, mi, mere, to rore or make a noyse
lyke great waters.



Frendeo, dui, dere, to grynde the tethe to­
gyther for angre or payne. Also to grunte
or grone for peyne.



Frequens, entis, acustomed, moche hanted,
also assembled togither, abundant.



Frequens Senatus, al the Senatours assem­
blyd togyther.



requentia, greatte haunte, and companye
of folke.



Frequento, taui, tare, to haunte, to goo to­
gyther.



Frequentatio, an hauntynge, an assembly.



Fretum, a narowe parte of the see, where
it is mouynge and troublous. Sometyme it
is taken generally for the see.



Friabilis, le, soone broken in smalle pieces.



Fribolus, almoste worthe an halfepeny.



Frico, caui, cui, care, to rubbe.



Frictus, fricatio, & frictio, rubbyng.



Frigefacio, feci, facere, to coole.



Frigefio, frigefieri, to be colde.



Frigeo, gui, & frixi, to be colde or slowe.



Frigero, aui, are, to coole.



Frigesco, scere, to waxe colde.



Frigidulus, a, um, somewhat colde.



Frigidus, da, dum, colde, daungerouse, or
noyfull.



Frigilla, a byrde, which syngeth in the cold
wether, a ruddocke.



Frigo, xi, & frigui, gere, to frye.



Frictus, & frixus, a, um, fryed.



Frigorificus, ca, cum, made colde.



Frigus, goris, colde. sometyme feare.



Frigutio, tiui, tiri, to leape vp, or hoppe.



Frio, aui, are, to breake smalle, specially be­
twyxte the fyngers.



Frisii, people by Holande.






Frit, the grayne in the toppe of the eare,
whiche is lasse than a corne.



Fritilla, a froyse or pancake.



Fritillus, a boxe, out of the which dise were
caste on the tables.



Friuolarius, he that selleth stuffe of lyttell
valewe.



Friuolus, a, um, vayne, lyght, of none esty­
mation or value.



Frixorium, a fryenge panne.



Frondarius, ia, ium, of leaues.



Frondatio, a slyppynge of of leaues. Also
brousynge.



Frondator, oris, a brouser, a wodlopper.



Frondeo, & frondesco, descere, to beare or
haue leaues.



Frondeus, ea, eum, that is of leaues.



Frondo, daui, are, to brynge forth leaues.



Frondosus, a, um, full of leaues.



Frons, tis, the foreheed, the frunt. Also it
signifieth shamefastnes. also countenance.
Frontem ferire, is spoken where a man sy­
gnyfyeth, that one disdayneth extremely
an nother.
Erasmus in
Chiliad.


Frons, frondis, the leafe of a tree, with the
braunches.



Frondifer, bearynge leaues.



Frontale, the hedstall of an horse.



Fronto, tonis, he that hath a brode forhed.



Frontosus, hauynge a greatte forehed, or
not abashed.



Fructifer, bearynge fruite.



Fructificus, & fructuosus, fruitefull.



Fructuarius, he that taketh the frute or pro­
fite of a thynge. Pernour of profytes.



Fructuarius, ria, rium, that whiche beareth
fruite, or doth pertayne to fruite.



Fructus, tus, & ti, fruite. also al profite or re­
uenues that cometh of the grounde.



Fruges, aut frux, frugis, increase of all those
thynges, whiche the erth bryngeth forth,
moste proprely of grayne or corne. some­
tyme it signifieth rent or reuenues.



Frugi, moderate, profitable, necessary.



Frugi homo, a good man, a thryfty man, an
honest man, temperate in expenses.



Frugalitas, tatis, moderation in liuing, spe­
ciallye in apparaylle and dyete, sobre rule,
also suffyciencye.



Frugalior, frugalissimus, more temperate,
moste temperate.



Fruiscor, sci, to vse at lybertie.



Frumen, the vppermost part of the throte,
the gargyll.



Frumentaceus, of corne.



Frumentarius, ia, ium, pertayning to corne.



Frumentatio, takynge of corne.



Frumentator, toris, a taker of pourueyour
of corne.



Frumentor, aris, to gather or puruey corne.



Frumentum, all corne, that hath berdes or
eyles. it is moste vsed for wheate or rye.



Frunitus, wyse in vsynge of a thynge.



Fruor, fretus, sum, frui, to vse with dilecta­
tion and profyte.



Frustatim, in piecis or gobettes.



Frustillatim, piece meale.



Frustra, in vayne.



Frustro, aui, are, & frustror, aris, ari, to de­
ceyue. also to do a thyng in vayne, or vain­
ly to employe.



Frustum, a piece or gobette.



Frustulum, & frustillum, a lyttell gobette.



Frusus, a kynde of brembyls, whose pryc­
kes be not hooked.



Frutex, that which hath a great stalke, and
yet it is no tree, as fenelle, caules, certayne
malowes, and other lyke herbes. somtyme
it is taken for the stemme or stalke.



Frutetosus, a, um, hauynge abundaunce of
suche great herbes.



Frutetum, seu fruticetum, a place where gro­
weth herbes with great stemmes or stalkes.



Fruticescere, to be a stalke.



Frutico, aui, are, & fruticor, fruticaris, ari, to
springe in stalke.

 

¶ F Ante V.

FVcilis, le, false, colouryd.



Fucinus, a lake in Italy.



Fuco, caui, care, to lay on a colour.



Fucatus, ta, tum, coloured or paynted, as
some women be.



Fucus, a dorre or bee without stynge, why­
che entreth into hyues, and eateth vp ho­
ny. Also payntynge, where oone colour is
layde on an nother. It is also vsed for des­
ceyte or falsehode.



Fuga, flyght.



Fugax, gacis, he that flyeth lyghtly. Also it
signifieth swyfte.



Fugio, gi, gere, to flye, to runne awaye, to
escape, to forgette.



Fugiens laboris, abhorring labour or peyn.



Fugitiuarius, a, um, startyng away, flyttyng.



Fugitiu&ecedil; aquæ, waters, which be taken out
of a commune ryuer by stelthe.



Fugitiuus seruus, he that runneth frome his
maister, wyllyng neuer to returne, or goth
to a place, from whens he supposeth that
his mayster can neuer recouer hym.



Fugito, taui, tare, to vse to runne away.



Fugo, aui, are, to dryue away.



Fulcio, si, cire, to supporte, to fortyfie.



Fulcra, beddestedes.



Fulgeo, si, gere, & fulgo, gi, ere, to shyne.



Fulgetrum, a leame of lyghtnynge.






Fulgidus, da, dum, bryghte.



Fulgor, bryghtnesse.



Fulgur, uris, uel oris, lyghtnynge.



Fulguratio, the lyghtnynge whenne it is in
the clowdes.



Fulgurator, the sender of lyghtnynge.



Fulgurio, riui, rire, to caste lyghtnynge.



Fulguritas, lyghtnes or bryghtnes.



Fulguro, aui, are, to sende forth lyghtning.



Fulica, a se byrd, more than a culuer, & black.



Fuligo, ginis, the soote of a chymney.



Fullo, onis, a fuller of clothe.



Fulmen, minis, lyghtnynge.



Fulmino, aui, are, to lyghten.



Fultura, a shore.



Fuluus, ua, um, a colour mixte of grene and
redde, a darke yelowe.



Fumarium, a smoky place, where wine was
layde, to the intent that it moughte the so­
ner waxe olde. also the shanke or tonell of
a chymneye.



Fumifico, aui, are, to make smoke, to incense.



Fumigo, aui, are, to parfume.



Fumo, aui, are, to smoke.



Fumus, smoke.



Funale, a torche.



Funales equi, horses, whiche coupled with
an halter, dyd go before the charyot.



Funambulus, he that walketh on a rope.



Funda, a slynge. Also a castinge nette, a sa­
chell or purse lyke a nette. Also a cerkle of
golde, or other mettalle, wherein sto­
nes be sette.



Fundamen, & fundamentum, a fundacion.



Fundibularii, slyngers of stones.



Funditores, the same.



Fundito, aui, are, to poure out often.



Funditus, from the foundation vtterly.



Fundo, aui, are, to founde, to make stable.



Fundo, fudi, fundere, to yette or cast mettall,
to powre out, to sheede, to throwe downe,
to scatter, to gyue aboundantlye, to speake
moche, to lay downe.



Fundum, the bottome of a thynge.



Fundus, that whyche is vsed to be callyd
lande or soyle.



Funebris, bre, funeralle.



Funepeus, a goer on a corde.



Funerale, pertaynynge to funeralles.



Funereus, rea, reum, pertaynynge to the
deed bodye.



Funero, aui, are, to burye.



Funesto, aui, are, to vyolate a place with a
deed bodye.



Funestus, ta, tum, vyolated with deade bo­
dies. Also mortalle, blouddy. also pertay­
nynge to deed bodies or dethe.



Funetum, bowed or howped, as somme
vynes be.



Fungor, functus sum, fungi, to exercyse an
office. Fungi uita, to lyue. Functus uita, He
that hath fynished his lyfe.



Fungus, a tadde stole, a mousherom.



Fungosus, lyke a musherom.



Funiculus, a small rope.



Funis, a rope.



Funus, funeris, funerall exequies, or solem­
nitie of burienge. Sometyme it sygnyfieth
the deed corps.



Fuo, fui, futum, to be.



Fur, furis, a thefe.



Furax, acis, theuyshe, a great picker.



Furca, furcula, an hey forke.



Furcifer, ciferis, a seruant, whiche for some
lyghte offense, was compelled to beare a
forke on his necke, hauynge both his han­
des bounden faste thereto, and so to goo
through the towne, confessynge his defaut,
and exhortynge other, that they shulde not
in lyke case offende, whyche was a greate
reproche.



Furcilis, a dungeforke.



Furcilla, an heyforke, also a galowes.



Furfur, uris, branne.



Furfureus, & furfuraceus, a, um, of branne.



Furiæ, the furyes of Helle, whyche were
thre, Alecto, Tisiphone, Megera.  



Furibundus, a, um, woode or very madde.



Furio, aui, are, to make madde or woode.



Furiosus, a, um, madde, or wodde, frantyke.



Furnaceus, a, um, baken in an ouen.



Furnaria, bakers crafte. Also a womanne
baker.



Furnus, an ouen.



Furo, furi, furere, to be woode for angre.



Furor, aris, ari, to steale.



Furor, roris, madnesse: Also furye, why­
che is a vehement concytation or styrrynge
of the mynde.



Furtim, by stelthe, priuilye.



Furtificus, a pycker or priuye stealer.



Furtiuus, a, um, that which is done by stelth,
or very pryuyly.



Furtum, thefte. it is defyned to be a deceit­
full handlynge or vsynge of any thynge, or
the possession therof, to haue therby gayne
or auauntage, whiche is by the lawe of na­
ture prohibited to be suffred. It is somtime
any act that is done priuily, or to the intent
it shuld be secrete.



Furti teneri, aut obstringi, to be answerable
to felonye.



Furu&ecedil; hostiæ, sacrifice doone to Pluto and
Proserpine. 



Furunculus, a litle thefe, also a beest called a
Stote, that killeth rabettis. It is also a sore
callid a felon. also a sore callid a cattisheer.






Fuscina, a speare with many teethe, wher­
with fyshers do take troutes, or yeles, by
throwynge of it, a troute speare, an yele
speare.



Fuscinula, a fleshe hooke.



Fuscus, ca, cum, browne of colour, not ful­
ly blacke.



Fusile, that whiche may be molten.



Fusim, abrode, as it were molten.



Fuse, in lengthe, longe.



Fusores, melters,



Fusorius, a, um, pertaynynge to meltynge,
As Ars fusoria, the crafte of meltyng. Vas
fusorium, a meltynge potte.



Fusus, a, um, molten.



Fusus, si, a spyndell.



Fustigo, are, to beate with a staffe.



Futilis, le, that whiche wyll be soone pow­
red out.



Futilis, he that speketh all that he knoweth
shortely or vnaduisedly.


 


¶ G Ante A.

G##sp##A##sp##B##sp##A##sp##L##sp##V##sp##S, a galowe
tree or gybet, whereon
men be hanged.



Gabata, a potagedyshe.



Gabinus, a garment with
two lappes, wherof the
one caste backward, dyd
gyrde him that did were
it. whych garment the consule ware, whan
he denounced warres.



Gades, two yles by the further partes of
Spayne, beyonde Granade.



Gætuli, people in Affrike.



Gætulia, a countrey in Affrike.



Gagates, a stone called Ieate.



Galactophagus, an eater of mylke.



Galactopota, a drynker of mylke.



Galat&ecedil;, people that inhabyte Galatia.



Galbanus, a gumme of a certayn tree, whi­
che is moche vsed in playsters.



Galbinus, a, um, delycate, wanton.



Galbuli, thynges whiche do hange on cy­
presse trees, lyke small heares.



Galea, an helmet or salette.



Galenus, the name of a noble phisition.



Galerita, an larke.



Galêrus, & Galerum, a hat. also a pirwike.



Galla, a fruite called Gaulles.



Gallicanus, a, um, of Fraunce.



Gallia, Fraunce.



Gallicia, a royalme in Spayne, callydde
Galyce.



Gallicinium, the tyme whanne the Cocke
croweth.



Gallicus, ca, cum, Frenche.



Gallina, a henne.



Gallinaceus pullus, a chyke.



Gallinaceus, a howse cocke.



Gallinarium, a place where pultry is kept.



Gallinarius, & gallinaria,he or she that ke­
peth pultrye.



Gallus, a, um, frenche.



Gallo, are, to be madde.



Gallogr&ecedil;tia, a countreye in Asia, callyd al­
so Galatia.



Gallus, a corke, a Frencheman, aprieste of
Cybeles, callyd the mother of the goddes.



Gamale, a towne in Iudea.



Gammarus, a fyshe callyd a lopstar.



Salustius.



Ganea, & ganeum, a brothell house, a hous
of baudry and ryotte. Also Ganea, is taken
for gluttonye.



Ganeo, onis, a Russyan, a haunter of baudy
houses, a ryotter. Also a rauyner of dely­
cates, a frauncher.



Ganges, a greatte ryuer, whiche enuyron­
neth India, wherin is founde bothe golde
and precyous stones.



Gangeticus, ca, cum, of that ryuer.



Gangr&ecedil;na, a sore callyd a cankre.



Ganymedes, a Troyane chylde, whyche
was fayned to be rauyshed of Iupyter, and
made his butlar.



Gannio, nire, to bark or houle lyke a dogge.



Gannitus, tus, barkynge, or howlynge.



Garamantes, people in Affrike.



Gargânus, a hylle in Apulia.



Gargara, a mountayn, & also a citie in Asia.



Gargarisso, are, to gargaryshe or washe the
mouthe and throte of a man.



Garrio, ire, to bable.



Gariophylum, a spyce callyd cloues.



Garrulus, a babblar.



Garum, sawce mude with fyshe.



Garumna, a ryuer in Fraunce.



Gaudeo, gauisus sum, gaudere, to reioyce, to
be gladde.



Gaudere in sinu, to reioyse by hym selfe.



Gaudium, ioye, myrthe, an affection of the
mynde, conceiued of an opinion of a thing
good or pleasaunt.



Gaulus, a lyttell rounde bote.



Gausape, a mantell to caste on a bedde: also
a carpette to lay on a table, some calle it a
daggeswayne.



Gausapina, a certayne garment.



Gaza, the treasure of a kynge.



Curtius.



Gazophilacium, a place where tresure is kept

 

¶ G, Ante E.

GEbenna, a hyll and towne in Sauoy.
nowe called Geneura.



Gedeon, the name of a iuge in Israel.






Geenna, is taken in holy scripture for hell.



Gela, a ryuer in Sycile.



Gelabilis, le, that maye be frosen.



Gelasco, scere, to be frosen.



Gelasini, the fooreteethe, whiche be she­
wed in laughynge.



Gelasinus, he that laugheth to make other
men laughe.



Gelicidium, a froste.



Gelidus, a, um, colde as yse.



Gelo, aui, are, to freese.



Geloi, fyeldes in Sycile.



Geloni, a people nowe callyd Tartariens.



Gelu, yse, sommetyme colde.



Gemellus, lyttell or smalle twynnes.



Gemibundus, full of waylynge.



Geminus, a, um, the noumbre of two. Also
geminus, is a twynne, where many chyl­
dren are borne at one burdeyne, althoughe
they be thre or mo. Also it is the name of a
man, whiche in hebrewe is Thomas. 



Gemino, aui, are, to double.



Gemma, the yonge budde of a vyne. Also
a precious stone.



Gemmo, aui, are, to budde or sprynge, as a
yonge graffe or vyne dothe.



Gemmascere, to begynne to budde.



Gemmatus, a, um, budded.



Gemo, mui, ere, to grone, or to wayle, or to
make a lamentable noyse.



Gemoniæ scalæ, a place frome whense the
bodyes of persounes condempned were
throwen downe.



Gemonid&ecedil;, women great with chylde.



Gemursa, a corne, or lyke griefe vnder the
lyttell too.



Gena, the eye lydde. It is sommetyme ta­
ken for the chekes.



Genauius, a, um, glouttonous.



Genealogia, a pedegrewe.



Gener, he that maryeth my doughter.



Generalis, le, generall.



Generatim, generally.



Genero, aui, are, to ingender.



Generosus, a, um, of a gentyl or noble kind.



Genesis, generation.



Genethliacus, an astronomer, or other lyke,
whiche by the sterres set at a mannes nati­
uitie, telleth his fortune.



Genialis homo, a manne in his house verye
lyberall and freshe.



Geniculatim, ioynted, as a wheate straw is.



Geniculum, the ioynt of a strawe, or stalke
of an herbe.



Genista, broome.



Genitalis, le, pertayning to the byrthe of a
man. genitale solum, the naturall countrey
or place, where a manne is borne. genitalis
dies, the daye of natiuitie. genitale semen,
the sede of generation. genitalia, the mem­
bres of generation.



Genimen, generation.



Genitor, a father.



Genitrix, a mother.



Genitura, sometyme generation, sometyme
the sede of generation.



Genitiuus, a, um, that hath power to ingen­
der, or that whiche procedeth with gene­
ration. genitiuæ not&ecedil;, markes, wherewith
a man is borne.



Genitus, ta, tum, begotten, ingendred.



Genius, an aungell. Amonge the Paynims
some supposed it to be the spirite of a man.
Some dydde put two gouernours of the
sowle, a good and an euyll, Bonus genius,
& malus genius, whyche neuer departed
from vs. sometyme it is taken for nature it
selfe, or dilectation meued by nature.



Genii, men, whiche do gyue all their studye
to eatynge and drynkynge.



Geniæ, olde veckes full of vnhappynes.



Genio dare operam, to lyue voluptuousely.



Genium defraudare, to absteyne from all
thynges pleasaunt.



Genocha, a beast lasse than a fox, of colour
betwene blacke & yelow, medlid with black
spottes, whiche wyll soone be made tame.



Gens, gentis, a people, sometyme a kinred.



Gentiana, an herbe callyd Gencyan.



Gentilis, a kynseman of the same name and
stocke. sometyme it signyfyeth a gentyle or
paynyme. somtyme a countrey man.



Gentilis, le, propre, or familyar to that peo­
ple, or kynrede.



Gentilitas, tatis, gentilitie, the multitude of
the people or famyly.



Gentilitium nomen, the surname or ancyent
name of a mans auncetours.



Gentilitius, a, um, of the people or nation,
gentilitia sacra, ceremonyes of that coun­
trey or people.



Genu, a knee.



Genua, a great cite callid Geane.



Genuini, the innermoste cheke teethe.



Genuinus sermo, the natural speche or mo­
ther tunge.



Genus, generis, is the begynnynge of eue­
rye thynge, eyther of the persone that in­
gendred it, or of the place, where it was
ingendred. Orestes a Tantalo ducit genus,
Orestes hathe his begynnynge of Tanta­
lus, or is of the bloudde of Tantalus. Pla­
to genere Atheniensis est, Plato is of his
bloudde or auncetrye an Athenyens. Al­
so it sygnifieth kynde. genus vit&ecedil;, a kynd of
lyfe. genus mortis, a kynd of deth. genus a­
nimalium, a kynde of beastes. Also it signi­
fieth that, whiche conteineth many sondry




kyndes, as Animal comprehendeth a man,
a byrde, a fyshe, and euery of them is genus
to that, whiche in theym is comprehended.
As a brute beast is genus to a horse, a lyon,
a bulle, a dogge &c. A byrde is genus to an
egle, a crowe, a larke, a sparowe.&c. A fishe
is genus to a whale, a porpese, a haddocke,
a playce.&c.



Geographia, the description of the erth.



Geomancia, superstitious warkinge in sor­
cerye, by cerkles and prickes in the erthe.



Geometer, a geometritian.



Geometria, geometry, measuring and pro­
porcionyng of fygures in the erthe.



Georgica, pertaynynge to husbandry.



Germani, Germaynes, or Almayns, They
be also bretherne of one father and oone
mother.



Germania, the countrey named Germany,
or Almayne.



Germen, minis, a branche of a tree or herbe.



Germino, aui, are, to branche out.



Gero, gessi, gerere, to beare. sometyme it
signifieth to haue.



Gerere magistratum, to exercise an offyce.



Gesta, & gest&ecedil; res, actes, thynges practised
or doone.



Gerr&ecedil; sicul&ecedil;, tryfles.



Gerres, fyshe of the kynde of herrynges,
it may be called pylchardes.



Gerrones, talkers of tryfelyng thinges, or
lyght matters.



Gerulus, a porter, or a man hyred to carye
bourdeynes.



Gerula, a mayde that kepeth a chylde.



Gerusia, a place where the Senate dyd as­
semble, a parlyament house.



Geryon, onis, the name of a king of Spain,
whiche was slayne by Hercules. 



Gesa, a haulberde.



Gessoriacum, as some men do suppose, was
the towne, whiche is now named Caleys.



Gestamen, minis, what soo euer is borne, a
burdeyn or caryage.



Gestatorium, that wherin any thyng is ca­
ried or borne, a flagon, a horse lytter.



Gestatio, the exercise, where a man is borne
or caried on any thinge.



Gesticularius, a, um, pertaynyng to sygnes
or tokens of myrthe, with meuyng the bo­
dy or handes.



Gesticulator, he that playith with puppetts.



Gesticulor, aris, to make suche sygnes or
tokens of myrthe, as in daunsynge.



Gestio, iui, ire, to shewe the affections of the
mynde by meuyng of the body, or any part
therof. somtyme it signifieth to delite.



Gestito, taui, are, to beare or were oftentimes



Gesto, aui, are, to beare longe. Gestat ventrem,
she is with chylde.



Gestuosus, full of tokens of myrthe.



Gestus, ta, tum, borne, or done.



Gestus, tus, gesture, or countenance with me­
uynge of the body.



Getuli, a people in Affrike.

 

¶ G, ante I.

GIarus, a littell ile in the see called Io­
nium, whervnto menne condempned
were exyled.



Gibber, & gibbosus, & gibberosus, he which
hath a croked backe, or a great bunche on
any parte of the body.



Gibbus, & gibba, a great bunche.



Gigantomachia, a battayle of geantes.



Gigas, gigantis, a gyaunt.



Gigno, genui, gignere, to ingender or gette.



Giluus, ua, um, yelowe colour.



Gingeria, uel gigeria, a mete made of sondry
kindes of fleshe, or of garbage offoule.



Gingiuæ, the iawes, wherin the teth be set.



Gingiuerim, siue gingiberim, gynger.



Gingrio, gingrii, ire, to cry like a goose.



Gion, a greate ryuer in Egypte, otherwise
callyd Nylus.



Girgillus, a rele, wheron threde is wounden



Gith, a sede, whiche is nowe callyd Nigella
Romana: it is blacke lyke to oynyon sede,
and is very soote, and the sauoure thereof
exhausteth reumes of the heed.

 

¶ G ante L.

GLaber, bra, brum, smothe, without hear.



Glabella, the space betwen thebrowes.



Glabresco, scere, to be without heer,
or smothe.



Glabreta, a place, hauynge nothynge gro­
wynge in it.



Glabriones, they which lacke heare.



Glacialis, le, where yse is.



Glacior, aris, ari, to be frosen.



Glacies, yse.



Glacitare, to make a noise like a gander.



Gladiatores, were men, whiche faught vn­
armed with swordes.



Gladiatorius, ria, rium, pertainynge to that
maner of fyghtynge.



Gladiatura, the arte or feate to fyghte with
a sworde.



Gladiolus, a lytel sworde or wodknyfe. also
the name of an herbe lyke to sedge.



Gladius, a sword. also a kind of fishe, which
hath a bone in his forheed like to a sworde.



Glandatio, fedynge of swyne with maste,
callyd paunage.



Glandium, glandionica, the parte of a bore
next the necke, the shelde or gammonde.



Glans, glandis, mast growing on okes, bech,
chestons, and other lyke, it is also a pellette




of leade. Also a kernell growyng betwene
the skynne and the flesshe, it is more ouer
the foreparte or nutte of a mans yerde.



Glandifer, fera, diferum, that whiche bea­
reth maste.



Glaphirus, a, um, iocunde, plesant, ingraued,
polyte, holow, famous, subtyll.



Glarea, sande, proprely sandy grauel.



Glareosus, a, um, sandy.



Glastum, an herbe lyke to plantayne, whi­
che maketh a blewe colour, wherwith the
auncient Britons dyed their vysages. some
men englyshe it woadde.
Cæsar.


Glaucinum, oyle, whiche dothe come from
the olyues before they be pressed.



Glauciolus, a horse with a wall eye.



Glaucium, an herbe, which crepeth on the
erthe nygh to salt waters.



Glaucoma, maris, & glaucomatum, ti, & glau­
coma, m&ecedil;, an humour in the eien, lyke cry­
stall, whiche letteth the syght.



Glaucopis, pidis, a man or womanne with
graye eyes.



Glaucus, ca, cum, gray colour.



Glaucus substantiuum, a god of the see. al­
so many men were called by that name. al­
so the name of a fysshe.



Gleba, a turfe or piece of erthe.



Glessum, crystall, or beryll.



Glycyrrhiza, lykoresse.



Glis, iris, a fielde mous, whiche slepeth all
the wynter.



Glis, glissis, potters claye.



Glis, glitis, a thystell.



Glisco, sci, scere, to growe, to waxe fatte, to
coueite or desyre feruently.



Globo, aui, are, to gather rounde.



Globus, & globum, a boule, or other thing
very rounde. Also a multitude of menne or
beastes gathered rounde togither.



Globosus, a, um, rounde as a boule.



Glocido, aui, are, to cackle as a henne doth.



Glocio, cite, idem.



Glomero, aui, are, to wynde in rounde. also
to gather togither in an heape.



Quint.



Gloria, the consent of good men in the praise
of a man or woman, callid renome, glory.



Glorior, aris, to auaunt, to thintent to haue
praises, to extolle with bostynge.



Gloriosus, a, um, renomed, somtyme in the
yll part, vaynglorious, or bosting him selfe.



Glos, glotis, the systers husbande, or bro­
thers wyfe.



Glossa, a glose, or exposition of dark spech.



Glossemata, wordes not moche vsed.



Glossematicus, he that maketh a commente
on a boke.



Glubo, bi, bere, to pulle of the barke or
rynde of a tree.



Gluma, the huske of wheate.



Gluo, glui, ere, to streyne or wringe harde.



Gluten, & glutinum, glewe.



Glutinamentum, al glewyshe matter.



Glutino, aui, are, to glewe or ioyne.



Glutio, tiui, tire, to swalowe.



Gluto, tonis, a glutton.



Glyciamerides, a kynde of meate.

 

¶ G, ante N.

GNafalon, a certayne floxe.



Gnarus, a, um, skylfull.



Gnare, skylfully.



Gnaritas, tatis, skylfulnes.



Gnomones, the teethe, wherby the age of
an horse is knowen. They be sommetyme
taken for that, whiche sheweth the houres
in a clocke or diall.

 

¶ G, ante O.

GObius, a fyshe, callyd a gogeon.



Go&ecedil;tia, a spice of wytchecrafte.



Gomor, a measure among the iewes.



Gomorrha & gomorrhum, a citie in Iudea
whyche was consumed for horryble synne
agaynst nature.



Gonorrha, a disease, wherby a mans seede
gothe from hym vnwyttyngly.



Gorgia, the name of a great rhetorician.



Gorgones, monstruous womenne, whyche
were vanquyshed by Perseus. 



Gortys, a citie of Candy.



Gossampinus, a tree, which beareth cotten.



Gossipium, cotten.

 

¶ G, ante R.

GRabatus, a cowche.



Graculus, a byrde callyd a Iaye.



Graculo cum fidibus nihil, The Iaye
hath nought to do with the harpe. whyche
is spoken of theym, whyche lackynge elo­
quence or good letters, doo scorne theym
that haue it.



Gracus, & graculus, a chough or cadese.



Gracchus, the name of a noble famylye or
house in Rome.



Gracilis, le, gracilentus, ta, tum, leane, or sclen­
der, sometyme softe.



Gracile, sclenderly.



Gracilitas, cilitatis, leannesse, sclendernes,
or softenesse.



Gradus, a greese or steppe, a degree in con­
sanguinitie.
De gradu deiici, to be caste downe from his
place: wherby is sygnifyed to be abasshed
or moued from constancy of mynde.




Deturbati gradu, hath the same signification.



Gradior, to go by steppes, or steppe.



Gradator, a great goer.



Gradarii equi, amblynge horses.



Gradatio, a fourme of speakynge, whan of
the fyrst sentence sprin geth the seconde, of
the seconde the thyrde, and so forthe.



Gradatim, in order, or by course.



Gradiuus, one of the names of Mars. 



Gradior, eris, gressus sum, to go.



Gr&ecedil;cus, a man borne in Grece, a Greeke.



Gr&ecedil;cus, a, um, of Grece.



Gr&ecedil;cia, Grece.



Gr&ecedil;canicus, ca, cum, come out of Grece.



Gr&ecedil;costasis, a place where Ambassadours
abode, vntylle they were sente for into the
Senate.



Graiugen&ecedil;, Grekes.



Gr&ecedil;cor, caris, ari, to ryotte in bankettynge
and rybaudrye.



Gral&ecedil;, crouches, or styltes.



Grallatores, they whiche do go on styltes.



Grammatica, grammer.



Grammaticus, he that teacheth grammer,
or expoundethe authours, a profounde
grammaryan.



Grammatista, a smatterer in grammer, a
meane grammarian.



Grammaticus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to grammer.



Grammatice loqui, to speake congruely.



Grammatocyphon, he that wrytethe on
his knee.



Grammatophylatium, the place where the
recordes, or commune writinges be kepte.



Grammar&ecedil;us, a chauncellour.



Gramme, a length without breadth.



Grammia, the fleume in the eyen.



Gramen, grasse: sometyme all herbes to­
gyther, the swarthe.



Graminosus, a, um, growen with grasse
or herbes.



Grando, dinis, hayle. Also a pushe lyke to a
boyle in the flesshe, whiche greueth a man
whan it is touched.



Grandinosus, a, um, full of hayle.



Grandinatus, ta, tum, hurt or wounded with
haylle.



Grandebal&ecedil;, heares in the arme holes.



Grandis, grande, auncient, or great.



Grandiusculus, la, lum, somwhat great, or of
good age, well stryken in yeres.



Granditas, tatis, the aboundaunce of yeres,
auncientie.



Grandeuus, very olde.



Grandiloquus, eloquente, he that speaketh
as it were with a greatte magnyfycence
in wordes.



Grandiloquentia, a stately eloquence.



Grandio, diui, ire, to make great.



Grandesco, ere, to waxe great.



Granum, grayne or corne.



Granarium, a graynarde, wherein corne
is kepte.



Graphis, phidis, the arte of portraiture.



Graphium, a pensyll, wherwith menne doo
write in tables.



Graphicus, ca, cum, kunnyngly, or perfect­
ly wrought.



Graphicus homo, a propre man.



Graphice, proprely well, and kunnyngly.



Graphiarium, a case, wherin pensiles were
kepte, it may be called a pennar.



Grassator, he that by highe wayes, lyeth in
awayt to robbe or slee men, an extorcioner.



Grassor, aris, ari, to robbe or slee men pas­
synge by the hyghe wayes. Also to goo or
come on one with a violent rage. Therfore
in a sodayn and violent pestilence, it is said,
morbus grassatur, The sycknes kylleth men
sodaynely.



Gratia, grace, somtyme it signifieth thanke,
sometyme a benefyte, sometyme rewarde:
also peace or loue, sometyme cause or res­
pect, also prayse.



Gratus, ta, tum, thankfull, pleasant, accep­
table.



Gratiosus, very thankfull. Also in fauour,
with the people, or well estemed.



Gratis, an aduerbe, betokenynge withoute
rewarde: sometyme without deserte.



Gratuitus, ta, tum, without rewarde or vn­
hyred.



Gratuito, an aduerbe sygnifienge, of good
wyll, without benefite.



Grates, thankes.



Gratificor, ari, to gratifie, or doo a thynge
thankfull, or to conferre a benefite, or doo
a good tourne.



Grator, ari, to giue thankes to god with of­
frynges, also to reioyce of good fortune.



Gratulor, ari, with a datiue case, to be ioy­
ous for hym selfe or an other for any good
thynge that hath hapned. Tibi de hac tua
fœlicitate gratulor, I am ioyous with the, or
as gladde as thou arte, of this prosperitie
that thou arte in. Sometyme it sygnifyeth
to gyue thankes vnto god: but with an ac­
cusatiue case it signifieth to take thankfully
any acte.
Liuius.


Grauis, graue, heuy, greuouse, sommetyme
substancial, graue, or hauyng grauitie, con­
trary to lyghtnes or wantonnes, also great
or puissant, sometime olde or aged, somtime
sure or constant, sommetyme plentuous or
full. Terra grauis, lande laded with corne.



Grauiter, et graue, greuousely, heuily, sub­
stancially, moche, wisely, sadly.



Grauatus, greued.






Grauedim dinis, heauynesse, griefe, disease.
Somtyme the murre or reume of the heed.



Grauedinosus, he that hath a heuye heed.



Grauedinosus, a, um, that whiche maketh a
heuy heed.



Graueolentia, stenche or stynke.



Grauo, aui, are, to greue, to burden, or lade.



Grauor, ari, to be grieued, or to take grie­
uouselye.



Grauate, & grauatim, greuously, or disple­
santly, or paynfully.



Grauesco, scere, to be laded.



Grauida mulier, a woman great with child.



Grauido, are, to gette a woman with chyld.



Grauastellus, aged.



Grex, gregis, a flocke, as well of menne, as
of cattelle.



Gragarius miles, a souldiour taken at ad­
uenture, not chosen.



Gragarius pastor, the chiefe shepard, whi­
che hath the charge of the hole flocke.



Gragarius canis, a curre dogge.



Gregalis, le, cattell, whiche is in the flocke.



Gragatim, in sondry flockes.



Gremiale, an apron.



Gressus, a steppe, or goinge.



Gressibile, apte to goo.



Gressutus, ta, tum, idem.



Grossus, a, um, greatte.



Grossi, greene fygges.



Grossuli, yonge fygges.



Grossipion, seu grossapinus, a tree, wherof
commeth cotton.



Grossapina, cotton.



Grus, gruis, a Crane.



Gruo, gruere, to crye lyke a Crane.



Grumus, a barowe, or hyllocke.



Grumma, a thynge, wherwith grounde is
measured.



Grumia, a mydde place, from whense goth
foure wayes.



Grunnio, ire, to grunt lyke a swyne.



Grundio, idem.



Gryllus, a beaste, more than a grassehoppe,
whiche destroyeth corne.



Gryphus, a grype or gryffon. also a capti­
ous, an insoluble, or diffuse argumente, a
ryd dyll.



Grypus, a nose rysynge in the myddell.

 

G, ante V.

GVla, the throte, sometyme glottony.



Gulosus, a glutton.



Gulioc&ecedil;, the grene shale of the walle
nutte.



Gummi, gumme, whiche droppeth from trees.



Gummatus, ta, tum, dressed with gumme
or rased.



Gummat&ecedil; arbores, Trees that bryngethe
forthe gumme.



Gumminum, oyle made of gumme.



Gurges, gurgitis, a swallowe or depe pyll in
a water, or a goulfe.



Gurgito, aui, are, to swolowe or deuoure.



Gurgulio, gulionis, the gully or gargylle of
the throote, or throote bolle. It is also a
worme that bredeth in barnes, and eateth
vppe corne.



Gurgustium, Gurgustium, a darke and vyle habitation, a
cabban or cotage.



Gustus, tus, taste.



Gustatus, tus, idem.



Gusto, aui, are, to taste.



Guttus, a cruet, or other lyke thynge, oute
of the whiche lycour is poured dropping.



Gutta, a droppe.



Guttatim, by droppes.



Gutturnium, a lauer, or yewer.



Guttur, gutturis, the throte.



Gutturosus, he that hath a swollen throte.

 

¶ G, ante Y.

GYg&ecedil;us, a laake of Lydie.



Gygemorus, a lyttell hylle, not farre
from Thessalye.



Gyges, the name of a kynge of Lydia, al­
so a ryuer of Lydia was callydde by the
same name.



Gymnastes, he that teacheth chylderne to
exercyse them in wrastlynge, or other like.



Gymnasium, a place, where is commune
exercyse of the bodye. Sommetyme a
schoolehouse.



Gymnasticum, the arte of exercyse.



Gymnasiarches, the chiefe mayster of the
schole or place of exercyse.



Gymnosophist&ecedil;, phylosophers of Inde,
whiche went alway naked.



Gymnici ludi, playes exercysed naked.



Gymnus, a beaste, whyche commethe of a
horse and an asse mare.



Gynœcium, a nourcerye.



Gyneconitis, that parte of the house, why­
che serueth onely for women.



Gynephilus, a great louer of women.



Gypsus, playster.



Gypso, aui, are, to playster.



Gyrus, a cyrcute or compasse.



Gyro, gyraui, gyrare, to compasse or goo
in cyrcuite.



Gyttheum, a towne, whiche Hercules and
Apollo, layenge there asyde theyr stryfe
and debate, buylded togyther, and the in­
habytauntes of the same towne are called
Gytthetes.










H##sp##A##sp##B##sp##E##sp##O, H##sp##A##sp##B##sp##V##sp##I, H##sp##A­
bere, to haue, to hold, to
possede or occupie, to e­
steme or suppose, to call,
to dwelle. Pensi habere,
to take hede. Frustra ha­
bere, to deceyue. Habe­
re bene seu male, to doo
or prosper well or yll. Bene habet, it is wel.
Res ita se habet, the thinge is at this point.
In custodiis haberi, to be kepte in prysone.
Fortunas suas uenales habuit, he hath solde
all his goodes. Habeo tibi fidem, I put my
truste in the. Habeo rationem, I haue busy­
nes, or I haue to do. Habere rem, to medle
with a woman. Habere rem cum aduersario,
to contend. Habere gratiam, to thanke. Ha­
beo audire, I can here. Habeo polliceri, I
canne promyse. Habet frustra, He is dys­
appoynted.



Habitus, habitus, the fourme or state of the
body, sometyme of other thynges, Also
apparayle. Also it sygnyfyethe a qualytie
or propretie, whiche a manne hath concei­
ued by education, longe exercyse, or cu­
stome, habyte.



Habitudo, dinis, the same.



Gabitior, oris, more corporate.



Habilis, le, hable.



Habena, the rayne of a brydell.



Habito, taui, are, to dwelle.



Habitaculum & habitatio, a dwellyng place
or habitation.



Hactenus, hytherto, so moche.



Hadrianopolis, a citie in Thracia.



Hadrobalum, a kynde of swete smellynge
gumme, that groweth in Media.

 

¶ H, ante Ae.

HAedui, people in Fraunce, whiche be
nowe callid Burgonyons, and bur­
bonoyses.



H&ecedil;dus, a kydde.



H&ecedil;dina caro, kyddes fleshe.



H&ecedil;dile, a stable, wherin kyddes be kepte.



H&ecedil;dera, Iuye tree.



H&ecedil;deratius, ia, ium, of Iuye.



H&ecedil;matites, the sanguinarie or blode stone.



H&ecedil;monia, the countrey callid Thessaly.



H&ecedil;morrhois, a disease in the fundement lyke
teates or wartes, out of the whiche issueth
bloudde, callyd emorrodes or pyles. Also
a serpent, of whom if a man be stryken, he
bledeth to dethe.



H&ecedil;reo, h&ecedil;si, h&ecedil;rere, to cleaue or stycke to a
thynge. sometyme to doubte.



H&ecedil;ret in te omnis culpa, In the is putte all
the blame.



H&ecedil;resco, scere, to sticke fast, or be thruste in.



H&ecedil;sito, aui, are, idem quod h&ecedil;reo.



Hæres, h&ecedil;redis, an heyre, or he, which suc­
cedeth an other in his landes or goodes.



H&ecedil;reditas, tatis, inheritance or succession.



H&ecedil;reditarius, ia, ium, pertaynynge to inhe­
ritance. Bona hæreditaria, goodes whiche
do come by inheritaunce.



H&ecedil;redipeta, crauers of goodes, flatteryng
men to be their heires.



H&ecedil;redium, lande, wherin a man hath a state
of inheritaunce.



H&ecedil;redidum, a lyttel inheritance.



Hæresis, h&ecedil;resios, a secte, an heresy, an ob­
stynate opynion.



Hæresiarches, an arche heretike.



Hæreticus, an heretike.



Hagnus, a lambe.



Hagnellus, a lyttell lambe.



Hagninus, a, um, of a lambe.



Halec, lecis, a fysshe callyd herryng. Also a
sawce made of fyshe.



Halesius, a ryuer nat farre from Aetna.



Halialmon, a ryuer of Macidon.



Halietus, an Egle, that haunteth aboute
the see.



Halieutica, bokes contayninge the proper­
ties of fyshes.



Halimon, a thorne lyke to a whyte thorne,
growynge by the see syde, and hath leaues
lyke to an olyue tree, but they be broder.



Halo, aui, are, to sende forthe sauour.



Halitus, breathe or vapour.



Halo, the cirkle or garlande aboute the
Moone.



Halicarnasus, a citie in the lasse Asia.



Halophanta, a great lyer.



Halosis, the captiuitie.



Halito, aui, are, to vapour out.



Halizones, people of Paphlagonie, so cal­
led bycause they ar inuironned about with
the See.



Hallucinor, ari, to be in a dreame, to be de­
ceyued, to erre, or to take a matter wrong.



Hamadriades, Nymphes or fayries of the
woddes.



Hamus, a hooke. sometyme a chayne.



Hamo, aui, are, to crooke.



Hamatus, matam tum, to be furnysshed with
hookes.



Hamiota, uel Hamota, an angler or fyssher
with an angle or hoke.



Hamatilis, le, pertaynynge to a hoke. pisca­
tus hamatilis, fysshynge with a hooke, or
anglynge.



Hamonus, a, um, a colour somwhat redde.



Haphe, a colour on the body, lyke to them
that be leperous.



Hammon, onis, Iupiter in the egiptian tunge






Harena, uide ante in arena.



Hariolus, a sothesayer.



Harmonia, harmonie or melody.



Harpasa, a towne of Asia.



Harpe, a sworde lyke to a fyshe.



Harpago, aui, are, to take by violence.



Harpago, ginis, a grapull of a shyppe. also a
coupers instrument, wherwith he dryueth
on howpes, an addysse.



Harpa, & harpax, acis, a grapelyng yron, for
to close shyppes togyther: also a poll with
a hoke on the ende, that shypmen vse.



Harpocrates, the god of sylence.



Harpocratem reddere, to put one to silence.



Harpalice, a womans name, the doughter of
Harpalus kynge of Thrace.



Harpyi&ecedil;, monstruous byrdes, hauyng may­
dens vysages, and talons of a meruaylous
rapacitie. wherfore men that be rauenous,
and great gatherers of goodes, be named
sometyme Harpyi&ecedil;. 



Haruspex, spicis, a dyuynatour, or tellar of
thynges to come by the lokynge in the bo­
welles of beastes. Also he, whiche obser­
ueth tymes in doinge of thynges.



Haruspicina, the arte of hym, whyche is a
dyuinatour.



Haruspicium, the diuynation or tellynge of
thynges to comme, by the lokynge in bea­
stis bowelles.



Haspis, pidis, the bowyng made lyke a cer­
kle in roufes of houses, or of a whele.



Hasta, a speare.



Hastæ pur&ecedil;, were without yron: and in the
olde tyme were gyuen for a price to theym
that vanquished firste in battayle.



Hastati, speare men.



Hastile, a speare staffe.



Hastarium, sellynge vnder the standerde.



Hastam abiicere, sygnifieth to leaue sute, to
dispayre of the matter in variance.



Hasticus ludus, rounnynge at the tylte with
speares.



Haud, in no wyse.



Vergilius.



Haurio, siui, iui, rii, ire, to drawe or take out,
to here, to see, to take a thyng gredylye, to
wounde, to fatigate or make wery, to make
empty, to consume. Haurire supplicia, to suf­
fre punyshement or peynes.



Haustus, tus, a draught in drynkynge.



Haustum facere, to drynke.



Haustrum, a bucket to drawe water.

 

¶ H, Ante E.

HEautontimorumenon, the name of
one of the comedyes of Terentius,
whiche is as moche to saye, as tour­
mentynge hym selfe.



Hebdomas, madis, & hebdomada, &ecedil;, a wike.
Also the numbre of seuen in dayes, yeres,
or other tyme.



Hebenus, a tree, wherof the wod is blacke
lyke geate, and it beareth neyther leaues,
nor fruite.



Hebes, hebetis, dulle.



Hebeo, & hebesco, ere, to be dull.



Hebeto, aui, are, to be duske or made darke.



Hebetudo, dinis, dulnesse, or duskyshenes.



Hebiones, of men in olde tyme were callid
poore folkes.



Hebraicus, Hebrician or of Hebrewe.



Hebron, a vyllage by Ierusalem.



Hebrus, a ryuer in Thracia.



Hecameda, the daughter of Arsinoi, whi­
che was gyuen to Nestor for a gyfte.



Hecatombe, a sacrifice, wherein were kyl­
led a hundred beastes.



Hecatompolis, a countrey hauyng an hun­
dre d cities therin.



Hecatompus, he that hath an hundred fete.



Hecate, a name of the mone.



Hecta, the yexinge of a man. also a lyttelle
puffe, whiche riseth in breadde whanne it
is baken.



Hectica febris, the feuer that consumeth.



Hector, the sonne of Priamus. 



Hecyra, a mother in lawe.



Hedonius, expenses in voluptuous thingis.



Heiulo, aui, are, to wayle, crienge out.



Heliocaminus, a place whiche is hette with
the sonne.



Helcium, the harneys of carthorses, wher­
by they drawe.



Helenium, an herbe commonly called Enula
campana, in englyshe Helycampane.



Heliopolis, a cytie in Grecia called also
Corinthus.



Heliochrisos, an herbe hauynge a yelowe
floure, A marygolde.



Helioscopium, a lyttell tree lyke to a fygge
tree, and hath leaues lyke a plane, but
greatter and blacker.



Helioselinum, an herbe lyke to Smallage,
whyche groweth in watery groundes, and
hath but one leafe.



Heliotropium, a flowre whiche in the sonne
rysynge dothe open, and at the sonne sette
closeth. Some supposeth it to be Mary­
goldes or ruddes.



Helix, icis, of some men is taken for a kynde
of wyllowe tree, or some men for yuie.



Hellas, ladis, the countrey of Grece.



Helleborus, an herbe, the rote wherof pur­
geth melancoly.



Hellenes, the sonne of Deucalion, of whom
the Grekes were named Hellenes.



Hellespontus, an arme of the see, whyche




deuideth Grece and Asie.



Heloi, in hebrewe signifieth god almighty.



Helorus, a ryuer in Sycile.



Heluatia, a garment which was vsed in Li­
dia, and was of the color of a cowes hyde.



Heluela, small wo rtes.



Heluetii, people called Suycers, or Suy­
ches, by desyre of warres, ennemyes to
all mankynd: subiectes neither to god nor
to Prynce.



Heluo, onis, he whiche in eatyng and drin­
kyng spendeth al his substance, a reueller.
somtyme a glutton onely.



Heluo librorum, an insaciable reder of bokes.



Heluatio, reuell, or spendynge in ryot.



Heluor, aris, ari, to spende in ryot.



Heluolum, a coloure of clothe, called frenche
tawnye.



Helxine, an herbe, which hath stalkes som­
what redde, and smal burres on the toppe,
whiche do cleaue faste vnto clothes.



Hem, an interiection of blamynge, disday­
nynge, meruaylynge, or shewynge.



Hemeridion, whiche dureth but one day.



Hemerodromus, a currour, which runneth
many myles in one day.



Hemicranea, a peyne in halfe the heed, cal­
lyd the mygrim.



Hemicyclum, a compasse chayre.



Hemicyclus, an halfe cerkle.



Hemina, a measure of licour or corne, whi­
che may nowe be taken for a pottell.



Hemiola, gayne of all, and halfe as moche,
as if of .iiii. s. be goten .vi. s.



Hemiolus, a proportion in Arithmetike, con­
taynynge the hole noumbre, and halfe that
nombre: as one to thre .xv to ten.



Hemiomum, an herbe good agaynst all yexis.



Hemis, halfe.



Hemispherium, half the compasse of the vi­
syble heuen or firmament.



Hemistichium, halfe a verse.



Hemitogium, halfe a gowne.



Hemitritæus, an halfe tercian feuer, whose
course is in euery .xxxvi. houres, or whych
hath the course of a tercyan.



Hemodes, certayne iles in the douche see.



Hemerobius, one dayes sustynaunce. also a
worme, whiche lyueth but one day.



Hemichorium, halfe a daunce.



Hemus, a mountayne in Grece in the realm
of Thrace, which is syxe myles in height.



Hendecasyllabus, a verse of a .xi. syllables.



Henula, a lyttell chappell.



Hepiolus, a flye lyke a butterflye, whyche
flyeth at nyght into the leame of a candell.



Hepsema, muste boiled to the thyrd part.



Heptapolis, was sommetyme the name of
Egypte, by reason of seuen cities, whyche
fyrste were in it.



Hepthemimeris, where a syllable naturally
short, is made longe in a verse, which doth
happe in the begynnynge of the fyrst fote.



Hera, the name of Iuno. 



Heraclea, a town in the confines of Europa.



Heraclee, a towne very nere to Naples.



Heracleon, an herbe lyke to Organum, it
groweth in watry places, and hath a floure
lyke a lyllye: and whan the floure is fallen,
it hath a heed lyke popie. It is also an no­
ther herbe growynge in plashes, hauynge
a lyttell stalke, whiche excedeth not foure
fyngers hygh, hauynge a redde floure, and
leaues lyke Coriander: this herbe healeth
all woundes, if it be layde vnto them. It is
called Heraclion syderion. 



Heracleotica nux, a walle nutte.



Heraclides, the name of a philosopher.



Heraclitus, a philosopher, whiche alwayes
wepte, whan he behelde the people: his
warkes of a purpose were obscure & harde
to be vnderstande.



Heraclius, the name of an Emperour, it is
also a touche stone.



Herba, an herbe. Also generally all thynge
that groweth on the erthe, not being wod.
somtyme a wede.



Herbam dare aut porrigere, where a manne
yeldeth hym, or confesseth hym selfe to be
vanquyshed.



Herbula, a lyttell herbe.



Herbosus, a, um, full of herbes or grasse.



Herbaceus, a, um, of herbes of grasse.



Herbidus, a, um, idem.



Herbarius, he whiche knoweth the propre­
ties of herbes, and maketh medycynes of
theym.



Herbarius, ia, ium, pertaynynge to herbes.



Herbare, to brynge forthe herbes.



Herbesco, ere, to make herbes or wedes.



Herceus, one of the surnames of Iupiter. 



Hercinia, a great wodde in Germany, whi­
che is in breadth .ix. dayes iourney.



Herculanus, na, num, of Hercules. 



Hercules, the sonne of Iupiter & Alcumena. 



Hercle & Hercule, an affirmatiue othe.



Herculeius, a Romayne, whiche fauoured
the parte of Marius. 



Herculeus, ea, eum, puissant or mighty.



Herebus, the depest place in hell.



Heri, yesterday.



Hericius, an yrchin or hedgehogge.



Herillus, a philosopher of Calcidonie.



Herma, an ymage of Mercurius. It is also
an image, the heed wherof may be changid.



Hermæ, be also Images sette or layde on
Sepulchres.






Hermathena, an ymage contaynyng the fi­
gures of Mercury and Pallas. 



Hermaphroditus, the sonne of Mercury &
Venus. Also he that is both man & woman.



Hermerotes, small images, proprely of ly­
tell chyldren with whynges.



Hermes, is, & hermetis, Mercurye. 



Hermodôcus, a philosopher of Ephesie.



Hermogenes, a propre name.



Hermoglyphus, a grauer of ymages.



Hermon, a lyttelle hylle that standethe on
Iordane.



Hermopolis, the name of a citie that Her­
mes buylded.



Hermupoa, an herbe callyd Mercury. 



Hermus, a ryuer, which in the middes, par­
teth the fyldes of Smyrnee: and fallynge
from the hylle Dorylao, dyuideth Phrigia
from Caria.



Hernia, the disease, wherof men be called
brosten: for that their bowels, or other mat­
ter, is fallen into their coddes.



Hernici, people in Campania.



Herniosus, he that is brosten.



Herodius, a byrde named a faucon.



Herodes, the sonne of Antipater, whyche
in the .x. yere of Augustus, was of the Ro­
maynes declared kynge of Iewes, and he
reigned .xxxvii. yeres.



Heroida, a noble woman.



Heroicus, ca, cum, noble, or pertaynynge to
noblenesse.



Herpera, a tetter.



Hersilia, the name of Romulus wyfe.



Herus, a lorde or master.



Hesperia, Italy. Hesperia ultima, Spayne.



Hesperus, the weste sterre.



Hesperides, the thre daughters of Atlas, 
whiche kepte the gardens, wherin grewe
the golden appuls, that were taken awaye
by Hercules.



Hesperidum horti, the gardeynes, where­
in were the golden appulles, nowe callyd
Orenges.



Hesternus, na, num, of yesterdayes.



Hesti&ecedil;a, is a parte of Thessaly sayth stra­
bo, and Ptol. and in Homerus, it is a town
in Euboea. Stephanus sayth, it is a Cytie
in Acarnania.



Heterogenus, na, um, of an other kynde.



Hetruria, the countrey of Thuscan wherin
the citie of Florence is.



Heu, alas.



Heus, howe.



Hexaclinum, a parlour, wherein syxe per­
sones may soupe.



Hexagonum, syxe cornerde.



Hexametrum, a verse of syxe fete.

 

¶ H ante I.

HHIarbas, the sonne of Iupiter, whiche
was kynge of the Getulians. 



Hiacynthus, an herbe with a pourple
floure, and hath a rounde roote.



Hiacynthin&ecedil; uestes, garmentes of pourple
colour.



Hiato, aui, are to gape often.



Hiatus, tus, a gapynge.



Hibiscus, an herbe lyke to malowes, hauing
a gretter lefe, and a heary stalke, holyhok.



Hic, this man. also here or in this place.



Hiera, an yle betwene Sicile and Liparis.
Also the name of a way, of a womanne, the
wyfe of Thelaphus kynge of Misie.



Hieranthemis, the floure of the herbe Ca­
mamele.



Hierapiera, a medycyne to pourge flewme
and cholere.



Herapolis, a citie in Asia.



Hierarchia, the holy gouernaunce or prin­
cipalytie.



Hieri, people beyonde Sauromatas.



Hierobotane, an herbe callyd holy herbe.



Hieroceps, an yle in Cyprus, nere to Paphus.



Hierocomion, a laserhouse.



Hieroduli, ministers in temples & churches.



Hierogliplic&ecedil;, mystical letters or cyphers.



Hieron, uel hiereon, a chappell.



Hierophanta, the declarer of mysteries or
holy scripture.



Hierosolyma, Ierusalem.



Hierotheus, the propre name of a man.



Hila, a small gutte or ars gutte.



Hilaresco, scere, to be mery.



Hilaria plurali,the .viii. calendes of Aprile,
whan the day & nyght haue equall houres.



Hilaris, re, & hilarus, mery, or ioyous.



Hilaritas, tatis, myrthe.



Hilarius, the propre name of a man.



Hilaro, aui, are, to make one mery or ioyous.



Hilarodus, a synger of a wanton and dely­
cate songe.



Hilum, the lyttell blacke, whyche is in the
ende of a beane. It is sometyme taken for
nothynge or nought.



Himera, a ryuer in Sycile, deuided into
two partes, the oone fresshe water, the o­
ther salte.



Hin, a measure of the Iewes, whiche con­
tayned of wyne or water, the weyghte of
xviii. pounde.



Hinnio, iui, ire, to neygh lyke a hors.



Hinnulus, a fawne or hynde calfe.



Hio, aui, are, to gape.



Hippacen, chese made of mares mylke.



Hippaco, aui, are, to fetche breth quyckely.



Hippagium, cariage on horsebacke.



Hippago, ginis, a ferybote.






Hipparchus, the maister of the horses.



Hippeas, a kynde of crabbefyshe.



Hippiades, ymages of womenne on horse­
backe.



Hippias, a philosopher, whiche was expert
in all sciences and craftes.



Hippiatrus, an horse leche.



Hippo, mascul. gen. the name of .ii. cities.



Hippocamp&ecedil;, fyshes lyke horses.



Hippocentaurus, a beaste beynge halfe a
man, halfe an horse.



Hippocomus, an horseskorcer.



Hippocrates, the name of a phisytion moste
excellente.



Hippocrene, a fountayne in Bœotia.



Hippodame, mes, & hippodamia, mi&ecedil;, the
name of a woman.



Hippodamus, a breaker of horses.



Hippodromus, a brode way, wherin many
horses may runne togither.



Hippoglotios, an herbe called Alexander.



Hyppolytus, the sonne of Theseus, who
at the complaynte of Phedra his stepmo­
ther, was pursewed by his father, and he
in a charyot fleynge, was ouerthrowen a­
monge the sharpe stones, and rente all to
pieces. Afterwarde Aesculapius reuyued
hym, and restored hym to helthe. where­
fore he wolde be called Virbius, that is to
saye, twyse a manne, forasmoche as he had
twise lyued.



Hippomachia, tournayenge on horsebacke
and iustynge.



Hippomanes, an herbe, wherof yf horses
done eate, they forthewith rounne madde.
It is also a venomous humour, rounnynge
out of the shappe of a mare, whiche yf a
man happe to receyue inwarde, he shall be
madde. Plinius saythe, that it is a lyttelle
fleshe in the forheed of a colte, whan he is
newe foled, blacke, and as moche as a date,
whiche the mare plucketh awaye with hyr
tethe, as soone as she hath foled: and if any
man do take it away before her, she neuer
after wyll loue hir fole.



Hippomarathron, an herbe lyke fenell, but
hauynge greatter leaues.



Hipponomus, a herde or keper of horses.



Hippopera, a maale or bougette.



Hippopodes, people in the Scythik occean
whiche haue fete lyke horses.



Hippopotamus, a beast lyuyng in the ryuer
of Nyle, hauyng fete lyke an oxe, his back
and mane lyke a hors, & neyeth like a hors,
a wynding tayle, and tusked lyke a boore.



Hipposelinum, an herbe lyke parcely, and
groweth in drye groundes, whereof hor­
ses do gladly eate.



Hippotela, a fole of an asse.



Hippotoxata, an archer on horsebacke.



Hippuris, an herbe called in latine Equisetum,
or cauda equina, in englyshe, horsetayle.



Hir, Hiris, the palme of the hande.



Hira, the gutte, which e is called Ieiunum. 



Hircipilus, a man that is hearie.



Hircosus, a, um, that stynketh lyke a gote.



Hirquitalus, a chylde, whiche passethe the
age of .xiiii. yeres, and begynneth to be
styrred with lecherye.



Hirquitallire, to enter into that age, or apt­
nes to lecherye.



Hircquus, the corner of the eie. also he that
is gogle eyed.



Hir culus, a kynde of spikenarde.



Hir cus, a gote bucke. it is also the ranke sa­
uour, which issueth out of the arme holes.



Hircinus, a, um, gotyshe.



Hirrio, iui, ire, to narre lyke a madde dogge.



Hirsutus, ta, tum, rough.



Hirtus, ta, tum, idem.



Hirudo, inis, a horseleche, or blode sucker.



Hirundo, inis, a swalowe.



Hisciacus, he that gapeth moche.



Hisco, sci, scere, to gape as one doth for slug­
gishenes, after slepe, or for lacke of slepe.
Also it is to proffre to speake, or open the
mouthe to speake.



Hismaelita, a sarasyn.



Hispalis, a citie in Spayne, nowe callydde
Sibyle.



Hispania, a countreye in the weste parte of
Europa callyd Spayne, and was sometyme
callid Iberia, and Hesperia, & is inuyronned
on the fourthe part with the see, callid Mare
mediterraneum, whiche dyuydeth Europa
from Affrica: on the northe parte with the
see called Mare Cantabricum, on the weste
with the great occian see with the moun­
taynes called Pyrenei, and the royalme of
Fraunce. And this countrey is diuided by
Ptholome into thre regions, Bethicam, wher­
in is Granado, Siuyle, Corduba.&c. Lusy­
taniam, wherin is Portugal, Galicia.&c. Tar­
raconensem, wherin is Castyl, Lyons, and
Arragon. At this tyme it conteyneth fyue
relmes, Granado on the south part toward
Affrike, Portugall on the west, Galicia and
Biscay on the north, Arragon on the caste
part, Castyl and Lions in the myddell.



Hispidus, a, um, bristled or rough heared.



Historia, a storye.



Historicus, a writer of stories.



Histrio, onis, a player in enterludes and
stage players.



Histrionicus, ca, cum, pertaining to players.



Histrix, icis, a beaste hauyng sharpe prickes
on his backe, called a porkpine.



Hiulco, aui, are, to make to gape or chinke.






Hiulcus, ca, cum, gapynge, or chynked, as
the grounde is in a great drythe.

 

¶ H Ante O.

HOc, this or that.



Hodie, to daye.



Hododocus, a robber by the hyghe
waye.



Hodœporicum, a boke to carie in iourney,
whic he may be called a iournall.



Hodœporus, a trauayler by the waye.



Holocaustum, proprely the beaste, whiche
hauy nge his bowelles taken out, is layde
hole on the aulter and bourned.



Holographum, a testament all writen with
the hande of the testatour.



Holor, oris, a swanne.



Holoserica uestis, a garment all of sylke.



Holus, alias Homolus, a hylle of Thessaly.



Homeromastix, ticis, the reprocher of Ho­
mere, generally Homeromastices, be taken
for all reprochers, and false correctours
of lerned menne.



Homerus, the poete of all other moste fa­
mous and excellent, who wrate the battaile
betwene the Grekes and Troyanes won­
derfull eloquently: but howe truely, wyse
men may coniect. Also he wrote the trauayle
of the prudent Ulysses. Finally both wor­
kes are worthy to be radde, for the meruai­
lous inuention, and profytable sentences
in them contayned.



Homicida, a murderer, a mankyller.



Homicidium, mourder, or manslaughter.



Homilia, a Sermone.



Homo, a lyuynge creature, hauynge capa­
citie of reason, subiecte to death, a manne,
woman, or chylde.



Homocapnus, a man, whiche sitteth alway
in the smoke, or by the fyre.



Homœosis, a simylitude.



Homogalactos, a foster brother.



Homogenes, of one kynde.



Homoglossus, of the same tonge or langage.



Homoleum, a cappe of the olde facion.



Homologia, a confession, consent or couenant



Homomeria, lykenes in partis or membres



Homonœa, the propre name of a woman,
wherby is signified concorde.



Homonymon, of like name.



Homo trium literarum, signified somtime in mo­
kage a man of a noble linage, bicause noble
men wrate their forenames, their names &
surnames with thre letters, as .P. Cor. Sci­
pio, C. I. Cæs. It is sommetyme taken for a
thefe, bycause in Fur are but thre letters.
Erasmus in
Chiliad.


Homousios, of lyke substaunce.



Homosipyi, they whyche sleepe together
vnder one ruffe.



Honestas, tatis, honestie.



Honesto, aui, are, to rewarde with honour.



Honestus, ta, tum, honeste.



Honor, oris, honos, noris, honour, dignitie,
sometyme beautie, also reuerence, honesty.



Honorarium, a present giuen to ambassadors,
great officers, and iustices at their first com­
myng, or executing of their autorities.



Honorem pr&ecedil;fari, to speake with reuerence,
as whan a thinge shall be spoken, which is
vyle or dishoneste.



Honoraria, playes made at Rome, to the
honour of Bacchus. 



Honorarius, ia, um, pertaining to honour.



Honorificens, honorificentior, honorificen­
tissimus, a, um, vsynge or doinge thynges
honourablye.



Honorifico, aui, are, to do honor, or to honor



Honorificus, ca, cum, that bringeth honour.



Honoro, aui, are, to honour.



Honorus, a, um, that is with honour.



Hopistographi, rolles writen on both sides.



Hora, an howre.



Horæum, sommer honye. It is also a sauce
made of fyshe.



Horarium, the space of an howre.



Horda, a cowe great with calfe.



Hordearius, ia, um, pertaynyng to barley.



Hordeum, barley.



Horestes, the sonne of kyng Agamemnon,
whiche slewe his mother, bycause she con­
spired with Aegisthus her aduouterer, to
slee his father.



Horia, a fyshers bote.



Horizon, tis, a cerkle dyuidynge the halfe
sphere, or ouer part of the firmament, from
the other halfe, where, to our syght, it see­
meth that the heuen toucheth the erthe.



Hormesion, a precious stone of the colour
of fyre.



Horminode, a grene stone, compassed with
a cerkle of the colour of golde.



Hornus, na, um, of this yeres, Hagnus hor­
nus, this yeres lambe. Horn&ecedil; fruges, This
yeres grayne.



Hornotinus, a, um, of one yeres growynge.



Horologium, a dyall or a clocke.



Horomasdes, among the Caldees was na­
med the good god.



Horoscopos, the diligent markynge of the
tyme of the byrthe of a chylde.



Horoscopo, are, to marke the howre.



Horoscopus, that part of the firmament, whi­
che euery houre riseth from the east, astro­
nomers do call it the ascendent.



Horoscopus, pa, um, euery thynge, wherein
howres be marked.



Horrearius, the keper of the barne.






Horreo, rui, ere, whan a man thynketh that
his heare doth ryse, also to quake for cold
or feare. somtime to feare moche.



Horresco, scere, whan a man feleth within
hym great colde or tremblynge to begyn,
as in a feuer, or in a greatte feare: Somme­
tyme to quake.



Horreum, a barne, wherin corne is layde.
Sometyme a store house, wherin any other
thynge is kepte.



Horribilis, le, horrible or terrible.



Horrificus, idem.



Horridulus, tymorous.



Horridus, da, um, rough, also terrible.



Horrifico, aui, are, to make aferde.



Horripilo, aui, are, to be rough.



Horrisonus, na, sonum, hauynge a terryble
sowne or voyce.



Horror, oris, tremblyng for colde or feare,
also horryblenes.



Hortatus, tus, exhortacyon.



Hortensia, the daughter of Hortensius, a
woman moste eloquent.



Hortensius, an excellent oratour of Rome,
of a wonderfull memorie.



Hortor, aris, ari, to exhorte.



Hortus, a knotte gardeyne, or a gardeyne
for pleasure, or an orcharde.



Horula, a lyttell howre.



Hostomaticus, syckely.



Hospes, hospitis, a geste, or mutual frendes
dwellyng in sondry countrays. also a stran­
ger or a man, inhabiting out of the countrey.



Hospita terra, a countrey, wherby a manne
maye peasibly passe.



Hospitalis, le, vsynge a gentyll entertayne­
ment, or gladly receyuynge a straunger.



Hospitor, aris, ari, to receyue frendely in­
to his howse.



Hossimi, they that be borne without nose­
thrylles.



Hostia, an hooste or sacrifice offered to at­
tayne vyctorie of ennemies.



Hosticus, ca, um, hostyle, or ennemye.



Hostilis, le, pertaynynge to an ennemy.



Hostimentum, recompence, one for an other.



Hostio, iui, ire, to recompence, to asswage,
or agate, to offende.



Hostis, an ennemye.



Hostium, a measure of a hundred and for­
ty bushels. Also a doore.



Hostorium, the staffe, wherwith all measu­
res be made euen, a stryke.

 

¶ H Ante V.

HVber, bera, berum, fruitefull, or plen­
tuouse.



Huber, eris, a pappe or vdder.



Hubertas, tatis, plentye.



Hubertim, plentuousely.



Huberrime, very plentuousely.



Hubero, raui, rare, to make plentuouse or
fruitefulle.



Hubertus, ta, tum, aboundant or plentuous.



Huc, hyther.



Huic, to that place. Also to him or her.



Hui, an interiection of scornynge.



Huiusmodi, & huiuscemodi, suche.



Hulula, a shriche owle.



Hululo, aui, are, to howle.



Humanitas, humanitie or nature of man. al­
so doctrine, pertainynge to man.



Humanitus, of men.



Humaniter, gentylly.



Humanus, na, um, gentyll, tractable, cour­
teyse, mercyfull and frendely.



Humecto, aui, are, to make moyste.



Humeo, mui, ere, to be moyste or wette.



Humesco, scere, idem.



Humerus, the shoulder.



Humidus, moyste.



Humigatus, wette.



Humius, le, base, lowe. also simple or pore,
abiecte, vyle.



Humilio, aui, are, to make lowe, poore, or
abiecte.



Humilitas, tatis, basenes, or lowenesse, hu­
militie, whiche as Speusippus defyneth, is
a gentylnesse of the mynde, lackyng wrath
or angre.



Humo, aui, are, to burye, or hyde.



Humor, oris, humour or moysture.



Humus, erthe beynge moyste.



Humi, a lowe on the grounde.



Hunni, people which came out of Scithia,
and inhabyted Hungarye.

 

¶ H Ante Y.

HYacynthus, is a precious stone, of the
colour of fyne golde, whiche beinge
worne in suche wise, that it toucheth
the fleshe agaynst the hart, or the vain, whi­
che comith from the hart into the left hand,
preserueth one from the pestilence. It is
also a purple floure, whiche hath a rounde
roote. some do suppose it to be callyd in en­
glyshe, flowre gentyll.



Hyacinthina, were solempne ceremonyes
done in the nyght.



Hieroni­
mus contra
Iouinianum



Hyapes, seuen sterres, in whose rysynge &
goinge downe it alway rayneth.



Hybrides, halfe wylde.



Hyalargus, a glasyer.



Hyalus, glasse.



Hyalinus, glasye.



Hyberia, a region in Asia, ioyning to Arme­
nie, enuyronned with the mountayns, callid
Caucasi. It is also the olde name of Spayn.



Hyberna, places where men of warre doo
reste them in wynter.






Hybernacula, places prepared to winter in.



Hybernia, Irelande.



Hyberno, aui, are, to make abode in wynter.



Hybernus, na, um, pertayninge to wynter.



Hybernus, a greatte ryuer in Spayne, nigh
to Tarrhacon.



Hyble, uel hybles, a cytie in Sycile, and a
mountayne nygh to it, whiche doth growe
full of tyme: And therfore the hony, whi­
che is there, is of all other moste pleasant.



Hybrida, is a dogge, ingendred betwyxte
a hounde and a mastyue, called a lymmar,
or mongrell.



Hybris, idis, a kynde of hawkes, whyche
seldome is sene in the daye, but seeketh his
pray in the night.



Hydaspes, a great ryuer in Indie.



Hyderon, a disease, whan the skynne is fyl­
led with water.



Hydraulis, an organ player.



Hydra, a water serpent. It was also a mon­
ster, with whom Hercules faught: and as
soone as he had stryken of one heed of the
monster, immediately sprange vp an other.



Hydram secare, to medle with an endelesse
matter, or where after one myschiefe hap­
neth an nother.



Hydria, a water potte.



Hydrolapathon, water dockes.



Hydromantia, diuination in callyng of spi­
rites to appere in water.



Hydromel, water & hony sodden togither.



Hydropota, he that drinketh alway water.



Hydrops, hydropis, the droppesy.



Hydrus, a water serpent.



Hydruntes, a citie in Calabria.



Hyemo, aui, are, to rest in the wynter time.



Hyems, wynter.



Hyena, a beaste lyke a wolfe, whiche hath
a mane ouer all his backe and neck, but the
heares be longer and harder.
Arist. de
Animal.


Hymber, a showre of rayne or hayle.



Hymen, a skynne in the secrete place of a
mayden, whiche whanne she is defloured,
is broken.



Hymenæus, was called the God of ma­
ryage.



Hymera, the name of a ryuer.



Hymettus, a hyll by Athenes, where was
hony of all other moste precyous.



Hymnus, a praise in a songe.



Hyoscyamos, an herbe called henbane.



Hypœpa, a citie, where were meruayllous
fayre women.



Hypætra, an aley in a gardayne, or galerye
without any couerynge.



Hypagogeus, an Instrumente, wherewith
stones are polyshed.



Hypanis, a ryuer in Scythia.



Hypata, a citie of Thessaly.



Hyperaspistes, a protectour, a great shield.



Hyperbaton, a longe dependynge, or su­
perfluous sentence.



Hyperbole, excesse in aduauncynge, orde­
pressynge: As higher than heuen, whyter
than snowe, swyfter than lyghtnynge, slo­
wer than a snayle, warse than the dyuell.



Hyperbolicus, ca, um, excedyng credence.



Hyperborei, people in the northeaste parte
of the worlde.



Hyperthyrum, that whyche is nexte ouer
the browe of a manne. Also somme saye
Hyperthyron, is a transumpte or haunce.



Hypercatalecticum metrum, where aboun­
deth one syllable or two.



Hyperion, the sonne.



Hyphen, where diuers wordes be pronoun­
ced vnder one accent, as quandoquidem, ut­
cunque. &c.



Hypnales, adders, which styngyng a man,
he dyeth slepynge.



Hypocaustum, a hote howse or stewe.



Hypocrisis, false dissimulation, fayned ho­
lynesse.



Hypocrita, an hypocrite.



Hypocondrium, the inwarde parte of the
body aboue the nauil, & vnder the stomake.



Hypodidascalus, an vssher or substytute in
teachynge.



Hypogeum, a place vnder grounde.



Hypomnema, matis, an exposition or comment.



Hypopodion, a foote stoole.



Hypostasis, substaunce. it is also that, whi­
che dothe ryse in vryne, where there is
good digestion, if the resydence be white,
lyght, and rysynge in facion lyke a peare,
the smalle ende vpwarde.



Hypothicos, a lynnen rochette.



Hypothyron, a groundsyll or thresholde.



Hypothyra, seu hypothyrides, the doore, or
rather the place open, where the doore is.



Hypozigia, all drawynge cattell.



Hypsicratea, the wyfe of kynge Mythrida­
tes, whiche folowed hym in al his warres,
beinge armed lyke a knyght.



Hypsipile, a ladye, whyche loued Iason,
and whanne he retourned not at the tyme,
whiche he promysed, she threwe her selfe
into the see.



Hypethra, an alaye to walke in.



Hyrcania, a countrey in Asie.



Hysginum, a colour lyke scarlette.



Hysopus, & hysopum, an herbe callydde
Hysope.



Hysterologia, & hysteron proteron,  a ma­
ner of speakynge, where the laste is sette
before the fyrste, and as it is sayd, the cart
before the horses.










I##sp##A##sp##C##sp##C##sp##H##sp##V##sp##S, one of the
names of Bacchus, cal­
led god of wynes.



Iaceo, cui, cere, to ly. som­
tyme to be. In medio cam­
pus iacer, In the middel
is a feld. also to be deed.
Ille iacet, he is deed. som­
tyme to be contenned or nought set by. Maxi­
mas uero uirtutes iacere necesse est, uoluptate
dominante, Carnal dilectation ruling, nedes
must excellent vertues be nothyng set by.
Salustius.
Lucanus.
Cic. de fi­
nibus.


Iacio, ieci, iacere, to throwe, caste, or shoote,
sometyme to sette or lay. Iacere fundamen­
ta, to laye the foundation.



Iacobus, a propre name.



Iactanter, bostyngely.



Iactantia, booste. Iactatio, idem.



Iactito, taui, tare, to boste often.



Iacto, aui, are, to throwe, to reuolue, or tosse
in the mynde, to vexe, to throwe downe &
beate, to auaunt or glorie, to speake vayn­
ly, to sette forth, to tosse, to caste out.



Iactuose, braggyngly.



Iactura, damage or losse, proprely as whan
a man hath moche goodes in a shyppe, and
by force of tempest, is constrayned to throw
it into the see, leste the shyp shuld perishe.



Iaculatio, iaculamen, & iaculamentum, a shot,
or cast with a darte, or iauelyn.



Iaculo, aui, are, to shoote or caste farre.



Iaculor, aris, idem.



Iaculum, any thynge that maye be shotte or
caste farre, moste commonly a dart or light
iauelyn.



Iaculus, a serpent, that lyeth vnder trees,
and sodaynly with a meruaylous vyolence
perceth any beaste, whiche happeneth to
passe by hym.



Iam, nowe.



Iambus, a fote in meter, whiche hathe the
fyrst syllable short, the other longe.



Iam diu, longe agone.



Iamdudum, now late, but a whyle sens.



Iamiam, euen nowe.



Iam olim, now late.



Iampridem, a lyttell whyle paste, but late.
sometyme forthewith.



Iam tum, fro that tyme.



Ianiculum, a towne not farre from Rome.



Ianira, the daughter of Ocean & Tethis. 



Ianitor, toris, a porter.



Ianthina, violet colour, or purple.



Ianua, a doore or yate.



Ianuarius, the moneth of Ianyuer.



Ianus, some suppose to be Saturne, some to
be Iaphet, one of the sonnes of Noe. Ci­
cero calleth hym the superiour worlde, or
heuen, he was made hauynge two visages,
either bycause the heuen tournynge, the
yere retourneth, where it beganne: orels
bycause it knoweth what is passed, and a­
foreseeth what shall happen. This god, or
rather ydoll, had a temple in Rome, which
in the time of warres was alway open, and
in the tyme of peace was shutte. And ther­
fore whan in stories mencion is made, that
the temple of Ianus was shutte, than is it
to be vnderstande, that the Romaynes had
peace vniuersally.



Iapetus, the father of Prometheus. 



Iapigia, a countrey in the realme of Naples.



Iapix, gis, a wynde, which commeth out of
the partes of Apulia, & is a western winde.



Iason, onis, he whiche firste conquered the
Fleece of golde.



Iaspis, pidis, a stone callyd Iasper.



Iatraleptes, a phisition or surgion, whiche
cureth with oyntmentes.



Iatraleptice, curynge by oyntmentes.

 

¶ I Ante B.

IBerius, a ryuer in Spayne.



Iberia, the auncient name of Spayn, also
an other countrey nye to Armeny.



Iberi, & Iberes, Spanyardes.



Ibi, there.



Ibis, a foule or byrde of Egypte, whych is
high, and hath stiffe legges, and a long byl.
They profytte moche to the countreye in
kyllyng and eating serpentes, whiche oute
of Libia be caried into Egypt, with a sow­
therne wynde. Also it is taken for an en­
uyous person.

 

¶ I Ante C.

ICaria, an yle in the see Icario, whiche
is also called Icaros.



Icarus, the father of the chast Penelo­
pe. There was also an other Icarus, whi­
che was the sonne of Dedalus, who ha­
uinge winges, with his father flewe out of
the yle of Crete: but whan he flewe higher
than his father commanded him, the waxe,
wherwith the fethers of his winges were
glued, being molten with the heate of the
sunne, and the fethers fallynge of, Icarus
was constrayned to fall into the see, which
was afterward callid Mare Icarium. Also Ica­
rus is a mountain in the region of Athenes.



Ichneumon, a beast in Egipte, of the great­
nes of a catte, and is facioned like a mous,
who crepeth into the body of a Cocodryl,
whan he gapeth, & eatinge his bowels, sle­
eth hym. It is also a kynde of waspes.



Ichnographia, an instrumente lyke a com­
passe, wherewith are made the descripcy­
ons of the sonne.






Ichnusa, the yle nowe called Sardinia.



Ichthiocolla, fyshe glewe.



Icthybolus, a fysher.



Icthyophagi, people whiche doo lyue by
eatynge of fyshe.



Icthyopola, a fishmonger, or seller of fishe.



Icthyopolion, a fyshe markette.



Icthyotrophia, a ponde or stewe, wherein
fyshes be fedde.



Ico, ici, icere, ictum, to stryke.



Icona, uel Icon, an ymage.



Iconicus, ca, cum, so paynted or fourmed, that
in euery membre the very similitude is ex­
pressed.



Iconismus, a description.



Iconium, a towne in the countreye of Ca­
padocia, an other in Asie the lasse. it is also
a mans owne image like him selfe.



Icteros, a sycknes called the Iaundise.



Icterus, a byrde called a yelowe hamer.



Ictericus, he that is disesed with the Iandis.



Ictis, idis, a white wesyll, whiche destroy­
eth bee stalles, and eateth the hony.

 

¶ I Ante D.

ID, that. Id quod res est, which is trouth.



Id ætatis, of that age.



Ida, a mountayn, which lieth nigh Troy.



Id&ecedil;i dactili, people called also Corybantes.



Id&ecedil;us, a, um, of the mountayne of Ida.



Idalium, a cytie in the yle of Cypres.



Idalus, a mountayne & a wodde in Cypres.



Idaspes, a famous ryuer, whiche passeth by
Parthia and Inde, wherin is golden gra­
uell, and precious stones.



Idcirco, therfore.



Idea, a fygure conceyued in ymagynation,
as it were a substance perpetuall: and lyke
as of one seale procedeth manye pryntes,
so of one Idea of a manne procedeth many
thousandes of men. and semblably of other
Ideas procedeth thynges innumerable. So
that Ideæ,be as it were eternal examples,
wherby all other thynges be created: and
this is Idea, wherof Plato speaketh.



Idiopathia, the propre passion of a disease.



Idem, the same thynge, or the same man.



Identidem, eftesones, in the same wyse.



Ideo, for that cause.



Idicus, ca, cum, of the mountayne of Ida.



Idiographum, a priuate wrytynge.



Idiograph&ecedil; liter&ecedil;, a priuate letter.



Idioma, matis, a propre forme of speche.



Idiota, Idiotes, a man or woman vnlerned.



Idolatra, a worshypper of idolles.



Idololatria, ydolatrie.



Idolium, a lyttell ydoll.



Idolothysia, offrynges to ydols.



Idolothytum, that which is offred to idols.



Idolum, an ydoll.



Idoneus, ea, eum, apte.



Idula, a shepe that was offred euery Idus
to Iupyter. 



Idum&ecedil;a, a regyon in Syria, ioynynge to E­
gypte, and bordereth vpon Palestina.



Idus, Ides of monethes, whiche do diuide
Nonas from Calendes. 

 

¶ I Ante E.

IEcur, coris, & iecinoris, the lyuer of a man,
or other thynge lyuynge.



Iecusculum, a lyttell lyuer.



Ieiunium, fastynge.



Ieiuno, aui, are, to faste or absteyne.



Ieiunum, the gutte, whiche goth downe to
the fundement.



Ieiunus, he that is fastynge.



Ientaculum, a breakefaste.



Iento, aui, are, to eate meate afore dyner.

 

¶ I Ante G.

IGitur, therfore, from hensforth, after­
warde.



Ignauia, cowardenesse.



Ignauus, a, um, cowarde.



Ignifacio, eci, facere, to sette on fyre.



Ignesco, scere, to sette on fyre, or to be
made fyre.



Ignarium, any thynge, oute of the whyche
fyre may be beaten.



Ignia, certayne fautes, whiche erthen pot­
tes haue in the inealynge.



Igniculi, are certayne prouocations, natu­
rally gyuen to imbrace vertue.



Igniculus, a sperke of fyre.



Ignio, iui, ire, to inflame.



Ignipotens, one of the surnames of Vul­
canus. 



Ignis, the fyre. Sometyme it is taken for
an harlotte.



Ignis sacer, a sore, wherin is an excedynge
inflamation and burninge.



Ignitabulum, a fyre panne.



Igniuomus, he that spytteth fyre: the sonne
is sometyme so called.



Ignobilis, le, vnnoble, vnknowen, foolyshe,
of none estimation.



Ignominis, without renoume.



Ignominia, reproche, infamye.



Ignorabilis, le, vnknowen.



Ignoro, aui, are, to knowe not.



Ignarus, ignorant, without knowlege.



Ignorantia, ignorance, lacke of knowlege,
and is referred to the wyt of the persone.



Ignoratio, lacke to be knowen, and pertai­
neth to the thynge or acte.






Ignosco, noui, noscere, to lerne and knowe
perfectly. Also to forgiue, to haue excused
to knowe not, or be ignoraunt.



Ignotus, vnknowen, also ignorant.

 

¶ I Ante L.

ILa, the leeste porcyon of a thynge, that
may be imagined. Also the stuffynge of
a puddynge, or other lyke thynge.



Ila, or Ilua, an ylande in the Tuscayne see.



Ile, is that whiche is set in the highest part
of a man.



Ileosus, the colycke, and he that hathe the
colycke.



Ileos, the colycke.



Ilex, licis, a tree callyd holy, or holme.



Ilia, the guttes.



Iliacus dolor, the frettynge of the guttes.



Ilias, adis, the warke of Homerus, of the
syege of Troye.



Iliberis, a ditie in the prouince of Narbone.



Iliceus, a, um, of holy or holme.



Iligneus, a, um, idem.



Ilione, the propre name of a daughter of
Priamus. 



Ilioneus, the propre name of a Troyane.



Ilissus, the name of a ryuer in the prouynce
of Athenes.



Ilium, the palais of Priamus. 



Illætabilis, le, without myrthe, or lackynge
myrthe or pleasure.



Illatebro, aui, are, to hyde in corners.



Illaudatus, not worthy to be named.



Ille, he.



Illecebr&ecedil;, thynges dilectable, whiche dra­
weth and allurethe the mynde to imbrace
them, flyckerynge intycementes.



Illecto, aui, are, to drawe pleasantly.



Illex, illegis, lawlesse, also wanton. Illex ocu­
lus, a wanton eie.



Illibatus, ta, tum, vntouched, vntasted.



Illiberaliter, vngentillye, excedyngely ylle,
myscheuously.



Illicet, nowe go to, incontinent.



Illiceo, illicui, cere, to prouoke or styre plea­
sauntlye.



Illectus, ta, tum, plesantly stired or prouoked.



Illicium, a prouocation.



Illico, anon, in the same place.



Illido, lisi, dere, to driue or beate to a thyng.



Illisus, a, um, dryuen or beaten to.



Illineo, iui, ire, to anoynte on.



Illino, iui, ire, to annoynte harde, to spotte
or soyle.



Illix, licis, a prouocation or styringe.



Illuceo, xi, cere, & illucesco, scere, to be light
or cleere.



Illudo, si, ere, to mocke, to hurte in iapyng,
or playenge.



Illuminus, a, um, without lyghte.



Illunis, dark, whan the mone doth not shine



Illustris, famous, clere, noble in renoume.



Illustro, aui, are, to make lyght or cleere, to
make famous or well knowen.



Illuuies, vncleannesse, fylthynesse in manne
or garment.



Illiria, a countrey nowe called Slauonye,
whiche hath on one parte Italy, on an no­
ther part Germany, on the east side Grece,
on the weste the Venyce see.



Illiricus, ca, cum, of Illiria.



Ilus, the kynge of Troyanes sonne, that
buylded Ilium.

 

¶ I Ante M.

IMaginarii, baner bearers, wherin be y­
mages paynted.



Imaginatus, ta, tum, fygured or fourmed
into an ymage.



Imagino, naui, nare, to make ymages, or to
counterfayte.



Imaginor, aris, ari, to imagyne.



Imago, imaginis, an ymage, a symylitude, a
shethe, or case.



Vergilius.



Imaguncula, a lyttell ymage.



Imaus, a mountayne in Iudea.



Imbecillis, le, & imbecillus, a, um, feble.



Imbecillitas, tatis, feblenesse.



Imbellia, cowardyse.



Imbellis, le, vnapte to warres, cowarde, or
weake.



Imber, a showre.



Imberbis, be, beardelesse.



Imbibo, bi, bere, to drynke in.



Imbrex, bricis, a spowte or gutter, oute of
the whiche rayne is conuayed frome the
house. It is sometyme taken for the tyle or
slatte, that lyeth on the house.



Imbricium, the couerynge or eueisynge of
the howse.



Imbrico, to couer with tyle, or other lyke
thynge.



Imbricosus, a, um, full of gutters.



Imbrus, an Ilande of Thrace, and a towne
in the same is so called.



Imbriser, bryngyng showres.



Imbubino, aui, are, to defyle with menstru­
ous flyxe.



Imbulbito, taui, tare, to defyle with chyl­
des dyrte.



Imbuo, bui, buere, to dye clothe or sylke, to
teache.



Imitor, aris, ari, to folowe the exaumple of
an nother.



Immanis, ne, cruell, great, horryble.



Immanitas, tatis, crueltie, greattenes.



Immineo, nui, nere, to procure, to endeuour



Imminuo, nuere, to cutte of.






Imminuere ius, to defalcate or mynyshe the
auctoritie or state of a person.
Salustius in
tom. Catil.


Immissum, layde in to abyde, as a beame of
a house, or other lyke thynge.



Immitto, misi, immittere, to sende in. some­
tyme it sygnifieth to lette growe in length.
Neque barbam immiseris istam, Neither let
this berde growe in length. Respicimus di­
ra illuuies, immissaque barba, we behelde, O
what an horryble fylthynesse and a bearde
growen in lengthe. Also to bryng or sende
on the contrary parte. Hoc futurum esse di­
xerunt, ut post breue tempus immitteret deus
regem, qui expugnaret Iudæos, It shoulde
come to passe sayde they, that god shulde
sende to the contrary parte a kynge, whi­
che shulde vanquyshe the Iewes. Alij Tar­
quinium a Cicerone immissum aiebant, ne
Crassus, suscepto malorum patrocynio rem­
pub. turbaret, Some sayde, that Tarquine
was brought in craftily by Cicero, lest that
Crassus, in takynge on hym the defence of
mysdoers, shulde therby brynge sedicyon
into the weale publyke.
Lucilius
lib.30.
Virg. æne.
lib.3.Lact. li.4.Salustius in
commentarii. Catil.


Immo, but rather, ye rather.



Immolo, aui, are, to offre in sacrifyce.



Immunis, exempt, without office or charge



Imminutas, tatis, fraunches or libertie.



Immunitus, ta, tum, not defended.



Impago, ginis, a tenon, whiche is put into
the mortais, also a pynne, whiche is driuen
into tymber, to make it ioyne and abyde.



Impeccabilis, he that neuer offendeth.



Impedimentum, lette, impediment in war­
res. Impedimenta, is the caryage and tra­
fyke, that goth with the hooste.



Colum.5.
Plautus in
Amphitr.



Impedio, diui, dire, to lette, to staye, or sup­
porte, to defyle.



Impeditus, is proprelye he, that hathe his
fete so bounde, that he can not goo.



Impedo, aui, are, to vndersette.



Impello, puli, pellere, to perswade instantly,
to inforce, to plucke downe, or infeble.



Impulso, aui, are, to perswade often.



Impulsus, perswaded, prouoked, inforced.



Impendeo, di, dere, to hange ouer.



Impendio, very moche, or more.



Impendium, expense, or coste.



Impendo, di, dere, to spende or lay out mo­
ney, to bestowe, to lay out.



Impensa, benefytes.



Impensa, æ, expenses.



Impense, pro ualde. Est impense improbus,
he is a very yll man.



Impensius, excedynge, more greuouse, or
displeasunt.



Impensibilis, without consyderation.



Imperator, the chiefe capitayne in warres,
nowe, the emperour.



Imperiosus, a maisterly manne, rigorous, or
cruell in gouernaunce.



Imperiose, stately, rigorousely.



Imperitabundus, ful of rule, or ruling moch.



Imperitia, lacke of knowlege.



Imperitus, not expert, easy to be deceiued.



Imperito, aui, are, to rule or gouerne.



Imperium, a solemne commaundemente, a
preeminence in gouernance, autoritie royal.



Impero, aui, are, to commaunde.



Imperatum, commaunded.



Impetus, tus, & impes, petis, violence.



Impetigo, ginis, a rynge worme.



Impeto, tiui, tere, to inuade.



Impetrabilis, le, that may be goten by desire.



Impetrasso, petrassi, ere, to gette by desyre
or instaunce.



Impetritus, infyxed, mortaysed, as it were
in a stone.



Impetro, traui, trare, to obtayne by desyre,
or requeste.



Impiatus, not purged of synne.



Impiger, diligent, not slowe, valyant.



Plautus in
capt.
Terent. in
Phor.



Impingo, pêgi, impingere, to hytte oone in
throwynge some thynge at hym. Impinge­
re compedes, to putte on gyues. Dicam tibi,
impingam grandem, I wyll laye a waighty
matter vnto the.



Impinguo, aui, are, to make fatte.



Impius, cruell, hatynge god & good men.



Impietas, pietatis, hatrede of god, crueltie,
wyckednesse.



Impie, wyckedly, cruelly.



Implano, aui, are, to deceyue.



Impleo, eui, ere, to fylle.



Implexus, wounde in.



Plautus.



Implico, caui, are, to wrappe in, to tye faste,
to detayne. Implicat ad speculum caput, she
bounde vp her heed at a glasse.



Implicitus, ta, tum, wrapped or tied fast to­
gyther. Implicitus morbo, attached or de­
tained with syckenes.



Imploro, aui, are, to desyre lamentably.



Impluuia, a cloke to weare in the rayne.



Impluuium, a place in the house, where they
vsed to receyue rayne water. It maye be
englyshed a lowuer.



Impolitia, negligence about the wele publike



Impono, sui, nere, to put one thyng on an o­
ther. also to gyue, to inioyne, to laye to
ones charge.



Imporco, aui, are, to make a balke in earing
of lande.



Importunus, na, um, out of seson, importunate.



Importunitas, tatis, which hath no commo­
ditie of tyme nor of place.



Impos, potis, vnable, without power.



Impostor, oris, he that deceyueth with pro­
mises, or selleth false ware for good.






Imposturam facere, to deceyue in maner a­
foresayde.



Impotens, tentis, he that can not resyste his
appetite or affections. sometyme it is vsur­
ped for puissaunt.



Impotentia, debilitie. sometyme immode­
rate power. also vnabilitie to resyste.



Impr&ecedil;sentia, & impr&ecedil;sentiarum, at this time,
or for this present tyme.



Imprecor, aris, ari, to desyre, to wyshe.



Impressio, ionis, a violent assaulte.



Imprimo, impressi, imprimere, to prynte,
to seale.



Improbus, an yll man, dishonest, obstinate,
wanton, malaperte, wyly, vnsacyable.



Improbitas, bitatis, dishonesty, vnthriftines,
wantonnesse, obstynacy, malapertenes, ra­
ueny, wylynesse.



Improperium, imbraydynge of a defaulte.



Impropero, aui, are, to imbrayde a manne
with some defaute.



Imprudens, imprudentis, vnaware. Also not
circumspecte. sometyme very circumspect.
Vergilius.


Impubes, & impuber, a man chylde before
the age of .xiiii. yeres, a mayden before .xii.



Impudens, shameles.



Impudenter, shamefully, dishonestly, vnad­
uysedly, wantonly.



Impudicus, vnchaste, vncleane in lyuynge.



Impudicitia, vncleannes of lyuynge.



Impune, without damage, without punysh­
ment or griefe, in vayne.



Impunitas, tatis, lacke of punyshement, li­
bertie withoute punysshemente, pardon of
punyshement.



Impurus, impura, purum, dishonest, vile, re­
procheable.



Imputo, taui, tare, to repute or ascribe, to lay
the blame or defaute.



Imputatus, ta, tum, vncutte, or neuer cutte.



Imus, ma, mum, the lowest or most lowe.

 

¶ I Ante N.

IN, sygnifieth in. Also In rempub. toward
the publyke weale. In meam partem, on
or for my part.



In parricidam, agaynst a murderer.



In nauem ingreditur, he went into the shyp.
also it sygnifieth space of tyme. In noctem,
vnto nyght. In lucem, vntyll day. also for.



Vergilius.



In magno munere, for a great rewarde.



In diem addicere, to sel vpon condicon, that
a thynge be done by a day.



In dies singulos, daye by daye.



In horam, for oone houre. In horas, frome
houre to houre.



In manu uel manibus est, It is in his power,
at hande, or easy, or in hande.



In manum dari, to be gyuen a parte or se­
uerally.



In medium afferre, to bryng forthe to a com­
mon vse or commoditie.



In mentem uenire, to come to mynde, or re­
membraunce, to be consydered.



In numerum, in order.



In ordinem ducere uel cogere, to brynge
downe from authoritie, to mynysshe esty­
mation or power.



In posterum, finally, in conclusyon.



In re tua, for thy profyte.



In rem pr&ecedil;sentem uenire, where the landes
in debate cometh in viewe, by the assigne­
ment of Iuges, vnto them whiche be cal­
led viewers, whiche shall see the boundes
and quantitie of the lande in variance.
Budeus.


In spem uenire, to begynne to hope.



In rem pr&ecedil;sentem producere, to brynge the
matter to lyght, to expresse the thing per­
fectelye.
Plinsus in
epist.


In re pr&ecedil;senti, in a playn and euident matter.



Quintil.



In tempore, in season, oportunately.



Inaccessa, an ylande of Egypte, to the whi­
che is no commynge.



Inachus, the fyrste kynge of Argiues.



Inanescere, to be vayne, and of none esty­
mation.



Inanilo quus, a bablar.



Inanimus, ma, um, without sowle.



Inanio, iui, ire, to make emptye.



Inanis, inane, empty, vacaunt, ydell, lyght in
estimation.



Inanitas, & inanitio, emptynes, voydenes.



Inaresco, scere, to drye vp.



Inarime, an yle in the Tuscayne see. Also a
mountayne.



Inaudio, diui, dire, to here.



Inauditus, ta, tum, neuer harde of, straunge
to here.



Inauris, a rynge, or other lyke thynge, han­
gynge at the eare.



Inauro, aui, are, to make ryche.



Inauspicato, vnluckyly.



Inceduus, a, um, vnvsed to be cutte.



Incero, aui, are, to keuer with waxe.



Incalesco, lui, scere, to be or waxe very hot.



Incallidus, symple, without crafte or sub­
tyltie.



Incandesco, dui, descere, to be verye hotte
angrye.



Incanto, taui, tare, to charme.



Incantatio, & incantamentum, a charme.



Incapistro, aui, strare, to halter, or to bynde
with a halter.



Incassum, in vayne.



Incautus, vnware.



Incedo, cessi, cedere, to go or walke, to goo
stately, to enter.






Incendo, di, dere, to inflame, to sette fyre
on a thynge.



Incentio, onis, the sowning of instrumentes.



Incepto, aui, are, to begynne often.



Incerniculum, a rayinge syue, wherin corne
is clensed, or it be ground. also a sarcer.



Incerno, ni, nere, to syfte in.



Incerto, taui, tare, to make doubtefulle, or
vncertayne.



Incertus, ta, tum, vncertayne or doubtfull.



Incesso, ssi, ssere, to make angry, to do disple­
sure to one, to accuse.



Incesto, aui, are, to pollute.



Incestuosus, ht that dothe often pollute.



Incestus, ta, tum, polluted.



Incestus, tus, is lechery committed with one,
whiche is nygh of kynne or aliance to him
that commytteth it. Also it sygnifyeth all
maner of pollucion.
Seruius.


Inchoo, aui, are, to begyn, also to performe.



Incido, di, ere, to cutte, to graue.



Liuius.



Incisa, loste. Spe incisa prius quam prædicta
dies adesset, Hope beinge lost, er euer the
sayd daywas commen.



Incido, di, ere, to happen, to fall sodaynely,
to come by chaunce.



Incile, a gappe or trenche.



Inciles, trenches, to conuay water from a
ryuer, into a medow, or other low ground.



Incilo, aui, are, to blame or reproue.



Incino, ni, nere, to synge, proprely to fayne
a small breste.



Incipio, cœpi, cipere, to begynne.



Incisim, piece meale, gobet meale.



Incisio, onis, incision, or cuttynge.



Incisura, a cutte or garse. Also Incisur&ecedil;, be
the lynes in the palme of the hande.



Incitabulum, incitamen, & incitamentum, a
prouocation.



Incitas, pouertie, necessitie.



Incitega, a thynge wheron great vesselles
of wyne are couched.



Incito, taui, tare, to prouoke.



Inclamo, aui, are, to call for one, to cry oute
on one, rebukefully to call in.



Inclementer, withoute mercye, cruellye,
sharpely.



Inclementia, crueltie, lacke of mercy.



Inclino, aui, are, to inclyne or bowe downe.



Includo, si, ere, to include or shutte in.



Inclytus, ta, tum, glorious, famous.



Incoctile, a potte, wherin meate is sodden.



Plautus in
Pseud.



Incœnatus, not hauyng souped. It incœnatus
cubitum, He goth to bed supperlesse.



Incœnis, without supper.



Incogitabilis, forgetfull, not consyderynge
what he dothe.



Incogitans, vnaduysed.



Incognitus, ta, tum, vnknowen.



Incolatus, dwellyng in a straunge countrey.



Incolo, ui, ere, to dwell in a place.



Incola, he that dwelleth in an other coun­
trey, than where he was born.



Incolumis, hole without syckenes.



Incolumitas, tatis, helthynes.



Incomitatus, being without company alone



Incommodo, aui, are, to hurte.



In commune, equally.



Incompactum, vnioyned, or yll ioyned.



Incomprehensus, not comprehended.



Inconsiliari, to be callyd before the counsell.



Inconcinnus, a, um, vnmete, il proporcionid.



Inconcussus, stable, that can not be shaken.



Inconditus, ta, tum, out of order or facyon,
rude. Also weryshe.



Inconditus, ta, tum, vnmade, vnbuylded.



Incongelabilis, le, that can not be frosen.



Inconsultus, lackynge aduyse, or consyde­
ration, he that wyll not aske counsayle. In­
consultu meo, without my counsayle.



Inconsutilis, without any seame.



Inconsutus, ta, tum, vnsowed.



Inconsyderatus, he that nothing considerith.



Inconsyderate, vnaduysedly.



Incoxo, aui, are, to sytte as women or tay­
lours done without a stoole.



Increatus, neuer created.



Incredibilis, le, incredible, not to be bele­
ued, meruaylous.



Incrementum, increase.



Increpito, aui, are, to blame or rebuke often.



Increpo, pui, pere, uel pare. to sounde or make noyse.
also to rebuke, to prouoke.



Incresco, eui, scere, to growe moch or more.



Incubus, a spyrite, whiche assumynge the
fourme of a man, medleth with womenne.
Also that whiche is called the mare, wher­
with men be oppressed in their slepe.



Incubo, aui, are, to lye in or vpon, to cleaue
to, to sytte ouer a thynge, to syt on egges,
as a henne dothe, to occupie, to possede, to
imbrace, to nouryshe, to dwell in, to care.



Incubatio, & incubitus, lyenge in, syttynge
to hatche egges.



Incudo, donis, he that warketh on an anuil.



Inculco, aui, are, to porre in.



Incultus, a place vnhusbanded or vntilled.



Incumbo, bere, to indeuour, to take in hand,
to happe, to leane vppon, or fall on a thing.



Incumbo ad studia, I gyue my mynde to a
thynge, I applye me.



Incunabulum, a cradell.



Incuria, neglygence, yll husbandrye.



Incurro, rere, to rounne agaynste oone, to
rounne in.



Incursus, & incursio, inuasion of enemies.



Incuruesco, scere  to bow down, or be crokid



Incuruo, aui, are, to make croked.






Incuruus, a, um, croked.



Incus, cudis, an andeuyle.



Incuso, aui, are, to accuse.



Incutio, cussi, cutere, to throwe in.



Indago, aui, are, to seke or serche.



Indago, ginis, serche.



Inde, from thens, there, from thensforthe.



Indecor, coris, not regarded.



Indecorum, vnhoneste.



Indefensus, without defence.



Indefinitus, ta, tum, not determyned or dis­
cussed.



Salustius in
Iugurth.



Indemnatus, he that is condempned with­
oute makynge aunswere.



Indemnis, without hurt or harme, defendid.



Indeprecabilis, he that wol not be intreatid
or wyll not forgyue. Pæna indeprecabilis,
punyshement without remission.



Index, dicis, he that accuseth or appeacheth
an other man. Also he that for to escape pu­
nyshement, or for some rewarde, disclosith
the conspiracie, wherevnto he was made
priuie. It is also the forefinger, and a touch
stone to trie golde, also the table of a boke,
whereby certayne chapyters or notes be
founden.



India, the countrey called Indie.



Indicatio, estimation or valuation.



Indicatura, idem.



Indicatus, idem.



Indicium, & indicina, a detection or ac­
cusation.



Indico, caui, care, to disclose, to manyfeste,&
make openly knowen, to demonstrate, to
accuse, to sette or tell the price, to delyuer
in possession that whiche is bought.



Indico, indixi, indicere, to denounce or de­
clare solemnely, and for a greate cause. As
battayle, fastynges, funeralles, counsayls,
triumphes, and other great thinges. Also
to sette a tribute or taxe, and to appoynte.



Indictio, the space of .xv. yeres.



Indictiuus, ua, um, that whiche is declared
or appoynted.



Indictus, dicta, tum, declared or denounced
solempnely.



Indicta causa, the cause or matter not kno­
wen, declared or defended.



Indidem, from thens, forthwith, the same.



Ti. Liuius



Indies, dayly, from daye to daye. Crescente
indies multitudine, The multitude or noum­
bre dayly increasynge.



Indigena, of the same countreye or towne
borne and bredde.



Indigeo, gui, gere, to lacke.



Indigentia, nede or necessitie.



Indigeste, inordinately.



Indigestio, yll digestion.



Indigetes, goddis made of mortall menne,
some take them for priuate goddis, pertai­
nyng to particular places.



Indigitamenta, bokes contaynyng the na­
mes of goddis, and the mistycal sygnifica­
tion of them.



Indigito, taui, tare, to name, or cal by name.



Indignor, aris, ari, to disdayne.



Indignus, vnworthy, myserable.



Indigus, nedy, or lackynge.



Indipisco, sci, scere, & indipiscor, sceris, sci, to
optayne, to vsurpe.



Indiscriminatim, indifferently, withoute di­
uersytie.



Indifertus, without eloquence.



Indiuidium, that maye not be dyuyded or
separate.



Indo, indidi, indere, to sette, or name. Also
to prynte.



Indocilis, a dullarde, that can not be taught.



Indoctus, vnlerned.



Indolentia, lacke of peyne. Indoloria, idem.



Indoles, towardenes, & disposition to ver­
tue, in chylderne, In men, token of vertue.
Also very nobilitie, or honour, aptenesse to
good or euyll.



Indomabilis, le, that may not be made tame.



Indomitus, wylde, vnbroken.



Indubitatus, ta, tum, vndoubted.



Induti&ecedil;, truce, or peace for a certayn tyme.



Induco, xi, cere, to induce, to bryng in, to per­
suade, to illure, to incline, to deceiue, to can­
celle, to defete, to put on, proprely hosen or
shoen, to infix or stablish. Ita induxi in animum,
I haue infyxed or stablyshed in my mynde.



Inductio, a fourme of argument, proceding
from the particulars vnto the vniuersalles.
Also an argument, whyche by gettyng the
assent in thinges not doubtfull, proueth the
thynge, whiche is intended.



Indulco, caui, care, & indulcoro, aui, are, to 
make swete.



Indulgeo, dulsi, gere, to graunte lyghtly, to
consent to a request, to pardon. Indulge ua­
letudini tu&ecedil;, Take hede to thy helth. Nimium
illi indulges, Thou carist to moche for him.
Also it is to gyue respite, to be gentyll and
mercyfull.
Ci. Tyr.
Ter. Heau.


Indulgentia, & indulgitas, gentylnes in suf­
ferance, also mercy.



Indumentum, a garment.



Induo, dui, ere, to put on a garment, or other
lyke thynge, to transfourme, or translate,
to caste in, to annoynte.



Induperator, oris, an emperour.



Indus, a great ryuer in Inde.



Indusium, a petycote.



Indusiarius, a maker of petycotes.



Indusiatus, cladde in a petycote.



Industria, a vertue comprehendynge bothe




study and diligence, industrie.



Industrius, he that is wytty and actyue.



Induuiæ, apparayle.



Inebrior, briaris, ari, to make dronke, or be
dronken.



Inedia, hunger.



Ineffigiatus, ta, tum, vnfacyoned, withoute
good proporcyon.



Ineo, iui, ire, to begyn, to go in, to deserue,
to gette, to wynne, to optayne, to treate.



Inire fœdus, to make a leage or treatie
of peace.



Inire pacem, to make peace. Inire bellum, to
make warre. Inire uiam, to fynde the way.
AlsoInire, is to leape, as a horse doth on a
mare. Inire fugam, to flee, as men do in ba­
tayle, to consyder, to vnderstande.



Initor, oris, a stalyon.



Ineptio, iui, ire, to tryfle.



Ineptus, ta, tum, vnapte.



Ineptus, a tryflar, vsyng nothyng in order,
vnapte to the purpose.



Inermis, vnarmed, a man yolden.



Iners, inertis, without any science or craft,
an ydell persone, also vnprofitable.



Inertia, lacke of crafte, ydelnes.



Inerticula, a vyne, wherof the wyne is soo
good, that none euyll procedeth therof.



Inesco, sci, scere, to cramme or feede. Also
to deceyue.



Ineuitabilis, le, that can not be eschewed.



Inexercitus, ta, tum, not exercysed, vnoc­
cupyed.



Inexplorato, without serche.



Inexputabilis, le, that may not be numbred.



Inextricabilis, le, that can not be shaken of,
or dissolued.



Infabre, vnkunningly, vncraftily, yl fauored.



Infamia, infamye.



Infamis, me, infamed. Infamis digitus, the
myddel fynger.



Infamo, aui, are, to infame, or yll report.



Infandum, that may not be spoken.



Infans, a chylde that can not yet speake. it
is also euery thyng that is very yong. Also
it signifieth not eloquent, somtime an ideot
that can not speake.



Infantia, chyldehode, also folyshenes.



Infantilis, le, pertaynynge to chyldehode.



Infarcio, cii, & ciui, cire, to infarce or stuffe,
or fylle.



Infatuo, aui, are, to make foolyshe.



Infector, ctoris, a dyar, that dyeth clothe,
wolle, or sylke.



Infectus, ta, tum, infected, dyed, stayned,
poysoned. Also vndoone, or not doone, not
made.



Infectus, tus, dyenge, or staynynge.



Infensus, displeased, moued with angre or
hate towarde an other. Also he that bea­
reth malyce.



Inferiæ, sacrifice done to infernall goddis.



Infernalis, le, infernall.



Infernus, helle.



Infernus, na, num, lowe.



Infernas, atis, the lowe.



Inferne, alo we, or benethe.



Infero, intuli, inferre, to brynge in, to throw
in, to adde to, to cast in, to conclude. Inferre
arma, to make warre. Stuprum inferre, to com­
mytte aduoutry or fornication with a kyns­
womanne.



Inferus, ra, rum, where nothynge is lower.



Infesta signa, standerdes or baners displayd
in battayle on bothe partes.



Infestiuus, ua, um, vnmete for disporte.



Infesto, aui, are, to do displeasure with son­
dry incursions or rodes.



Infestum mare, the see occupied with pyra­
tes and robbers.



Infestus, a mortall ennemye.



Infestus, ta, tum, that standethe agaynste a
man, to the intent to indamage hym.



Infibulo, aui, are, to claspe to gyther.



Inficias ire, to doubte or denye.



Inficiator, oris, he that denyeth.



Infici, feci, ficere, to dye clothe, to stayne or
infecte.



Inficior, aris, ari, to denie, or disafferme.



Infidus, da, dum, vnfaythefulle.



Infimates, the base people.



Infimo, aui, are, to brynge lowe.



Infimus, a, um, the lowest or moste base.



Infirmo, aui, are, to make weake.



Infirmus, ma, um, vnstable, sycke, feble.



Infirmitas, tatis, vnstablenes, weakenesse,
syckenes.



Inflammo, aui, are, to inflame or set on fire.



Infligo, xi, gere, pœnam  aut opprobrium, to
punyshe or rebuke.



Informo, aui, are, to shape or fourme, to en­
forme or teache good maners.



Inforo, aui, are, to declare at the barre in a
place of iugement, to pleade . also to per­
forate or make a hole.



Infortunium, yll chaunce.



Infra, within, bynethe: In numbre it signi­
fieth lasse or fewer.



Infractio, slowthfulnesse.



Infractus, ta, tum, vnbroken, sure, Infractus
animi, styffe of courage. sometyme it signi­
fieth discouraged.



Infrendo, di, dere, to crasshe the teethe for
angre.



Infrendes, chylderne lackynge teethe.



Infringo, infregi, gere, to breake to pieces.



Infrunitus, a foole, that knoweth not howe
to vse a thynge.






Infulæ, be the labelles, whiche do hang on
euery syde of a mytar. It was in the olde
tyme the attyre that priestes dyd weare on
their heedes. They were also tapettes of
linen, wherwith temples were hanged.



Infumibulum, the shank or tonel of a chimney.



Infumo, aui, are, to drye in the smoke.



Infundibulum, a tounnell, whereinto licour
is poured, whan vessels are fylled.



Infundo, infudi, infundere, to poure in.



Infurnibulum, a piele, wherwith breadde is
put into the ouen.



Ingemo, gemui, ere, to lament or bewayle
moche.



Ingeniculor, aris, ari, to bowe the knee, or
make courtesye.



Ingenium, the propre nature of a thynge.
Also wytte.



Ingeniosus, wyttye.



Ingens, tis, wonderfull great.



Ingenuatus, comme of an honeste stocke
or kynrede.



Ingenuus, a free man borne, or a gentylman.



Ingenuitas, tatis, freedome.



Ingenuus, a, um, naturall.



Ingenue, freely, frankely.



Ingero, gessi, gerere, to bryng in, to myxt.



Ingitas, tatis, pouertie.



Inglorius, ria, um, of no renome or fame.



Ingluuies, gluttonie. Also the cray or gorge
in byrdes.



Ingrandesco, sci, scere, to waxe greate.



Ingratis, agaynst my wyll, or our wylle.



Ingrauesco, sci, scere, to ouercharge.



Ingredior, eris, gredi, to entre.



Ingruo, ui, ere, to inuade, to be imminent, pro­
prely spoken of battayle or tempest.



Inguina, the pryuie membres of menne and
womenne.



Inguinaria, an herbe which cureth the dis­
eases in pryuie membres.



Ingurgito, aui, are, to deuoure gluttonously.



Inhæreo, to cleaue or stycke to.



Inhæresco, sci, scere, to stycke faste.
 


Inhalo, aui, are, to drawe in brethe.



Inhibeo, bui, bere, to forbydde.



Inhio, aui, are, to gape. also to couete moch.



Inhonor, withoute honour.



Inhorreo, rui, rere, Inhorresco, scere, to ab­
horre, to quake for feare.



Inhumanus, cruell, vncourteyse.



Inibi, euen there, anon, amonge them.



Iniicio, inieci, iniicere, to caste or throwe in,
to cast at some thynge, to throwe with vio­
lence, to putte on.



Iniicere manum, to sease or take possessyon
of a thynge. Manus iniectio, a seaser of
lande.



Inimicitia, hostilitie, contrarye to amytie.



Inimico, caui, care, to make enemies.



Inimcor, caris, cari, to practise hostilitie.



Inimicus, an ennemye.



Ininde, from thens.



Iniquus, a, um, not euen or playne. Also not
indifferent or iuste, sometyme great, strait,
or narrowe.



Iniquitas, tatis, parcialite, contrary to iustice.



Initio, aui, are, to instructe in thynges con­
cernynge relygion. Initiatus, instructed or
entred in rules concerning religion. also to
begyn to do a thynge.



Initior, aris, ari, to begynne: also to be wea­
ned, as chylderne be.



Initium, a beginnyng, a sacrifice to Ceres.



Inito, aui, are, to walke in.



Iniuges, catell neuer yoked or broken, whi­
che were sometyme sacrificed.



Iniungo, xi, gere, to inioyne, to appoynt, to
lay on, as a man wil adde to a great burdein.



Iniuria, wronge, iniurie, reproche, damage.
Taken like an aduerbe, it signifyeth, with­
out cause, without deserte.



Iniuriosus, a wronge doer.



Iniurius, a, um, wrongfull, he that doth any
thynge agaynst the lawe.



Innitor, teris, inniti, to assaye, to indeuour.



Innato, aui, are, to swymme in a place.



Innocuus, a, um, vnharmefull, he that doth
none harme.



Innotesco, sci, scere, to be knowen.



Innoxius, a, um, wherin is no damage, that
whiche can do none harme.



Innumerato, in a redynesse.



Innuo, nui, ere, to graunt or assent with nod­
dynge of the heed.



Ino, the name of Cadmus daughter, the
wyfe of Athamas kynge of Thebans.



Inocco, aui, are, to harowe in.



Inoculo, aui, are, to greffe.



Inodorus, without sauoure.



Inolesco, sci, scere, to waxe greate.



Inopiosus, a, um, needye.



Inops, pis, poore, lackynge helpe. Also vn­
buryed.



Inora, beastes without mouthes.



In posterum, at the laste, in conclusyon.



Inprimis, specially, principally, chiefly.



Inquies, quietis, & inquietus, ta, tum, vn­
restefull, vnquyete.



Inquieto, aui, are, to vnquyete or trouble.



Inquilino, inquilinaui, quilinare, to dwell in a
straunge place.



Inquilinus, he that dwelleth in a place,
where neither he, nor his auncetoures
were borne.



Inquino, aui, are, to defyle or polute.



Inquio, I saye.



Inquiro, siui, quirere, to inquyre.






Inquisitius, more intentifely, more inwardly



Insanio, iui, ire, to be madde or peuysshe, to
dote, to do vnaduisedly.



Insanus, madde, peuyshe, doting, regarding
no counsell, frowarde, vntractable.



Insania, madnes, peuyshenes, dotage, fro­
wardenesse.



Inscitia, ignoraunce.



Inscius, a, um, ignoraunt.



Inscienter, ignorauntly.



Inscribo, scripsi, scribere, to write in or vpon,
to name or intitle.



Ins criptus, a, um, vnwritten, written vpon,
named, or intitled.



Insecta, be all flyes and wormes, that be di­
uided in their bodies, the heed and breaste
from the bealy and tayle, as bees, waspes,
emotes, or pismeres, and suchelyke.



Insequor, eris, sequi, to folowe or pursue.



Insero, serui, rere, insertum, to set in, to ioyn.
whan it hath inseui, insitum, it sygnyfyeth to
greffe.



Inserto, aui, are, to sette to.



Insertorium, the bond or thonge, wherwith
a tergat or buckeler is hanged on a mans
arme.



Inseruio, uiui, ire, to serue.



Insideo, es, sedi, sidere, to sytte on, to sytte
in, or be in, to besiege, to abyde in a place.



Insidiæ, wiles to intrap a man, er he be ware.



Insidior, aris, ari, to practyse wyles, to in­
trappe or betray a man.



Insidiosus, a, um, full of wyles.



Insidiose, wylyly, craftily.



Insido, is, sidi, re, to entre to thintent to abide.



Insignia, signes or tokens of honour, wher­
by euery astate or great auctoritie is kno­
wen, as robes, maces, swordes borne vp­
right, cappes of mayntenaunce, and other
lyke thynges. Also somtyme tokens of do­
ctrine and vertue: as staues typped with
syluer, which bedels bere before doctors,
hodes furred, crownes of laurell. &c.



Insignio, iui, ire, to note with somme sygne.
Also to doubbe knyghtes.



Insignis, ne, notable, excellent, marked with
some speciall token to be knowen.



Insigne, a notable signe or token.



Insignite, & insigniter, notably.



Insilio, liui, ire, to leape in or vp.



Insimul, togyther.



Insimulo, aui, are, to accuse or appeale, also
to fayne or dissemble.



Insimulatio, an accusation or appeale.



Insinuatus, a, um, wounde togither.



Insinuo, aui, are, to bringe into, to conioyne,
to put in a mans mynd couertly & craftily.



Insinuatio, a colourable & crafty beginning
of an oration, dissembling som thing, where
the matter may not be fauorably herde.



Insipidus, a, um, vnsauerye.



Insipiens, entis, without discretion.



Insisto, institi, insistere, to set fast and fyrme­
ly, to indeuour, to prouoke or solicite. som­
time to assyst.



Insitio, onis, greffyng.



Insititium, the stocke.



Insitium, the greffe. Also a iegot or other
lyke meate stuffed with flesshe and egges
chopped or mynced.



Insitiuus, ua, uum, infarcyd or stuffed.



Insolens, not wont or accustomed, haut, ar­
rogant, presumptuous.



Insolentia, seldomnes of vse in any thynge,
vnhauntynge of a place. Also presumption
wanton pride.



Insolitus, not wont.



Insolo, aui, are, to drie in the sonne, to blech.



Insolatus, a, um, sunned. Insolatio, a sonnyng.



Insomnia, æ, lacke of powar to slepe.



Insomnium, a vayne dreame.



Insomnes noctes, nyghtes without slepe.



Insomniosus, slepy, or he that slepith moch.



Insons, insontis, innocent, or not gyltie.



Insonus, a, um, without noyse.



Inspectius, more aduysedly.



Inspecto, taui, tare, to beholde attentiuely,
to wayte on.



Inspicio, spexi, cere, to beholde, to ouersee,
to controll, to consyder a thing throughly.



Inspectio, a beholdynge, an ouersyghte, a
controllemente.



Cicero.
Ti. Liuius.



Inspector, an ouerseer, a controller.



Inspicio, aui, are, to make a thyng smalle, like
to a wheate reede.



Inspiro, aui, are, to inspire, to blowe in.



Instans, tis, an instant, the least part of time.



Instantia, thinges that be present.



Instanter, instantly. Instantia, diligence.


Instar, as it were or lyke.



Instatio, the instant tyme.



Instauro, aui, are, to new make, or begin any
thing. somtime to renue or reform, to reedify



Instat, it is nigh, it is com, it is at hand. C&ecedil;sar
ubi se diutius duci intellexit, et diem instare, qua
die frumentum militibus metiri oportebat,
whan Cesar perceiued that he was delayed,&
the day was nigh come, whan he muste ne­
des delyuer corne to his men of warre.



Insterno, straui, sternere, to couer, to sprede.



Instrara, trappers of horses.



Instratum, a counterpoynt. also it signifieth all
tapisry, which serueth to couer any thing.



Instigo, inxi, gere, to meue inwardely.



Instinctus, inwardly meued.



Instigo, aui, are, to stere or pricke forwarde.



Instita, a purfyll.



Instito, aui, are, to repugne, or withstande.



Institor, oris, a chapman, a mercer, also he
that selleth apparayle and fyne stuffe, go­
inge about therwith.



Institorius, ia, ium, pertaynyng to chapman.






Instituo, tui, tuere, to institute, to begynne, to
instructe or teache, to ordayne.



Institutiones, instructions in doctrine.



Instituta, ancient maners & customs, also or­
dinances. Pro meo instituto, for my purpose.



Insto, as, institi, instare, to require instantely,
to solicite, to stycke to, to resiste, to persist,
to prease on, to come on, or immediatly fo­
lowe. Instat, it is nowe.



Instratum, the trappier or apparayle of an
horse, a horseclothe.



Instrumentum, an instrument or toole. Also
ordinance of warre, vessell and all necessa­
ries of householde and husbandry. some­
tyme it signifieth a dede or charter, concer­
nyng lande dettes or couenantes.



Instruo, xi, struere, to sette in order or aray,
to instructe, to fournyshe, to prepare.



Insubres, lumbardes, proprely menne of the
duchy of Melayne.



Insucco, aui, are, to soke in lycour.



Insuesco, sueui, scere, to be wonte.



Insuetus, ta, tum, not vsed.



Insula, an ile inuironned with water. It is al­
so a hous in a town, hauing none other hous
ioyned to it, but stretes on euery syde of it.



Insularis, re, belongyng to an yle.



Insularius, a, um, mooste vyle, proprely men
banyshed into Iles to dygge mettall.



Insulatus, ta, tum, made an yle.



Insulto, taui, tare, to leape vppe, to scorne or
speake in the reproche of a man.



Insultura, a leapynge vp or into a thyng.



Insum, inesse, to be in some thynge.



In summa, vniuersally, alway, fynally.



Insummo, are, to fynyshe.



Insumo, psi, ere, to spende or lay out money.



Insuper, furthermore, moreouer.



Insusurro, aui, are, to whisper in ones eare.



Integer, gra, grum, yf it be spoken of age, it
signifieth yong & lusty: if it be spoken of a man
it signifieth honest in al poyntes & qualites,
in a thynge it sygnyfyeth entier or hoole.



Integer æui, lustye of age.



Integrasco, sci, scere, to be renewed.



Integro, aui, are, to begyn agayn, to renewe.



Integrum mihi est, It is in my power, or at
my pleasure, at myne arbiterment.



Intellectus, vnderstandynge.



Intellectualis, of vnderstandynge.



Intelligibile, that maye be vnderstande.



Intelligo, lexi, ligere, to vnderstande.



Intelligentia, the perceyuyng of the minde.



Intemerata, perfecte sacryfyces, all thyn­
ges obserued.



Intemperiæ, goddesses, hauynge power to
doo harme.



Intemperies, & intemperantia, vntemperatnes.



Intempesta nox, mydnyght, whan all thing
is in sylence.



Salustius in
Iugurth.



Intempestas, tatis, the caulme of the water,
whan there is no tempeste.



Intempestiuus, ua, um, thinge out of tyme or
season. Intempestiue, vntymely.



Intendo, di, dere, to bende or stretche. Also
to loke diligently on a thynge, to knytte or
tie, to inforce with myght.



Intendere animum, to set or fixe the mynde.



In tenebris saltare, signifieth to do a thynge
vnaduisedly, and without any iugement.



Intentatus, not assayed.



Intentio, signifyeth not intente or purpose,
but for the act that is apointed or executid.



Intento, aui, are, to menace.



Intentus, ta, tum, sette or fyxed.



Inter, betwene, amonge.



Inter sacrum et faxum, in the poynte to pe­
ryshe and be vtterly loste.



Interamna, a citie in Italye.



Interaneus, a, um, that whiche is within.



Interanea, the inwardes of man or beast.



Interaresco, sci, scere, to be dried vp.



Interbibo, bi, bere, to drynke all out.



Intercalaris, re, & intercalarius, a, um, put or
set betwene. Intercalaris dies, the daye of
the leape yere.



Intercalo, aui, are, to set or put betwene.



Intercalaris mensis, the moneth, in the whi­
che certayne dayes were sette, that lacked
to make the yere complete, whych moneth
is Februarye.



Intercalaris uersus, a syngular verse, often
repeted amonge other verses. Some doo
callit, in englyshe balades and songes, the
foote or refrette of a ditie.



Intercapedo, dinis, a space or pawse.



Intercedo, cessi, cedere, to make intercession.
also to go betwene, or be betwene.



Intercedit mihi tecum amicitia, There is a­
mite betwene the and me. Tribuni interces­
serunt, The trubunes dyd let or prohibite.



Intercessio Tribunorum, a let or prohibition
of the Tribunes agaynst the auctoritie of
other offycers.



Intercido, cidi, re, to cut asonder in themiddis.



Vide Cale
pinum.



Intercisa & porrecta,cut of & made longer.



Intercido, cidi, ere, to decaye or perisshe be­
twene this and that.



Intercino, nere, to synge betwene or in the
myddell of a thynge.



Intercipio, cæpi, ere, to preuent or apprehend
one vnware, to take in the middes, or in the
meane while, sometyme to take all.



Intercisi dies, were dayes diuided, part ho­
ly day, parte warkedaye.



Intercludo, si, ere, to shut in, to stoppe, to let.



Intercolumnium, the space betwene pilars.



Intercus, cutis, a disease betwene the skinne




and the fleshe: whan it is an adiectiue it si­
gnifieth inwarde. Intercutibus uitiis maden­
tes, ouerwette with inwarde vices.



Intercutaneus, ea, eum, that is within the skin.



Interdico, xi, cere, to prohibite greuousely:
also to resyste or lette.



Interdictum, a prohibition.



Interdiu, in the day tyme.



Interdum, sometyme.



Interea, in the meane while. also neuer the
lesse. Interea loci, in the meane space.



Intereo, rii, ire, to dye vtterly.



Interitus, deathe.



Interequito, aui, are, to ryde betwene.



Interest mea, tua, sua, nostra, uestra, it beho­
ueth me, the, nim, vs, you, or it pertaineth to
me, the, hym .&c. also it maketh matter, or is
a diuersitie. Nihil interest tui, It is no matter
to the. Si nihil interest regis, peto ut dum di­
co, uinculis liberer, If it be noo mattier to
the kyng, I pray you, whiles I do speake,
lette me be without gyues. Sometime it si­
gnifieth to be in the myddes.



Interfœmineum, a womans priuy token, wher­
by she is knowen from a man.



Interficio, feci, to slee.



Interfluo, xi, ere, to flowe betwene.



Interfundo, fudi, fundere, to poure betwene.



Intergerimus, a wall added toan olde foun­
dation or walle, to sustayne it.



Interhæc, in this meane tyme.



Interi, they that be within.



Interiaceo, cui, cere, to put betwene, to cast
betwene.



Interibi, in the myddell of that place.



Interiectum tempus, the meane tyme.



Interiicio, ieci, iicere, to laye or put betwene.



Interim, in the mean space or time, in the mean
season. also sometime, sodainly, otherwhile.



Interimo, emi, imere, to kylle.



Interior, & interius, the inner.



Interiungo, ere, to tarie.



Interlino, inere, to enterline.



Interloquor, eris, qui, to speke in a mans tale.



Interluceo, lucere, to shyne betwene, or in
the myddes.



Interluco, care, to make a glade in the myd­
dell of a wodde.



Interlunium, the space of tyme, in the whiche
neither the olde mone doth appere, nor the
newe moone is seene.



Interluo, ere, to flowe betwene, to wasshe
betwene meales, or other actes.



Intermedius, a, um, in the middell.



Ci. de ora.



Intermestris luna, the newe mone at the ve­
ry chaunge.



Intermestrum, the tyme whan the moone is
at the poynt to chaunge.



Intermico, to shyne in the myddes.



Interminor, aris, ari, to threten sore.



Intermitto, tere, to leaue or put of for a time.



Intermorior, to dye vtterly.



Intermortuus, a, um, deed for a season.



Interneco, are, to slee all at ones.



Internectiuum bellum, warre to vtter distru­
ction or dethe.



Internecio, a vniuersall slaughter.



Internicinum bellum, warre to the vtterance.



Internodium, a ioynt in a mans fynger. also
a ioynt in a strawe or rede.



Internosco, noscere, to knowe a thynge a­
monge other thynges.



Internuncius, a messager, or meane betwene
two persons being at variance.



Internus, a, num, that whiche is within, or in­
ward.



Inter opus, euen in the doinge.



Interordinium, a space betwene that which is
in order. Interordo, dinis, idem.



Interpello, are, to interrupt or lette one that
speaketh or dothe any thynge, also to re­
quire, to aske or demaunde.



Interpensiua, certayne pieces of tymber,
whiche are sette frome the corners of the
walle, to the endes of the rafters, to con­
uaye rayne water into the spoutes.



Interpensiui parietes, walles, which rise vp­
pon an other walle, and haue no fundacion
in the grounde.



Interpola, newe inuentions, or deuyses.



Interpolo, are, to putte or sette betwene, to
renewe or refreshe any thynge.



Interpolator, oris, & interpolatrix, tricis, he
or she that refresheth olde thynges, and do
make them seme newe.



Interpolis, le, interpolus, la, um, renewed,
refreshed.



Interpono, sui, nere, to put betwene.



Interponere fidem publicam, to promise vpon
the credence & consent of all the people.
Salustius in
Iugurth.


Interpremo, to stoppe or close in.



Interpres, pretis, an interpretour or transla­
tour. Also a styckler betwene two, whiche
are at varyaunce.



Interpretamentum, & interpretatio, an inter­
pretation or translation.



Interpretor, aris, ari, to interprete, expoune,
or translate.



Interputo, are, to cutte betwene.



Interrasile, that whiche is playne betwyxte
two partes grauen or imbosed.



Interrex, regis, he that ruleth in the meane
ryme, betwene the cessynge of the auctori­
tie of one principall gouernour, by deth or
otherwise, vntylle an other be elected into
the same offyce.



Interregnum, the saide meane tyme of go­
uernaunce or rule.



Interrogo, are, to demaunde a question.






Interrogati legibus, to be tried by examina­
tion, that they had offended against the lawis.
Salustius in
Catalinar.
Cic. in Pr&ecedil;
tura urba.


Interrumpo, rupi, pere, to breke in the middes.



Interscalmia, the spaces betwene the oores
in a bote or galey.



Interscapilium, the space betwene the shul­
ders vnder the necke.



Interscindo, di, scindere, to cut in the middis.



Intersepio, sepsi, pire, to diuide in the middel
with some inclosure.



Intersepta, the gristell, which maketh par­
ticion betwene the nosethrilles.



Intersero, seui, serere, to sowe or set betwene
or in the myddes.



Intersono, are, to make noyse in the middes
or betwene.



Interspiro, are, to spring vp in the middes.



Intersterno, to strawe betwene, or throwe
thynges betwene.



Interstitium, a distance or space betwene.



Intersum, interesse, to be present. also to dif­
fer, to be diuers. Stulto intelligens quid inter­
est? What diuersitie is there betwene a fole
and a wise man?



Intertextus, a, um, wouen or wrought betwene.
or tinselde, as cloth of tinsyl, or bawdekyn.



Intertrigo, ginis, gallynge, whiche hapneth
by the occasion of sweate betwene the leg­
ges, the toes, or fyngers.



Intertrimentum, & intertritura, the losse of
bothe partes, or on bothe sydes.



Interturbo, are, to trouble excedyngly.



Interuaco, are, to be vacant or void betwene



Interuallum, a space betwene.



Interuello, ere, to plucke vp here & there.



Interuenio, ire, to come in the meane while,
to be present amonge other.



Interuenium, the space betwene the vaines.



Interuerto, re, to take away craftily or falsly.



Interuiso, ere, to visite among, or now & than.



Interula, a shyrte or smocke.



Intestabilis, he whiche by the law can make
no testament. somtime it signifieth detestable.



Intestatus, he that dyeth without makynge
any testament, intestate. Also he that dieth
makyng none heyre by testament. also a man
out of credence, whome no manne wylle
take for a wytnesse.



Intestina, the bowelles, or inwarde parte of
man, or other thynge lyuynge.



Intestinum bellum, where people do warre
within their owne realme.



Intestinum odium, hate with hart & mynde,
mortall hatrede.



Intestinum opus, the inwarde buyldynge of
tymber and pargette.



Intingo, xi, gere, to depe, as one dothe his
fynger into lycour.



Intorqueo, si, quere, to thrust in by throwing
of a darte, or other lyke thynge. Also to
tourne or wynde in.



Intra, within. Intra modum, lesse thanne a
meane, shorte of a meane.



Intra famam, les than the opinion that men haue.



Interius, more inwarde.



Intimus, moste inwarde, moste secrete.



Intrarius, idem.



Internus, na, num, whiche is within.



Intrico, are, to wrappe.



Intrimentum, damage eyther to the gyuer,
or to the receyuour.



Intrinsecus, within.



Intritus, brayed in a morter.



Intro, into a place.



Intro, are, to entre or goo in.



Introcludo, si, dere, to shutte in.



Introduco, xi, cere, to brynge or leade in.



Introeo, iui, ire, to goo in.



Introgredior, eris, ire, to comme in.



Intromitto, misi, mittere, to lette in.



Introrsus, into, within.



Introrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake in.



Introspicio, spexi, spicere, to loke in.



Introuoco, are, to calle in.



Intueor, eris, eri, to beholde in.



Intus, in a place.



Intusium, a shyrte or smocke.



Intutus, ta, tum, vnsure.



Galenus.
Plinius.
Columel.



Intybum erraticum, cicorie or white endiue.



Inuado, si, re, to inuade, to entre, to apprehend.



Inualesco, lui, scere, to waxe stronge, to be
confyrmed or stablyshed.



Inualidus, da, dum, feeble, weake.



Inualetudo, dinis, feblenesse.



Inuectiue orationes, orations made ageynst
one in reprouyng his maners and lyuynge.



Inueho, uexi, uehere, to carye in a thinge, to
carye a thynge into a place.



Inuehor, eris, uehi, to rebuke one vehement­
ly, and with violent and soore wordes.



Inuenio, ire, to fynde a thing, whiche a man
seeketh for.



In uerba iurare, to be sworne as princis coun­
saylours and seruantes be sworne vnto them.
Also to do feaultie.



In uersum, in numbre and order.



Inuerto, tere, to tourne in, to tourne vppe so
downe, to turne in and out after the vulgar
speche, proprely to turne euery thyng con­
trary to the ryght fourme or facion.



Inuestes, yonge children without heare on
their bodies.



Inuestigo, are, to seke out, to finde in seking.



Inuestigabilis, le, that maye not be founde
with sekynge.



Inuestio, iui, ire, to adorn or garnishe a thing.



Inueterati, olde shrewes or vnthriftes, men
in lyuynge vnthriftily waxed olde.






Inueteresco, raui, scere, to were out for age,
to be oute of vse, to be aged or olde. Also
worne out, almoste consumed.



Inuicem, togither, one the other. Inuicem
diligunt, they do loue one an other. also it
signifieth for thy parte. Habes res urbanas,
inuicem rusticas scribe, Nowe thou knowest
the affaires of the citie, for thy parte write
what is done in the countrey.



Inuidentia, enuy, griefe to beholde or here
that an other man prospereth.



Inuideo, uidi, dere, to haue enuy at an others
prosperitie. Inuideo tibi doctrinam, I haue
enuy at thy lernynge. Also to see inwardly
or through a thynge.



Inuisus, uisa, uisum, hated.



Inuidia, enuy, hatred, yll wyll.



Inuidia facti sui, the displeasure of his acte,
or attemptate, or the dede wherfore he was
enuied and hated.
Salustius in
Iugurth.


Inuidiosa res, a thynge, whiche bredeth en­
uye or hatred.



Inuidiose, enuyousely.



Inuidiosus, an enuyous persone. sometyme
he, whiche is enuied.



Inuidus, he that hath enuye.



Inuigilo, are, to haue watche of a thynge, or
to lay watche, to care.



Inuinius, he that neuer drynketh wyne.



Inuisus, a, um, neuer sene. also hatid or odious.



Inuitatus, boden, as to a feaste or bankette.



Inuito, are, to bydde. also to delyte, to fylle
the bealy.



Inuitus, ta, tum, vnwyllynge, or agaynste a
mannes wylle.



In uniuersum, vniuersally.



Inuius, a, um, lackynge a way, or where no­
thynge can passe.



Inumbro, are, to make shadowe: somtyme it
signifieth to defende.



Inunco, uncare, to catche, as it were with
an hooke.



Inundo, to ouerflowe, or surrounde.



Inundatio, a floudde.



In unguem, to the poynte, perfectly.



Inuoco, care, to calle in, to call for helpe, al­
so not to calle.



Inuolo, are, to steale, to lay violent handes
on one, to flee out.



Inuolucris, a byrde not redy to flee.



Inuolucrum, that whiche is wrapped.



Inuolucre, as a thinge whiche is wrapped
togither.



Inuoluo, uere, to wrappe.



Inuolutus, ta, tum, wrapped.



Inuoluolus, & inuoluola, a worme lyke a can­
ker, whyche is on vynes, and whan he is
taken of, he wrappeth hym selfe rounde
togither.

 

¶ I Ante O.

IO, an interiection, signifieng sometyme
grefe, as in Tibullo. Vror io, O I burne.
Sometyme excessiue gladnesse. as in O­
uidio. Dicite io pæan.



Iochabella, the name of Moyses mother.



Iosephus.



Iocus, plurali ioca, a mery worde, disporte.



Iocor, aris, ari, to speke merily, or in disport.



Iocosus, a, um, & iocularis, lare, mery, sport­
full, prouokynge myrthe.



Ioculus, a lyttell sport or myrthe.



Iolaus, the sonne of Iphiclus, of whom the
people of Sardinia, were named Iolenses.



Iole, the daughter of Euritus, kynge of
Aetolia, whom Herculus loued.

 

Ionia, a region of the lasse Asia, wherein
were the citie of Ephesus, Miletum, & Cla­
zomenæ.



Ion, a stone of a vyolet colour.



Ionia, a citie of the Athenienses.



Ionicus, ca, cum, & Ionius, a, um, of Ionia.



Ioppe, a citie of the countrey of Palestina,
not farre from Ierusalem, standyng by the
see, whiche some men do suppose to be the
hauyn, callyd Port Iaffe.



Iordanis, a ryuer of Iudea, commonly cal­
lyd flume Iordane.



Ios, an yle where Homerus was buried.



Iotapata, a citie in Syria.



Iouiniani, were men of armes, so called of
Maximian the emperoure, whiche dydde
valyantly in the countrey of Illiria.



Iouis, the genitiue case of Iupiter. 

 

¶ I Ante P.

IPhianassa, the wyfe of Melampos, whom
for her beautie Iuno tourned into furye
or madnesse.



Iphigenia, the daughter of kyng Agamem­
non, with whom he dydde sacrifice going
to Troye.



Ips, ipos, a lyttell worme, bredynge in hor­
nes and vynes.



Ipse, ipsa, ipsum, he, she, that same, by de­
monstratynge or shewynge the persone or
thynge spoken of.



Ipsemet, he hym selfe.



Ipsippe, to hym and none other.



Ipsulces, plates embosed like to fygures or
images of men or women.



Iphitus, the sonne of Praxonidis, whiche
fyrste ordayned the solempne playes cal­
lyd Olympiada.

 

¶ I Ante R.

IR, the holownesse of the hande. somme­
tyme it sygnifieth the hole hande.



Ira, wrathe, an appetite to punyshe him,




of whom we be offended.



Iracundia, angre, displeasure agaynst one,
a desyreto be reuenged.



Iracundus, shortly or soone angrie, hastie.



Irascor, eris, irasci, to be angrye.



Irate, angrely.



Iratus, angrye.



Irceus, a kynde of pud dynges.



Ircipes, an harowe.



Ire inficias, to denye.



Ire pedibus in sententiam, to consente to the
sentence or raison of an other, which hath
spoken, or to be of the same opinyon.



Irenarches, & irenarcha, he whiche is in au­
ctoritie to see peace kepte in a countreye or
citie, which amonge vs may be callyd a Iu­
stice of the peace.



Iris, iris, uel iridis, the rayne bowe. it is also
a floure deluce, the roote wherof is verye
soote, and is commonly called Yreos.



Irnium, oyle of Ireos.



Ironia, is a fygure in speakynge, whanne a
man dissemblyth in speche that whyche he
thynketh not: as in scoffyng or bourdyng,
callynge that fayre, whyche is fowle in
dede, that good, whiche is yl, that eloquent,
which is barbarous. Semblably reasoning
contrary to that I thinke, to the intente to
mocke hym, with whome I doo dyspute
or reason.



Ironice, mockyshly, scoffyngly.



Ironicus, he that vsethe that fasshyon in
speakynge.



Irrasus, vnshauen.



Irraucio, raucui, cere, to be hoorse.



Irrenumerabile, that may not be rewarded
or recompensed.



Irreparabile, that maye not be repaired or
restored to the fyrste astate.



Irrepo, psi, pere, to crepe in.



Irreprehensus, a, um, that can not be reprouid.



Irretio, iui, ire, to be taken or holden in, as it
were in a nette.



Irretitus, taken, lapt in with cr afte, or faire
promyses.



Irrigo, to water grounde, to brynge water
into the fieldes out of a ryuer.



Irriguus, gua, guum, the grounde or fielde
that may be easyly watered. sometyme the
water, whyche may be easyly diryuied in­
to the fieldes.



Irripio, pere, to plucke in.



Irrito, are, to make voyde & of none effecte.



Irritus, ta, tum, voide, of none effect or force.



Irrito, hauynge the laste syllable sauynge
one, longe, to prouoke, to kendyl wrathe,
to styrre vppe.



Irrogare mulctam, to sette a payne.



Irructo, are, to blowe in by belkynge.



Irrugio, gere, to braye oute.



Irrumo, are, to sucke in.



Irrumpo, rupi, irrumpere, to breake in, or en­
ter with force. somtyme to breake asonder.



Irruo, to rounne hastilye or furiousely into
battayle, or vppon any thynge. sometyme
to falle in, or cast in.

 

¶ I Ante S.

IS, a pronowne, whiche signifieth he.



Is&ecedil;us, a famouse rhetorician, whiche in­
uentid to make euery matter compendious.



Isagoge, an introduction.



Isagogicon, a waye to introduce, or begyn
to teache.



Isapis, a ryuer nygh to C&ecedil;cenna.



Isara, a ryuer commynge oute of the Rone,
where the hylle callyd Cemenus is ioyned
to the Rone: and so runneth by Druentia
into the goulfe of Venyse.



Isacia, an yle ageynste Velia, callydde also
Oenotris.



Isauria, a region of the lasse Asia.



Isaurum, a cite in the countrey of Pamphilia.



Ischia, the houckle bone. it is somtyme ta­
ken for the ache in the sayde bone, whiche
vulgare phisicions do call Sciatica.



Ischiadicus, uel Ischiacus, he that hathe the
ache in the hyppe, commonly callid Sciatica.



Isiaci, the priestes of the goddesse Isis. 



Isis, called also Io, one of the harlottes of
Iupiter, whom he tourned into a cowe for
feare of Iuno his wyfe.



Isitium, a certeyne puddynge. some calle it
an Isynge.



Ismarus, a mountayne in Thracia.



Ismenias, the name of an excellent minstrel,
whiche played on the shalmes.



Ismenus, a ryuer in the cuntrey of Bœotia.



Isocolon, where two sentences are in lyke
lengthe.



Isocrates, the name of a famous oratoure,
of wonderfulle eloquence, oute of whose
schole proceded the moste excellente ora­
tours of Grece.



Isodomon, a fourme of buyldynge, where
euery thynge is equally strayght.



Isonomia, equalite of lawes, as where they
be indifferent & like to al maner of persons.



Isopleurus, thre edged.



Israel, sygnifieth a man seinge god.



Issa, an yle in the Venician see ioynynge to
Slauonie.



Issus, a citie in Sicile, and a ryuer of Siria.



Ister, istri, the great ryuer callyd Danubius,
in duche Danowe.



Ister, the greattest ryuer of Europa, called
also Danubius, Danowe.



Istic, there, where thou arte.






Isthmus, a narowe parte of the countreye,
where two sees are but a small distaunce a­
sonder. There be dyuers suche places in
Grecia, and of them were certayn playes
called Isthmia.



Istria, a parte of Italye, marchynge on Il­
liria, callyd nowe Slauonye.

 

¶ I  ANTE  T.

IT A, so, so moche, therfore.



Ita sane, ye truely.



Italia, Italye.



Italus, an Italyan.



Italica, a citie in Italia, whiche by an nother
name is called Consinium, There is an other
in Spayn, where Silius Italicus was borne.



Italicus, ca, cum, of Italye.



Italicensis, a citesen of Italica.



Item, in lyke wyse.



Iter, eris, itiner, itineris, a iourneye. also a
way. Iter habeo ad C&ecedil;sarem, I take my ior­
ney to the emperour.



Itero, are, to do a thynge eftesoones, to goo
backe agayne.



Iterum, eftesoones, or agayne.



Ithaca, the countrey of Vlysses.



Ithome, a towne in Peloponeso, an nother
in Thessaly.



Ithonia, a countrey in Grece.



Ithyra, a towne on the mountain of Taurus.



Ithyphallus, the name of Priapus the most
dishonest and abhominable ydoll Also the
secrete membre being in prosperite.



Itidem, semblably, also.



Itinerarium, a commentarye or boke of re­
membraunce, contaynynge thynges com­
mytted in iourneyes. Also it is a kalender
of myles in the distance of places, with the
tyme of abode in euerye place, lyke to ie­
stes of princis.



Iteneror, aris, ari, to goo in iourneye.



Ito, taui, tare, to go moche.



Ituria, a region in Arabia, or Siria, of whi­
che the people are callyd Ituræi.
Cicero.


Itus, & itio, a goinge. Quid noster itus & re­
ditus, what our goinge and commyng.



Itys, the sonne of Tereus and Prognes,
who, as poetes doo fayne, was tourned
into a fesaunt.

 

¶ I, Ante V.

I##sp##V##sp##B##sp##A, the mane of a beaste. Also the
name of a kynge of Barbarye.



Iubar, a sterre, whiche is also callid Lu­
cyfer and Hesperus. it is sometyme taken
for bryghtenesse.



Iubeo, iussi, iubere, to commande, to desire,
to wyshe, to exhorte, to decree.



Iubilo, are, to declare in the voyce, the ioye
and gladnesse of the harte, whiche maye
not be expressed with wordes.



Iubilum, ioye and gladnes in voyce, not ex­
pressed in wordes.



Iucundor, aris, ari, to be ioyous and mery.



Iucundus, a, um, he or that, whiche is the
cause that an nother reioyseth, dylectable,
pleasaunt to see or here.



Iud&ecedil;a, Iewry, or the countrey of Iewes.



Iudæus, a Iewe.



Iudex, iudicis, a iudge.



Iudex ordinarius, he that hath auctoritie of
his propre iurysdiction, to sytte in iugement
without commission. As the chiefe Iustice
of Englande, the Mayre of a cytie incor­
porate, and a Coroner.



Iudex delegatus, he that sytteth by commissi­
on, as all other iudges and iustices.



Iudicialis, le, of a Iudge.



Iudiciarius, a, um, pertaynynge to a iuge, or
that whiche is to be iuged.



Iuditium, iudgement.



Iuditium habere, to gyue iugement.



Lau. Valla
in Barpt. fa
cium .lib.2.



Iudico, are, to iudge or deeme, to suppose, to
gyue sentence, to condemne.



Iugale uinculum, the bonde of matrimonye.



Iugalis, he that is yoked.



Iugantinus deus, was amonge paynyms the
god, whom they supposed to haue auctori­
tie ouer the rydges of hylles.



Iugarius, a streete in Rome, where was an
aultar of Iuno, whyche men supposed dyd
ioyne matrimonie surely.



Iugeratim, by sondry furlonges.



Iugere, to crye lyke a kyte.



Iugerum, & iugus, geris, as moche grounde
as one yoke of oxen wyll eare in a day. som
suppose it to contayne in length 240. feete,
in bredth halfe so moche. some saye, that it
is more. Leonardus Portius saythe, by the
auctoritie of Columella, that Iugerum con­
taineth .xxviii. thousand & .viii. hundred fete.



Iuges, oxen lyke in greatnes, callid yokes,
or payres.



Iugis, contynuynge in one thynge.



Iugiter, contynually.



Iuglans, andis, a wall nutte.



Iugo, are, to yoke or couple togither.



Iugosus, rydged.



Iugula, a celestyalle Sygne, contaynynge
thre sterres.



Iugulo, are, to slee, not onely with weapon,
but also with syckenes. quartana neminem
iugulat, The feuer quartayn sleeth no man.



Iugulus, the foreparte of the necke, why­
che is dyuided in two great synewes, Dex­
ter, & sinister.



Cels. li.4.



Iugulum ferire, to slee proprely in the neck.



Iugulum petere, whan an oratour or man of
lawe, toucheth vehemently the poynte of




the matter, and with manyfest and sore ar­
gumentes and reasons, seemeth to assaulte
and oppresse the contrarie parte, as it were
with sharpe weapons.



Iugum, a yoke. also the rydge of an hyll or
banke, also the beame, wheron weauers do
tourne their webbe. Also a thynge lyke to
a galowes, vnder the whiche in sygne of
reproche, thay whiche were vanquisshed,
were constrayned to creepe. whiche was
made with two speares standynge, and one
speare ouerthwarte. Also a frame, wheron
vynes are ioyned. Also a beame, whereon
balances do hange. Also the syde beames in
a shyppe, in the whyche the traunsomes
are fastened.



Iulis, a citie in the yle of Cæa, the countrey
of Simonides the poete.



Iulia, a kynred, whiche proceded from As­
canius, sonne of Aeneas, callyd Iulus. also
a towne in Cales, in the countrey of Spain.



Iulius, the moneth of Iuly, which toke his
name of Iulius Cesar. 



Iulus, otherwise namid Ascanius, the sonne
of Aeneas. Iulus, is also a litle worme with
many fete, bredynge in vynes & okes, whi­
che is also callyd Conuoluolus, Inuoluolus,
& Voluola. It is also the mosynesse of the
outwarde parte of fruites. Also the yonge
fruite immediately after that the flowres
be fallen.



Iuli, be also the mosynesse or softe heares,
whiche do growe on the beardes & visages
of yong men, before that they be shauen: and
somtyme it signifieth the same yonge men.



Iulus, is also a fyshe, whiche is guyde vnto
whales: whiche also is called Hegeter. it is
moreouer a songe dedicate to Diana. 



Iumentum, euerye beaste that drawethe or
beareth burdeyns. also a lyttel carre.



Iunctim, ioyntely.



Iunculi, meate callid iunkettes: also a freshe
chese made on rushes, callid a iackeman.



Iuncus, a bulle rushe.



Iuncus odoratus, a spyce that is medicina­
ble, specially to make the brethe swete.



Iungami, people in the countrey of Liguria.



Iungo, xi, gere, to ioyne.



Iunix, icis, a yonge cowe or hefar.



Iuniculi, small vynes ioyned togyther.



Iuniperus, a swete bushe, called Ieoneper.



Iunis, ne, yonge, whereof commeth Iunior,
yonger.



Iunius, the monethe callyd Iune. also a
mannes name.



Iuno, the wyfe of Iupyter. it is sometyme
taken for the ayre.



Iunonia maior, & minor, be two of the for­
tunate Iles.



Iupiter, iouis, the name of a greate prynce,
whiche for his wysedom and prowes was
honoured of the gentyles for chiefe of all
goddes. It is also the name of a planette,
whiche is alwaye beneuolent in his influ­
ence and course.



Iuramentum, an othe.



Iuratus, sworne.



Iurgiosus, a, um, braulyng, full of contention.



Iurgium, a braulynge, or a small contention.



Iurgo, are, to braule or chyde.



Iuridicus, ca, cum, accordynge to the lawe,
or belongynge to the lawe.



Iurisdictio, iurisdiction, power, or auctori­
tie to ministre and execute lawes.



Iuro, iurare, to sweare.



Iurulentus, ta, tum, full of iuice, or lycoure.



Ius, iuris, lawe, auctoritie, lybertie, power,
ryght. somtyme the place, where the lawe
is ministred. Also lycour or iuyce. De iure
meo, tuo, suo decedere, to omytte some part
of the rygour or extremitie of the lawe.
Pro suo iure agere, & summo iure agere, to
take the extremite of the lawe. Summum ius,
the rygour of the lawe.



Iuscum, & iusculum, brothe, wherein meate
hath ben sodden.



Iusiurandum, a solempne othe or promyse
made to G O D.



Iussa, commaundementes.



Iussus, a, um, commaunded.



Iusta, sacrifices done for deed men: now it
may be vsed for funerall exequies.



Iusta soluere, is proprely in funeralle obse­
quies, to do and performe al thinges ther­
vnto necessarie. 
Cicer pro
R oscio.


Iustitia, iustice, rygtuousnesse.



Iustitium, a cessynge for a tyme from miny­
stration of lawes in places iudiciall.



Iustus, a iuste or rightuous man, an vpright
and true meanynge manne. It is taken ofte
tymes in holy scripture for a vertuouse man
or good man.



Iustus, ta, tum, equall, meane betwene twoo
extremities. Iusta magnitudo, neither more
nor lesse, the iuste quantitie. somtyme it sy­
gnifyeth greatnesse. Iusta pars, the greatte
parte. Iusto labore, with great labour. Iustas
inimicitias, great hostilitie. sometyme it si­
gnifieth amonge lawyers, true or very. Iu­
stus filius, his very sonne.



Iuturna, the syster of Turnus. 



Iuuamen, iuuatio, & iuuamentum, helpe.



Iuuenalia, playes vowed for the helthe of
yonge menne.



Iuuenalis, le, pertaynyng to youthe.



Iuuenalis dies, a day celebrate to youthe.



Iuuenalis, is also the name of a poete, whi­
che wrate Satyres.






Iuuencus, & iuuenca, yonge, not onely men
but also beastes. Iuuenculus, idem.



Iuuenesco, scere, to waxe, or be yonge.



Iuuenilis, le, yonge.



Iuueniliter, yongely.



Iuuenis, a yonge man.



Iunior, oris, yonger.



Iuuentus, tutis, youthe. sometyme a multi­
tude of yonge men.



Iuuo, uas, iuui, are, to helpe, to delyte.



Iuxta, nighe, ioyntly or togither, euen like,
accordynge. Nunc uero quo in loco res no­
stræ sint, iuxta mecum omnes intelligitis, Nowe
howe the matter standeth, ye all knowe as
well as I: or els, in what case our busynes
is, ye vnderstande all as moche as I do.
Salustius in
Catalinar.


Iuxtim, nygh to.

 



Ixon, a greate whyte byrde, of the kynde
of Rauens.





¶  L ANTE A.

L##sp##A##sp##B##sp##A##sp##S##sp##C##sp##O, labasce­
re, & labascor, sceris, to
fayle or decaye.



Labefacio, labefacere, to
breake or destroye.



Labefacto, ctare, to make
feble, to appaire.



Labellum, a lyppe.



Labeo, onis, a manne or womanne hauynge
greatte lyppes.



Labes, a spotte, whiche sodeynely hapneth
to thynges that are smothe, a blemyshe.



Labecula, a lyttell spotte.



Labia, & labra, lyppes. Also Labrum is the
brymme or brynke of a ryuer or fountayne.
Also a fatte or lyke vessell necessarie to be
bayned in. somtyme a fatte for wyne after
that it is pressed. It may be vsed for a keele
vate, wherinto ale or beere is putte.



Labicanum, a towne in Italy.



Labici, the inhabitantes of that towne.



Labicus, was the name of the sonne of Mi­
nos, who was named also Glaucus. 



Labilis, bile, vnstable, whyche wylle soone
falle, slypper.



Labina, slyppernesse.



Labo, are, to falle downe sodaynly.



Labor, eris, lapsus sum, labi, to slyde, to dye,
to fayle, to fall downe by lyttell and lyttell.



Labor, labour, trauayle.



Laboriæ the name of a countrey in Italye,
vulgarly called Terra laboris, the lande of
laboure.



Laborinus, a felde in Campania, where the
stubbyll of corne is so great, that the peo­
ple do burne it in stede of wodde.



Laboriosus homo, a paynefull man.



Laboro, rare, to laboure, to be in heuynesse
or griefe.



Labrusca, wylde vyne.



Labyrinthus, a maase, or any buildyng made
like a maase, out of the which it were hard
to gette forthe.



Lac, lactis, mylke.



Lac&ecedil;na, a kynde of apparayle. also a wo­
man of Lacedemonia.



Laced&ecedil;mon, uel Laced&ecedil;monia, a citie in the
parte of Grece, which is nowe called Mo­
r&ecedil;a, wherof Menelaus was kynge.



Lacer, & lacerus, a, um, torne or rent.



Lacerna, a shorte cloke, whiche menne of
warre be wont to weare.



Lacernatus, cloked, or cladde in a cloke.



Lacero, are, to teare in pieces, or to gyue
many woundes.



Lacertus, & lacerta, a Lyzerde, an Euet: al­
so the parte of a mannes arme, from the el­
bowe to the wreste of the hande, proprely
the brawne and synewes of the arme.



Lacertosus, hauynge greatte brawnes and
synewes.



Lacesso, siui, & cessi, ssere, to rent, or goo a­
boute to rent the good renoume of a man.
Also to prouoke a man to wrathe or disple­
sure, with wordes, writynge, or acte: to
rayle on a man, to prycke a man with some
yll language or acte.



Lachana, all kynde of herbes.



Lachanopoles, a syller of herbes.



Lachanopolium, the herbe markette.



Lachesis, one of the thre ladies called Par­
c&ecedil;, whiche poetes dyd fayne, to haue the
rule and contynuance of mans lyfe.



Lachrima, a teare in weepynge.



Lachrimo, are, to weepe.



Lacini&ecedil;, gardinges of a garment, proprely
where the skirtes be cutte in sondry facion,
In lacinias, in peces. Lacinia, is also a redde
musheron, whiche springeth at the rote of
a chesten tree.



Laciniosus, a, um, cutte in sondrye facions,
wyndyng and tournynge dyuers wayes.



Lacinium, an elbowe of lande, lyenge be­
twene the see, called Hadriaticum, and the
see callyd Ionium.



Lacon, onis, a man of Lacedemonia.



Laconia, the countreye, where Lacedemo­
nia standeth.



Laconicus, nica, nicum, of the countraye of
Laconia.



Laconicum, a hotehowse or drie bayne.



Laconismus, a shorte fourme of speakinge.



Lactarius, ia, um, meate made of mylke, all
herbes, whiche haue iuyce lyke mylke.



Lactarius, rij, he that maketh sondry mea­
tes of mylke.






Lacteo, ere, to sucke mylke.



Lactes, places within the rybbes of a man,
benethe the nauyll, soo tender, that it maye
not suffre any wounde or stroke, as Probus
sayth. Some say that they be caules, wher­
in the small bowelles do lye.



Lactesco, scere, to be tourned into mylke, or
to be fylled with mylke.



Lacteus, a, um, of mylke or lyke milke, also
that whiche is nourished with mylke.



Lacticinia, white meates made of mylke.



Lactidiaci, stryken aboute the nauyll.



Lacto, are, to fede with milk, also to deceiue
with faire wordes.



Lactuca, an herbe callyd letuse.



Lacuna, a dyche, wherin water standeth. al­
so a trenche, wherby fieldes are drayned,
Some englyshe it, a synke.



Lacunar, a beame of tymber. Also suche a
thynge as doth yet hange in marchauntes
houses, ouerthwart their halles, whereon
be set a great numbre of candelles.



Lacus, cus, a depe place alway full of water
whiche is deriuied into brokes and riuers,
also the vesselle, whyche receyueth wyne,
whanne the grapes are pressed. Also the
pryncipalle beame that gothe ouerthwarte
the howse.



Lacuturres, greatte cabages.



Ladanum, a swete gumme, whiche goth in­
to the makynge of pommanders.



Ladon, a ryuer in Arcadia.

 

¶  L  ANTE  AE.

LAedere maiestatem, to derogate anye
thynge of the kynges auctorytie or
prerogatiue.



Lædo, læsi, dere, to hurte or do displeasure. 
 


Læs&ecedil; religionis culpa, heresye, or lollardy,
contempt of religion or ceremonies.
Ci. in Ver.


L&ecedil;margia, gluttonye.



L&ecedil;margus, a glutton.



L&ecedil;muschaton, the rewarde gyuen to hym
that vanquyshed at playenge or fyghtynge
with weapons.



Læna, a garment lyned, whiche the dyuy­
nours callyd augures, dyd weare.



Laerte, a citie in Cilicia.



Laertes, the father of Ulysses.



Laertius, the name of one, which wrate the
lyues of Phylosophers.



Lætabilis, gladde, or reioycefull.



Lætamen, compasse or mucke layde in the
fieldes, to make corne and grasse to growe
plentuousely.



Lætifico, are, to make gladde.



Lætisco, scere, to be gladde.



Lætitia, gladnesse, reioycynge of the mind,
whiche doth also appere outwardly.



Lætitudo, inis, idem.



Læto, are, to make gladde.



Lætor, aris, ari, to be gladde, or to reioyce
with outwarde sygnes.



Lætus homo, a gladde man.



Læta ouis, a good shepe. Læta seges, & letum
legumen, plentyfull corne and grayne. All
other thynges, not hauynge lyfe, beinge
called Læta, do sygnifye dilectable to be­
holde, or that do please the eye of the be­
holder.



Læuigo, are, to plane, or make playne, or to
polyshe.



Læuis, læue, smothe or playne.



Læuitas, tatis, playnnesse or smothenesse.



Læuo, are, to make smothe.



Læuor, oris, smothenesse.



Lagari uersus, verses, whiche do halt in the
myddes of the foote.



Lageos, a kynde of grapes.



Lagana, be thynne cakes made with floure
and water, wherto was putte fatte brothe,
pepper, saffron, and cynnamom.



Lagonon, the frettynge of the guttes.



Lagœna, a pytchar potte.



Lagia, one of the names of the ile of Delos.



Lagois, a kynde of fyshe, whiche maye be
called the hare fyshe.



Lagophthalmos, he that hathe eien lyke a
hare, or in whom the ouerlyds of the eien
do not meue downewarde.



Lagotrophia, a warren or parke of hares.



Laguncula, a lyttell pytchar.



Lagygies, people in Sarmacia.



Laicus, a lay man.



Lais, the name of a famouse harlotte, vnto
whom for her beautie repaired the richest
men of Grece.



Laletania, a countrey in Spayne.



Lalisiones, coltes of wylde asses.



Lallare, to speake lyke a baby: in the whi­
che worde the greke doth approche nerer
to the englishe than to the latine, as baba­
zin, whiche made a latine worde, is baba­
re, it maye be transferred to the mother or
norice, that babeleth with hir childe whan
she giueth to it the dugge.
βαβαζειν


Lamæ, the raggydnesse of rockes.



Lambo, bere, to lycke with the tounge. also
to touche, to flowe, or runne softly.



Lambrus, a ryuer of Po, called Padus.



Lambrani, people dwellyng about the sayd
ryuer of Lambrus.



Lamentabilis, le, lamentable.



Lamentarius, a, um, that causeth lamentation.



Lamentor, aris, ari, to lament or bewayle.



Lamentatio, onis, lamenting or wailyng.






Lamiæ, be women, whyche beholdynge,
chyldren, or gyuyng to theym gyftes, doo
alter the fourme of them, whiche children
be afterwarde called elfes, or taken with
the fayrye. And some suche women wylle
sucke the bloudde from chyldern. They be
also those, whyche be called ladyes of the
fayry, whiche do allure yong men to com­
pany carnally with them, & after that they
be consumed in the acte of lecherye, they
coueyte to deuoure them.



Lamia, is also a beaste, whiche hath a wo­
mans face, and the fete of a horse. It was
also the surname of a noble Romayne, and
also of a famous harlot.



Lamina, a plate of mettall.



Lamirus, one of the sonnes of Hercules. 



Lampas, a leame of fyre, or brightenes of
the sonne, moste vsed for a lampe.



Lampetra, a fyshe called a lamprey.



Lampascus, a citie on the border of Asia, v­
pon the ryuer called Hellespontus.



Lampsacenus, a, um, of that citie.



Lampyris, a gloo worme, or a worme callid
a globerde.



Lana, woulle.



Lanaris, re, that beareth or hath wolle.



Laneus, a, um, woullen.



Laneus, a fyshe.



Lanitium, the occupienge of woll.



Lanitius, a, um, wollen or of wolle.



Lanare pæcus, beastes hauyng woll.



Lanarius, a wulle man, or he that occupieth
or selleth wolle.



Lanatus, a, um, cladde or wrapped in wolle.



Lanatus lupus, a fishe so called for his white­
nes and softenes.



Lancia, a spanish iauelin with a brode heed.



Lancearius, he that beareth a Iauelyn.



Lanceatus, armed with a iauelyn. also woun­
ded with a iauelyn.



Lanx, cis, a dyshe, whiche of some is callid
a potenger. also a balance.



Lancino, are, to strike, to rent with the teth.



Lanerum, a garment made of vndied woll.



Langa, a beast, whiche is found aboute the
ryuer of Po.



Langueo, & languesco, ere, to languyshe, to
be sycke, to be faynt, to be aferd, to be idell.



Languidus, da, dum, faynt, sick, aferde, idell.



Langurium, langettes of aumbre, lyke to
longe beadestones.



Languor, oris, languour, faylyng of strength
and naturall moysture.



Laniena, the flesh shambles, or shop where
fleshe is solde. Sommetyme it sygnyfyethe
dismembrynge.



Lanificium, cardinge and spinning of woll.



Lanificus, he that dothe worke woulle, to
make it mete for the clothyar . It maye be
called also a woll wynder.



Lanio, are, to cutte lyke a boucher.



Lanifex, ficis, idem qui lanificus.



Lanionius, a, um, pertaynyng to bouchers craft.



Lanista, he that had the reule ouer sworde
players, and caused them to be taught, and
after solde them. Also that ordayned byr­
des to fyghte.



Lanium carnarium, a slaughter house.



Lanius, & lanio, onis, a boucher.



Lano, are, to put in woll, or to dresse with woll.



Lanugo, the soft heares or mosynes in the
vysages of chylderne and women. Also on
fruites called peaches, and some herbes as
longe wort, clary, and suche other.



Laodicea, a citie in Asia.



Laodomia, the wyfe of Prothesilaus. 



Laomedon, ontis, the father of Priamus. 



Lapa, & lapathes, an herbe called Clote,
whiche beareth bourres, that cleauen to
clothes and cattell.



Lapathos, seu lapathium, an herbe called sorel.
rede in the addition.
Not found in the addition.


Lapicida, a mason.



Lapidarius, a, um, pertainyng to stones.



Lapidesco, ere, to be made or tourned into
a stoone.



Lapidicina, a quar re of stones.



Lapido, are, to strike with stoones. also to
strike somtyme without stones.



Lapillus, a lytle stone, also a precious stone.



Lapio, iui, ire, to make harde as a stone.



Lapis, pidis, a stone but lasse than that, whi­
che is called Saxum. 



Lapis, is sommetyme taken for a myle. Ad
tertium aut quartum lapidem, at the thirde
or the fourthe myle. De lapide empti, were
slaues or bondmen solde.



Lapithe, people of Thessalie, of whom Pe­
rithous was kynge.



Lapsana, wylde colewortes.



Lapsio, a falle.



Lapso, are, to falle often.



Lapsus, us, a falle. Also a small offence done
by neglygence, an ouersight.



Lapythos, a citie in the yle of Cypres.



Laqueare, laquear, & laquearium, the roufe
of a chaumber, which is imbowed or fret­
ted. also a playne beame in a rouffe.



Laqueatus, a, um, haltered, snarled, tyed or
bounde faste. sommetyme it sygnyfieth ho­
lowe or bowynge.



Laqueus, an halter.



Lares, goddes, whiche the paynyms didde
suppose euery person had belongyng vnto
hym: which were also called Penates, both
the whiche wordes be also taken for pry­
uate dwellynges of houses. Mei lares, mei
penates, my house or dwellynge place.






Laranda, a cytie of Lycaonia.



Lararium, a priuate chappell or closette in
a mannes house.



Lardum, larde, or the fat of an hogge. some­
tyme swynes flesshesalted.



Larentia, a famous harlotte, which bycause
she made the people of Rome her heyre,
they named her a goddesse, and callydde
hyr Flora. 



Largior, iris, iri, to gyue lyberally.



Largitas, tatis, largenes, or lyberalitie.



Largitio, lyberalle expenses, to wynne a
mannes pourpose.



Largus, a, um, large, or free of expenses.



Large, abundauntly.



Larine, a fountayne in Attica.



Larissa, the name of one citie in Thessalia,
an other in Asia, thy thyrde in Italy.



Larius, a brooke by the citie of Comum.



Larix, icis, a tree of the kynde of firre, out
of the whiche issueth a soote gumme.



Larodij, people in Scithia.



Larua, a spyrite, whiche apperethe in the
nyght time. Some do call it a hegge, some
a goblyn. Also a masker, or he that wea­
reth a visour. it is sometyme taken for the
same visour.



Laruatus, he that is feared with a spirite, &
is becomme madde. It sommetime signy­
fieth a masker.



Laruale, an ymage defourmed, pale, leane,
and horrible to beholde.



Larum, a lyttell blacke waterfowle.



Lasanum, a chaumber potte, or vrynall.



Lasciuio, ire, to be wanton.



Lasciuus, a, um, wanton.



Lasciuia, wantonnesse.



Laser, the iuyce of an herbe called Laserpi­
tium, commendable in sondry medicines.



Lasibus, olde writers vsed for Laribus. 



Lasseo, & lassesco, lassus sum, sere, to be
wery.



Lascea, an yle in the see called Egeum. It was
also called Andros.



Lasso, are, to be weery.



Lassus, a, um, weery.



Lassitudo, werynesse.



Lastaurus, a greatte lechour.



Latebra, & latebr&ecedil;, brarum, a priuye place,
where men do hyde them. Sommetyme it
sygnifieth an excuse.



Latebro, are, to hyde.



Latebrosus locus, where as be many priuye
places.



Lateo, tui, tere, to be hydde.



Later, a tyle.



Laterani, yeman of the garde.



Lateranus, to name of a consul of Rome, of
whose hous was made a church of sainte
Iohan, whiche is nowe callid Lateranensis.



Laterculus, a lyttell tyle.



Laterem lauas, thou losest thy labour.



Lateritius, a, um, made of tyles.



Laterna, a lanterne.



Lato, latescere, to be brode.



Latex, ticis, all maner of lycour: but it is
moste commonly taken for water.



Latomia, a dungeon in the prison at Rome.



Latomus, a mason.



Latialis, le, & latiaris, re, of latin, of that part
of Italy, whiche was called Latium.



Latibulo, are, to be hydde.



Latibulum, a denne or bury, where beastis
do hyde them. somtime it is vsed for a se­
crete place or caue, wherin men be hidde.



Laticlauius, a Senatour.



Latifolium, that whiche hath brode leaues.



Latifundium, a greatte or large felde, great
and large possessions.



Latin&ecedil;, narum, sacrifyces to Iupiter named
of the latins, who fyrst dyd ordayne them.



Latine, in the fourme of latyne.



Latinitas, tatis, latyne speche.



Latinus, na, um, latin, or of the people cal­
lyd latines.



Latinus, the propre name of Aeneas father
in lawe.



Latito, are, to lurke.



Latium, a parte of Italy.



Latius, a, um, of that countrey.



Latmius, a mountayne in Ionia, where po­
etes say the mone kyssed Endymion. 



Latomiæ, was a strayte prison in the citie of
Syracusis in Sicilia, an other in Spartha.
It is also a quarry, out of the whiche sto­
nes are dygged.



Latona, was mother of Apollo and Diana. 



Latonia, called also Diana, and is also taken
for the moone.



Latria, the honour and seruyce, wherewith
god onely is worshypped.



Latres, a seruaunt.



Latrina, a syege or iakes.



Latro, are, to barke as a dogge dothe.



Latrocinium, thefte, robberie.



Latrocinor, trocinari, to robe, also to serue
in warres.



Latrones, robbers by the high waye. Also
souldyours retayned . Amonge the Ro­
maynes it were those, whyche were al­
waye aboute the kynges or Emperoures
persone, as the garde is aboute the king.
Also Latrones, seu Latrunculi, be chesse­
menne, with whiche menne doo playe at
the chesse.



Latrunculator, a iustyce of gayle delyuery.
or any Iustyce, whyche dothe gyue sen­
tence on theues.



Latus, lata, latum, brode.






Late, abrode, in many places.



Latitudo, dinis, bredthe.



Latumiæ, quarres where stones are digged.



Latus, lateris, a syde.



Latus clauus, a senatours robe or garment.
it is put somtyme for the dignitie of a Se­
natour. semblably Laticlauium. 



Lauacrum, a bathe or bayne.



Lauatrina, a synke, wherinto fowle water is
caste or swepte, wherby pauementes are
made cleane.



Lauce, an yle in the see called Pontus.



Laudabilis, le, laudable, commendable.



Laudatio, a praise or commendation.



Laudo, are, to prayse. Lauso restem, I take
to wytnesse.



Lauerna, a goddesse, vnder whose protect­
on theues were in Rome.



Lauinium, a citie in Italy, called also Lau­
rentum.



Lauo, uaui, are, & lauo, ui, ere, to washe.



Lautus, & lotus, ta, tum, washed.



Laurea, a leafe of a laurell or bay tree. some­
tyme a garlande made of Laurell.



Laurens, tis, a manne of the towne callyd
Laurentum.



Laurentum, a citie in Italy callid also Lauinium.



Laureo, are, to put on a garlande of laurell.



Laureola, a crowne or garlande that vyc­
tours ware in theyr triumphe.



Laureus, a, um, of laurell.



Lauretum, a place, wherin doo growe lau­
relles or baye trees.



Laurifer, & lauriger, is, he that wearethe a
garlande of laurell.



Laurinum, oyle of laurell or bayes.



Laurion, a place in Attica, where syluer
was dygged.



Laurus, a laurelle or baye tree.



Laus, laudis, prayse.



Lautia, were presentes, which the Romans
did send to ambassadors of other realmes.



Lautitia, magnifycence and netenesse in dy­
ners and bankettes.



Lautrices, the wyfes of two bretherne.



Lautul&ecedil;, weate baynes.



Lautus, ta, tum, washed. also nete or cleane,
or elegant, ryche.



Laxitas, tatis, & laxamentum, release, par­
don, lowsenes, lybertie.



Laxo, are, to lowse, large, wide, soft, weke.



Laxum, an aduerbe, signifieth wyde.



C&ecedil;sar.



Laxare manipulos, was in batayle, whan the
sondry bendes or companyes of fote men
were set in a ray, one man a conuenient di­
stance from an nother, that they mought
fyght the more at their lybertie.



LEæ, an Ilande by Cyrenaica, a regyon
of Affrike.



Leæna, a lyonesse.



Leander, the name of a man.



Lebes, lebetis, a caudron to boyle in.



Lebadia, a cytie in Bœotia.



Lectica, a thynge lyke to bed, wherin riche
men, and noble men were borne by six ser­
uantes. It may be taken for a lyghter.



Lecanomantia, a diuination or prophecy by
the noyse of basons.



Lecticarij, they whiche bare Lecticam.



Lectio, onis, reedynge.



Lectipes, an herbe.



Lectisterniator, oris, a chaumberlayne, or he
that maketh the beddes.



Lectisternium, a solemnitie among the pay­
nims whan in the honour of their goddis
Iupiter, Iuno, and Minerua, beddes were
spradde in the temples, in the which fyrst
the idolles were layde, in the resydue as
many as mought lye and eate.



Lectito, are, to rede often.



Lectrum, a part of Asia, lyenge into the see.



Lecturio, ire, to desyre to rede.



Lectus, a bedde. Lectulus, a lyttell bedde.



Lecythus, a potte of erthe, whiche serued
onely for oyle.



Legatarius, ia, to whome any thynge is be­
quethed.



Legatitius, pertaynynge to legacies.



Legator, oris, he that bequetheth any thing,
the testatour.



Legatum, a legacye or bequeste.



Legatus, an ambassadour, that hathe com­
missyon to treate of mattiers. He that is
sente oonely to salute or congratulate, is
callyd Orator.



Legerda, a citie in greate Armeny.



Legirupio, onis, a breaker of lawes.



Legio, onis, a company of men of warre, con­
taynyng commonly, syxe thousand fote men,
seuen hundred thyrty and two horsemen.



Legionarius, a, um, pertaynyng to a legion.



Legirupa, a breaker of lawes.



Legislator, a maker or gyuer of lawes.



Legifer, idem.



Legittimus, a, um, accordynge to the lawe.



Legittimi dies, dayes in banke, whanne the
partie shulde appere or pleade.



Legittima iuditia, iugementes confirmed by
lawes written, or auncient custome.



Legiuncula, a small legion.



Lego, are, to sende as an ambassadour, or as
a legate, or deputie, to commytte, or ap­
poynte, to bequeathe.



Lego, gi, gere, to gather, to rede, to passe by
to stryke.



Legula, a fyllet.



Leguleius, a lawyer.






Legulus, a gatherer of small thynges.



Legumen, minis, all maner of pulse, as bea­
nes, peason, vetches, tares.&c.



Legumentum, & legarium, the same.



Leleges, seu leleg&ecedil;, people, whiche were al­
way wandrynge, and dwelled sommetyme
in Thessalia.



Lema, a teare.



Lemanus, a ryuer whiche runneth into the
ryuer of Rome.



Lembus, a swyfte lyttelle shyppe, whyche
may be callyd a barke.



Lemnisci, labelles hangynge downe frome
garlandes.



Lemnos, an yle in the see called Aegeum.



Lemnia terra, that whyche is nowe callyd
Terra sigillata. 



Lemosi, they that weepe lyghtly.



Lemonici, a people in Guyan, Lemonoise.



Lemures, spyrites, whyche doo walke by
nyght with horrible fygures.



Len&ecedil;us, one of the names of Bacchus. 



Lenas, a bawde.



Lendiginosus, a, um, full of nyttes.



Lenio, iui, ire, to pacific, to appease, to treate
gentilly, to make plain, or smoth, to comforte.



Lenis, lene, that whiche hath no roughnes,
meke, tractable, softe of condicions.



Lenitas, & lenitudo, mekenesse, gentilnesse,
easynesse to please, softenes, smothenes.



Leniter, softely, swetely, moderately.



Leno, a baude, a marchant of hoores.



Lenobates, a treader of grapes.



Lenocinium, the practyse of bawdry. some­
tyme immoderate and exquisyte clenlynes
or elegancye, to styrre a manne to vyce.



Lenocinor, ari, to practise baudrye. Also to
apeake fayre, or allure oone with wordes,
and other pleasaunt thynges.



Lenonius, a, um, pertaynyng to bawdes.



Lens, lendis, a nytte.



Lens, tis, a kynde of poulse called fatches.



Lentesco, scere, to be smothe, or tender.



Lenticula, a poulse called chittes.



Lenticula, a maner of vessel, out of the whi­
che kynges and princes were annoynted,
a Chrismatorie.



Lenticularis, re, lyke a chytte or fatche.



Lentigo, ginis, a thynge lyke a lyttell warte
in the face redde or blacke.



Lentiscus, a lyttell tree, out of the whyche
cometh Mastix, a swete gumme.



Lente, easily, softely.



Lento, lentare, to doo a thynge softely or
easyly, slowely.



Lentus, ta, tum, softe, gentylle, easye, slowe,
remysse, ydell, cleauynge, or clammy.



Lenulus, a lyttell or yonge bawde.



Lenunculus, idem. Also a lytel fishers bote.



Leo, onis, a Lyon.



Leo risit, a prouerbe touching them, which be
sowre of countenance, fierce, & vncurteyse.



Leonem radere, spoken where one attempteth
a thynge dangerous, and almost impossible.



Leocrates, the name of an excellent grauer.



Leodamas, the propre name of a philosopher.



Leon, a philosopher.



Leonides, was kynge of the Lacedemoni­
ans, whiche dyd feates of warre agaynste
Xerxes kynge of Persia incredible, and fi­
nally was slayne in defendyng Grece, with
foure thousande and eight hundrid grekes
onely, against .xvii. hundred thousande of
the hooste of Xerxes. There was also an
other Leonides, which was tutour to king
Alexander, whan he was a chylde.



Leonina, an herbe, whiche groweth on hil­
les, whose floures are like to a lions mouth
whan he gapeth.



Leontopetalon, an herbe, hauynge leaues
lyke to colewortes, the stalke halfe a foote
high, the sede in huskes as great as smalle
peason, the rote lyke a rape rote, great and
blacke, whiche helpeth ageynste the slyn­
gyng and bytynge of all maner of serpentis.



Leontophon, a lyttell worme, whiche if the
lyon do byte, he dyeth incontinent.



Leontophona, a lyttell beaste, whose heed
is tourned into asshes, wherwith men doo
myxte fleshe, and cast it in the ways, wher­
by lyons do passe, wherof if they doo eate,
they dye incontinent.



Leontopodion, an herbe callid Pee de lyon
whiche hath floures lyke roses vnspradde.



Leopardus, a Lybarde.



Lepadusa, the yle of Sicile.



Lepidium, an herbe lyke to a wyld parsnippe.



Lepidus, a, um, nete, polyte, and pleasaunte,
as well in speeche, as in gesture.



Lepor, oris, & lepos, oris, purenesse or nete­
nesse in speeche. Also the good grace and
dilectablenesse in speche and gesture.



Leporarium, an inclosure, or place inclo­
sed, wherin are kepte any beastes for plea­
sure or huntynge.
Var ro .3.
de re rust.


Leporinus, rina, rinum, of an haare.



Lepra, leprye.



Leprium, a cytie in Achaia.



Lepus, poris, an hare.



Læptoludi&ecedil;, blacke fygges.



Lepusculus, a leuret or yonge hare.



Lerna, a place, wherein the citie of Argon
layde all their ordure and fylthe.



Lernæus, a, um, of Lerna. Lerna malorum,
the dunge heape of mischiefes.



Leros, an Ilande in the see Icarie.



Lesbos, an ile in the see called Aegeum.



Lesbius, a, um, of the yle of Lesbos.






Lessus, us, a lamentable voyce, vsed in the
burieng of men, as we do saye, Alas.



Lestorum, a region of Indie.



Lestrygones, a people in the extreme parte
of Italye, whiche dyd eate the company­
ons of Ulysses, rostynge them on broches.



Letalis, le, mortalle.



Letania, uel litania, a supplycation or com­
mune prayer.



Lethargus, a syckenes, whiche causeth one
to slepe continually, and to forget al thing.



Lethargicus, he that hath the slepynge or
forgettynge syckenesse.



Lethe, a ryuer of hel, the water wherofas
soone as it is drunke, causeth a man to for­
gette all thynge that is passed.



Letificus, ca, cum, causynge deathe.



Leto, tare, to slee. Letatus, slayne.



Letum, deathe.



Leua manus, the lefte hande.



Leuca, a promontorie or elbowe of lande,
nygh to Corinthus.



Leucacantha, white bryer.



Leucanthemis, an herbe, which phisytions
of late dayes calle Camomylle.



Leucates, a mountaine in Epiro. also an yle.



Leuce, a littell towne not far from Smirna.



Leucola, an yle by Cypers.



Leuconium, whyte cotton.



Leucoph&ecedil;us, a browne or a russette co­
loure.



Leucoph&ecedil;atus, he that dothe weare a rus­
set garment.



Leucopum, & leucopus, white of naturalle
coloure.



Leucophlegmantia, a white dropsye.



Leucosyria, a countrey, whiche is now cal­
led Cappadocia.



Leucosia, an yle agaynste Pestanum, in the
the see Thyrrhenum.



Leucoth&ecedil;a, the goddesse, whiche was cal­
led Matuta, & Aurora. 



Leuctrum & leuctra, a towne in Bœotia.



Leuis, leue, lyght. Leuitas, tatis, lyghtnes.



Leui, one of the sonnes of Iacob, the pa­
triarch.



Leuiathan, a dragon of the see: it is taken in
holy scripture for the dyuell.



Leuiculus, a, um, somwhat light. also wanton.



Leuidensis, se, thynne wrought, and of small
substance.



Leuifidus, da, um, of light credence or trust.



Leuir, ri, the husbandes brother.



Leuo, are, to lyfte vp. somtime to take away,
to abate.



Leuus, a, um, lyght. ALso whan it is spoken
of worldly thynges, it sygnifieth lefte, vn­
happy, contrary: whan it is referred to ce­
lestiall thynges, it betokeneth ryghte, for­
tunate, prosperous. For that whiche to vs
is the lefte hande, to them, whiche are a­
boue vs, and do looke towarde vs, is the
ryghte hande.



Lex, legis, lawe.



Lex municipalis, the peculyar lawe, why­
che euery citie hath.



Lex orchia, a lawe, whyche assigned howe
many persones shulde be boden to souper,
and that men shulde soupe at their doores,
to the intent that it moughte appere, howe
the lawe was obeyed.



Lex plagiaria, wherby men were whipped.



Lexipyreti, medycines, whyche doo heale
menne of feuers.



Lexouii, people in hyghe Fraunce aboute
Burbon.



¶  L  ANTE  I.

LI&ecedil;, be holes in the toppe of a maste,
whiche doo receyue the cabulles, or
roopes.



Liba, an yle in the Indian see.



Libamen, minis, libamentum, & libatio, a taste
or say taken, proprely in sacrifice.



Libanius, the name of a great Rhetorician.



Libanotis, tidis, an herbe callyd Rosemary.



Libanotus, a wynde, whyche dothe blowe
out of the northweste.



Libanus, a mountayne betwene Araby and
Phenicia. It is also a tree, whyche bryn­
geth forthe incense.



Libellio, a writer of bokes.



Libellorum pr&ecedil;fecti, maysters of the reque­
stes, whiche do receyue billes of supplica­
tion, being put in, to the kyng or prince.



Hieron.



Libellulus, a very lyttell boke.



Libellus, a lyttell boke . also sometyme an
epistell, a supplication, a lybell or declara­
tion in the lawe, of dette, trespasse, coue­
nant, and other lyke.



Libens, wyllynge.



Libentiæ, dylectations, pleasures.



Libenter, wyllyngely, gladly.



Libentina, one of the names of Venus. 



Liber, beri, the fynder of wyne, called also
Bacchus & Dionysius. 



Liber, ra, rum, free, at lybertie, not boun­
den, large, or greatte.



Liber, libri, a boke or warke writen, the in­
ner rynde of a tree.



Liberalis, le, lyberall. Liberales artes, the ly­
berall sciences, or sciences belongynge to
a free manne.



Liberale iuditium, & liberalis causa, where a
man contendeth for his lybertie.



Liberalia, orum, the festiual days of Bacchus. 



Liberaliter, lyberallye.






Liberalitas, tatis, lyberalytie.



Liberi, chyldren, as well women as men.



Liberides, conies.



Plinius.



Libero, are, to delyuer, to sette at lybertie.



Liberare creditorem, to content, or satisfie
hym, of whom money is borowed.



Libertas, tatis, lybertie taken alwaye in the
good parte.



Libertinus, & libertus, he that of a bonde­
man is manumised or infranchised.



Libet, it lyketh or contenteth.



Libethra, a caue, wherin was a well, callyd
Libethros, where the Muses beinge con­
uersant, were therfore called Libethrides.



Libethrides, the Muses, or ladies of sciences.



Libethrus, a mountain in Macedonia, where
the Muses dyd dwelle.



Libidinarius, a haunter of lecherie.



Libidinosus, lecherous, wylfull.



Libido, dinis, sensualitie, vnlefull appetite
or luste. Sometyme it sygnifieth onely ap­
petite or wylle.



Libitina, a goddesse, in whose temple were
solde all thynges pertaynyng to sepulture
or funeralles. sometyme for burienge. Also
for dethe, or the beere, wheron deade bo­
dyes are caryed.



Libitinarius, he that hath the suruayeng and
charge aboute burienges.



Libo, are, to tast any thing: somtime to tou­
che, somtyme to sacrifice, somtyme to take.



Libra, a pound weight: somtyme a payre of
balaunces. it is also one of the .xii. sygnes.



Libra Attica, conteined a hundred dragmas,
and was called Mna, or Mina.



Libra Romana, contayned .xii. ounces, that
is to say foure score & syxtene dragmas.



Libralis, le, a pounde weight.



Libramentum, poyse or weyght.



Libraria, a lybrary.



Librarius, a, um, pertaynynge to bokes, or
of a pounde weyght.



Librarius, a scriuener, a boke bynder.



Librile, the hanging equally of the balance.



Librilla, a cogell or stone, to throwe at one.



Libripens, dis, a weyer. It was also amonge
the Romaynes he, whiche bought a bond­
man or slaue, takynge a pounde weighte of
brasse in his hande, and sayeng: This man,
whiche with this money and brason pound
is boughte to my vse, by the lawes of the
Romayns, I say, is myn owne.



Libro, are, to way, to poyse, to make weigh­
tye, to houer.



Libs, a wynde, the whiche bloweth out of
the fourthe.



Libum, a chiese caake.



Liburni, people of the countrey called Li­
burnia, also commune messangers.



Liburnia, a part of Dalmatia, or Slauony.



Liburnum, liburna, liburnas, & liburnica, a
lyght shyppe, as a barke or galias.



Libya, & libye, a royalme in Affrike.



Libycis, cidis, a citie in Iudea, on the easte
parte of the ryuer of Iordane.



Libycontes, stones, which ar not very clere.



Libycus, ca, cum, of Libia.



Libys, & Libyssa, a man & woman of Libya.



Libyophœnices, people in Affrica.



Liceo, cere, to cheapen.



Liceor, ceris, ceri, to sette the price.



Licenter, rashely.



Licentia, licence, vnlefull libertie.



Licentiosus, rashe, vsynge vnlefull libertie.



Licet, it is lefull. sommetyme it is vsed for
maye. Mihi licet, I maye. Tibi licet, thou
mayste. sometyme be it so, admytte it.



Lichas, a measure, whiche excedethe not
foure fyngers.



Lichenes, ryngewormes or tetters.



Lichenis, a foule breakyng out, whyche be­
gynneth aboute the chynne. Somme do take
it for the frenche pockes.



Licia, be thredes, whiche sylke women do
weaue in lyncelles or stooles.



Liciatorium, a weauers shyttel, or a sylke wo­
mans tauell, wheron sylke or threde beinge
wounden, is shot through the web or lome.



Licinia, a kynde of olyue trees.



Licitator, toris, a chepener, a chapman. some­
tyme it signifieth a broker.



Licite, lefully.



Licitor, aris, ari, to bye and selle for gaynes,
or to bargayn by exchaunge or cheuisance,
to fyght, to deceyue a manne by a craftye
bargayne.



Lictor, a sergeant, or other lyke minister to
execute corporall punyshement. A Consul
of Rome had .xii. other heed officers: syx
which bare euery one in their handis, rod­
des and axes bounden togither, to do with
them execution, as they were commaunded.



Lictorius, a, um, pertaynyng to sergeantes
and other lyke officers.



Lictus, ta, tum, lycked.



Lidoron, a tyle in lengthe one foote and an
halfe, in bredth one foote.



Lien, nis, the splene.



Ligamen, minis, ligamentum, a bonde.



Ligellum, a cotage.



Liger, eris, a ryuer in France called Loire.



Lignor, aris, ari, to go to carie wodde.



Lignarius faber, a carpentar.



Lignator, a carier of wodde.



Lignile, fuell, or a wodde stacke.



Lignosus, a, um, as harde as wodde.



Lignum, wodde.



Ligo, are, to bynde.






Ligo, onis, a spade.



Ligula, a lyttell tongue.



Liguria, the countrey in Italye, where the
citie of Geane is sette.



Ligurio, ire, to eate lycorousely, or to de­
uoure sweete or dayntye meates. Also to
eate daintily or curiousely.



Liguritor, toris, a daintie feder, an eater of
delicate meates.



Ligus, guris, of the countrey of Liguria, a
Ianuens of Ianeway.



Ligusticum mare, the see that is by Ieane.



Ligusticus, ca, cum, of Liguria.



Ligustrum, a tree, which dothe beare white
floures, and soote: wherof is made an oyle
called oleum cyprinum: and thie tree doth
growe in watrye places, as wyllowes and
falowes do. It is also an herbe, which some
men do cal Maior, and groweth by hedges.



Ligyes, are people of Asye, whyche with
Xerxes warred agaynste the Grekes.



Lilib&ecedil;um, an hyll in Sicile on the see banke.
Also a towne.



Lilietum, a place where do grow many lilyes.



Lilinum, oyle of lylyes.



Lilium, a lylye.



Lima, a fyle.



Limatulus, a lyttel fyled.



Limatura, pouder, whiche cometh of filing.



Limax, cis, a snayle. Also a man, which pri­
eth or seketh for some thynge to consume.



Limborarius, a maker of gardes or purfils.



Limbus, a purfyll of a womans garment, or
a garde of a mans garment.



Limen, minis, signifyeth not only the thras­
sholde of a doore, but also the haunse, som­
tyme it signifieth the entre of the dore. som­
tyme frendeshyppe, after the exposytion
of Seruius. 



Limenarcha, the wardeyn of the portes.



Limes, mitis, sygnifieth a bounde or butting
in fieldes.



Limetanei agri, feldes lyeng in the extreme
marches of a countrey.



Limetanei milites, souldiours appoynted to
kepe the borders of a countrey.



Limito, are, to bounde or lymitte how ferre
a thynge doethe extende.



Limitatus, ta, tum, bounded, lymytted.



Limo, are, to fyle, to polyshe.



Limus, a vesture from the bely downward.
Also mudde or slime, which is in the water.



Limus, a, um, croked, a wrie, a skewe.



Limis oculis spectare, to looke wantonly on
the one syde, to caste a wanton eie, to loke
a skewe.



Linamentum, lynnen.



Linea, a carpenters lyne or corde. it sygni­
fieth also euery line generally, either made
or ymagined to be.



Lineamentum, the facyon of a body.



Linearis, are, pertaynynge to a lyne.



Lingo, xi, gere, to lycke with the tunge. also
to sucke downe by lyttell and lyttell.



Linctus, tus, lyckynge or suckynge downe.



Lingones, people in France, called Langres.



Lingua, a tongue. also a language. Also an
instrument, wherwith men do take medy­
cines or salues out of a boxe.



Lingula, a lyttell tunge. Also a lachet or lin­
gell. Also Lingua & lingula, do sommetyme
signifie a spoone.



Lingua bubula, an herbe called Langdebefe.



Linguax, acis, a great speker, ful of wordes.



Lingulaca, a woman full of wordes. Also a
fyshe called a soole.



Linio, iui, ire, to annoynte.



Lino, ni, ere, to annoynte or laye on somme
thynge, that is thycke. also to lyne.



Linostrophron, an herbe, whyche is also
callyd Marubium.



Linozostis, an herbe callyd Mercurie.



Linquo, liqui, linquere, to leaue.



Lintearius, a mercer of lynnen.



Linteolum, a piece of lynnen clothe.



Linteo, onis, a lynnen weauer.



Linternus, a ryuer and towne in Campania.



Linteum, a shete. It is taken for all lynnen
clothes. sometyme for sayles.



Lintres, lytell botes made of holowe trees.



Linum, lynnen.



Linus, he that brought fyrst letters out of
Phenicia into Grece, and was mayster to
Hercules. 



Lynx, a beaste, whiche hathe the face of a
lyon, the body spotted lyke a panther, and
is of the greatnesse of a doo, whose vryne
is sodaynly tourned into a precyous stone.



Lipara, an yle by Greece. It is also a softe
playster.



Liparis, a ryuer in Cilicia.



Lipopsichia, a soundyng, where one semeth
to be deade.



Lipopthymia, a traunse.



Lippio, iui, ire, to be porreblynde, or sande
blynde, or dymme of syght.



Lippus, bleare eyed.



Lippitudo, the blearenesse of eyen.



Lipsana, scrappes, or leauynges of vitayle,
or other thynges.



Liquamen & liquatum, greace, or talow mol­
ten, sewet.



Liquefacio, cere, to melte.



Liquentia, a ryuer in Lombardy.



Liqueo, iui, ire, to be liquide or soft, as oyle.



Liquesco, scere, to relente.



Liquet, it appereth, it is sure.






Liquido, are, to discouer, or make to appere.



Liquidus, da, um, lyquide runnynge & softe.
sometyme pure, also prosperous.



Liquido, playnely, apparantly, purely.



Liquo, are, to melte.



Liquo, ere, to runne out, as lycour dothe.



Lira, a rydge of lande, whiche is ouer the
furrowe. sometyme it sygnifyeth an harpe.
Liræ be trifles or iapes.



Liratim, in ridges.



Liris, a ryuer in Campania.



Liro, are, to make rydges.



Litem æstimare, to assesse damages and co­
stes for the playntyfe in an action.



Lis, litis, debate, variance, controuersie.



Litem suam facere, where one medleth in an
other mans matter, as it were his owne.



Litera, a letter. Liter&ecedil;, a letter or letters that
be sent. sometyme it signifieth sciences.
Litera salutaris, was in the olde tyme, A, as
betokenynge absoluynge, Litera tristis, B, as
sygnifyenge condemnynge.



Literæ fugientes, blynde letters, whyche
eyther in defaulte of the ynke, or of the
parchemente, or for auncientie, maye not
be radde.



Literarius, a, um, pertaynynge to letters or
sciences.



Litterator, oris, a grammarian, or a mayster
of grammer.



Litteratura, grammer.



Literosus, lettred. Litteratus, idem.



Liticen, a blower of a smalle trumpette.



Lythargyrium, lytarge, or white leed.



Lithargyrus, a stone of syluer.



Lithiasis, the griefe of the stone.



Lithocolla, a cement, wherwith stones are
ioyned togyther.



Lithoglyphus, a grauour in stones.



Lithologema, a heape of stones.



Theophra
stus.



Lithospermon, an herbe, which hath sedes
lyke stoones, and groweth amonge corne:
whyche herbe curethe the stoone of the
bladder.



Lithostratius, a place paued with square
stoones.



Lithotomia, a masons warkhouse, or quarre



Litigator, oris, a stryuer.



Litigiosus, a, um, full of stryfe.



Litigium, a debate, or variance.



Litigo, are, to varie, to stryue, to sewe one
on nother.



Lito, tare, to please god with sacrifyce, and
to optayne my desyre.



Littus, toris, the bankes, as well of the see,
as of a great ryuer. somtyme lande butting
on the see callyd the see syde.



Littoreus, rea, um, & littoralis, littorale, of
the see syde.



Litura, a blottynge or stryke through that,
whiche is writen, cancellynge.



Lituro, are, to blotte or stryke throughe, or
cancelle.



Litus, ta, tum, enoynted.



Lituus, a croked staffe, which the diuinours
called Augures, helde in their handes, whan
they appoynted places in their diuination.
Also a scepter, and a trumpette.



Liueo, ere, to be blacke, to enuye.



Liuesco, scere, to enuy.



Liuidus, a, um, he that hath his skyn blacke
with beatynge, also enuious.



Liuius, the prince of latyn historiens.



Liuor, the coloure, whiche is lefte on the
skynne, after beatynge or whippynge. som­
tyme it is taken for enuye. Liuor edax tibi
cuncta negat, The gnawyng enuie denay­
eth the all thynges. Rabiem liuoris acerbi
Nulla potest placare quies, No quiete canne
content the ragynge of bytter enuy.
Lucanus.Claudius
lib.3.


Lix, asshes.



Lixa, a skullyon, whiche carieth wodde or
water in an hoste, or to the kychen.



Lixabundus, he that for a smalle rewarde
dothe moste vyle seruyce.



Lixinium, lye made of ashes to wasshe clo­
thes cleane.



Lixo, are, to whette.



Lixos, a towne in Affrica.


 
¶ L ANTE  O.

SObus, the lappe of the eare.



Loba, a braunche of the grayn callyd
Millium.



Locarium, the hyre of a house or lodgyng.



Locatarius, he that letteth house or lande,
a lessour.



Locellus, a lyttell place.



Locito, are, to lette.



Loco, care, to set or lay, as a howse is set in
a place, a foundation is layde. Also to laye
vp, as a thing is to be kepte. Sometyme to
gyue in mariage. Also to lette a thynge to
hyre: or to rent, to make a lease.



Locator, toris, the lessour.



Locrus, a citie in the vttermoste parte of I­
taly, whiche was named Magna gr&ecedil;cia. 



Locrenses & locri, people of Locrus. there
were also people so named in Grece.



Loculamenta, places made with bourdes,
wherin tame culuers, and other byrdes or
conyes are kepte to brede.



Loculatus, ta, latum, dyuyded into sondrye
places.



Loculus, a lyttell place. Also a purse, an al­
morie, a lyttell coffer, a biere, wheron deed
bodies are borne to be buried.



Locuples, pletis, ryche, abundant, sufficient.






Locuples fideiussor, a sufficient suretie.



Locupleto, tare, to make ryche of yerelye
reuenewes.



Locus, a place. somtime a family or kinred.
also stede, as Loco patris te habeo, I take
the in stede of my father.



Loci, plurali numer. the secrete partes of a
womanne.



Locusta, a flye with longe hynder legges,
whiche bourneth corne with touchynge of
it, and deuoureth the resydue. In India be
of them thre foote in lengthe, whiche the
people of that countrey do eate. It is also
a see fishe, like to a creuys, called a lopster.



Locutor, cutoris, & loculeius, a prater or a
iangler.



Lodex, uel lodix, icis, a sheete.



Lœdoria, a taunt or reproche in scoffyng.



Aristo. Me
theor.2.



Lœlaps, a blaste of wynde tourned frome
the erthe vpwarde.



Logica, logike, one of the lyberal sciences,
the crafte of reasonyng or arguinge.



Logion, a place where iuges gyue sentence:
also a gathering of rent, or other reuenues



Logodædalus, he that speaketh craftily to
deceiue: or in eloquente wordes induceth
sentences vayne, or of lyttell purpose.



Logomachia, a contencion with wordes, or
an vndiscrete altercation.



Logos, vsed for a latyn worde, is taken for
triflynge wordes, or vayne language.



Loligo, ginis, a fyshe, which hath his heed
betwene his fete and his bealy: and hathe
also two bones, one lyke a knyfe, the other
lyke a penne.



Lolium, a wiede growynge in corne, cal­
lyd Cockyll.



Longobardia, a regyon of Italye, callyd
Lumbardye.



Lombricus, a lampraye.



Lomentum, beane meale.



Longa Alba, a citie in Italye.



Long&ecedil;uus, longe lyued.



Longanimis, he that suffreth longe.



Longanon, a gutte, out of the whyche or­
dure issueth.



Longe, an aduerbe, signifieth longe, farre,
excedynge.



Longinquus, a, um, far of, farre, straunge.



Longisco, scere, to be longe.



Longitudo, dinis, lengthe.



Longobardi, Lumbardes.



Longurius, a longe pole.



Longus, a, um, longe.



Longum, a longe tyme.



Lopades, a shelle fyshe.



Loquacitas, tatis, babblynge.



Loquacito, are, to babble or speake moche.



Loquax, cis, a babler or greatte speaker.



Loquela, speeche.



Loquor, eris, qui, to speake.



Loquitor, tari, to speake moche.



Lora, siue lorea, a drynke made of grapes,
after that they be pressed, callyd Seconde.



Lorarii, seruantes whiche serued to bynde
men, or to beate them, whan they were by
their maisters commaunded.



Lorica, an haberion, a place made vppon
walles lyke an open galery, with grates of
tymber or hurdels, to kepe men frome fal­
lyng. It is also the walle plate, before that
morter is layde on it.



Loricatus, armed with an haberion.



Loricatio, wallynge with morter.



Lorico, care, to put on an haberion.



Loricion, a mantell.



Loricula, in warfare is a munyment or forti­
fication, that the besigers of cites do make.



Loripes, edis, whose fete ar, as if they were
bounden or gyrte.



Lorum, a thonge of lether, or a colar, or o­
ther lyke thynge, wherewith beastes are
bounden or tyed. sometyme a whip, wher­
with a man or beaste is whypped.



Lotaringia, a countrey betwene Pycardye
and Normandy.



Lotophagi, people in Affrike, whyche doo
lyue by eating only of a frute, callid Lotos.



Lotium, vryne or pysse.



Lotos, & lotis, lotidis, is a notable tree in
Affrike, or herbe, of whose fruite if a stran­
ger do eate, he dothe incontinently forget
his owne countrey.



Loxias, one of the names of Apollo. 

 

¶ L  ANTE  V.

LVbentia, & libentia, myrthe, pleasant­
nes, moste proprely in wordes.



Lubido pro libido, sensuall appetite.



Lubrico, care, to make slypper.



Lubricus, ca, cum, slypper, waueryng. some­
tyme redy to slyppe or slyde.



Luca, a citie in Italye, of whiche the inha­
bytantes are called Lucenses.



Lucæ boues, were taken of the olde latines
for Elephantes.



Lucania, a countray belongyng to the roy­
alme of Naples.



Lucani, people of the countrey of Lucania.



Lucanica, a pouddynge made of porke, a
sawsage.



Lucanus, a famous poete, which wrate the
battayle betwene Cesar and Pompeye. 



Lucar, money bestowid in woddes, dedicate
to goddis, called Luci.



Lucaria festa, feastes, whiche the Romains
made in holy woddes.



Lucellum, a lyttell gayne, a small markette.






Lux, lucis, light, sometyme it signifieth day.



Luci, by daye.



Lucens, that whiche hath his lyghte of an
nother thynge.



Luceo, luxi, lucere, to shyne.



Luceres, the thirde parte of the people of
Rome, distributed by Tatius & Romulus. 



Luceria, a citie of Apulia.



Lucerius, a kynge of Ardea, whiche holpe
Romulus agaynst Tatius. 



Lucerna, a lanterne.



Lucernarius, the lanterne bearer.



Lucernula, a sconse.



Lucesco, scere, to be bryght or clere, as day.



Lucetius, a name of Iupiter. 



Lucetia, one of the names of Iuno. 



Lucibile, that whiche is light of it selfe.



Lucido, are, to make clere, or to gyue lyght.



Lucifico, care, idem.



Lucidus, da, dum, cleere.



Lucifer, the daye sterre.



Lucifugus, ga, whyche fleeth frome lyghte,
and delyteth in darkenesse.



Lucilius, the name of an olde poete.



Lucina, one of the names of the mone, cal­
led also the goddesse of byrthe.



Lucini, they whiche haue lyttell eyen, and
smalle syghte.



Lucius, a mans name.



Lucretilis, an hylle in the countreye of the
Sabynes.



Lucrifuga, he that fleeth from lucre or gaines



Lucrinus, a mere or great water in Campania.



Lucrio, onis, a couetous manne, an inordy­
nate gayner.



Lucror, aris, ari, to gayne, or to wynne.



Lucrum, lucre or gayne.



Lucta, wrastelynge.



Luctatius Catulus, a cytesyn of Rome.



Luctiferum, cause of waylynge.



Luctificus, ca, cum, idem.



Luctitor, tari, & lucto, are, to wrastle ofte.



Luctor, aris, ari, & lucto, are, to wrastle.



Luctuosus, a, um, lamentable.



Luctus, tus, weepynge and waylynge, the
habyte of mournynge.



Lucubro, are, to make any thynge by can­
delle lyghte.



Luculentus, ta, tum, full of lyght, cleere.



Lucullus, the name of a noble Romayne.



Lucus, a hygh and thycke wodde. somtime
it signifieth lyght, whan it is of the fourth
declination. It is also a citie in Spayne by
Compostella, which is now callid Lucensis.



Ludia, a daunsynge wenche.



Ludibrium, a mocke, or any thynge that is
mocked.



Ludibundus, a, um, playing, or full of playe.



Ludicrum, any play or pastime, or an enterlude



Ludicrus, cra, crum, pertaynynge to playe
or myrthe.



Ludifico, are, to mocke.



Ludii, & ludiones, players in enterludes or
stage playes.



Ludius, & ludio, onis, a player.



Ludo, si, dere, to playe, to mocke or deceiue
in game . Opera luditur, The warke or la­
bour is loste.



Ludus, play in actes, myrth in wordes: also
a schoole or place of exercyse.



Lusus, us, idem.



Lues, pestilence in men, murrayn in beastis.



Lugdunum, a citie in Fraunce, callid Lions.



Lugeo, luxi, lugere, to mourne, to lamente.



Lugubris, bre, pertaynynge to mournynge.
Vestis lugubris, a mournynge garment.



Luma, a brembyll.



Lumbago, ginis, feblenes of the loynes.



Lumbare, breeches of hosen.



Lumbrici, wormes callyd easis.



Lumbri, the loynes.



Lumen, luminis, lyghte.



Luminare, that whiche gyueth lyght.



Luna, the Moone.



Lunaris, re, pertaynynge to the moone.



Lunaticus, he that is madde or sycke at a
certayne tyme of the moone.



Lunatus, ta, tum, lyke the moone.



Luo, ere, to suffre punyshement or dethe.



Luere capite, to haue the heed stryken of.



Lupa, a female wolfe. also an harlotte.



Lupanar, a brothell howse.



Lupanaris, re, pertaining to a brothel hous.



Lupanarium, a brothell howse.



Lupari, to meddell with common harlottes.



Luparius, a hunter of wolfes.



Lupatum, a harde bytte.



Lupercal, a place dedicate to Pan, the god
of shepeherdes.



Lupercalia, sacrifices & plays made to Pan. 



Luperci, minysters of that solemnitie.



Lupinus, na, num, of a wolfe.



Lupinus, a kynde of poulse.



Lupus, a wolfe. Also a bytte for a hors. al­
so a hoke to drawe vp thinges out of a pyt.
Also a kynde of spyders.



Lupus est in fabula, a prouerbe, whan he co­
meth, whiche is spoken of.



Lupum auribus tenere, a prouerbe in thyn­
ges that be daungerous, eyther to retaine,
or to lette goo.



Lura, the mouthe of a bottelle.



Luridus, da, dum, pale of colour.



Lurco, are, to eate rauenously.



Lurco, onis, a deuourer of his own substance



Luscinia, a nyghtyngale.



Lusciosus, poreblynd. Luscio is the disease.



Luscitus, he that seeth playnely by nyghte.






Luscus, porblynde. sommetyme a man ha­
uynge but one eye.



Lusitania, the realme called Portugall.



Lusito, tare, to playe often.



Lusorius, a, um, pertaynynge to playe.



Lustralis, le, pertayning to riot and lechery.
sometyme a thynge done euery fyfte yere.



Lustrici dies, the day whan a chylde is fyrst
named, whiche in men chylderne was the
nynth day, in womenne childern it was the
viii. day. It may nowe be vsed for the daye
of christenynge of chylderne.



Lustro, are, to go aboute in circute, to make
satisfaction by sacrifice, to consyder in the
mynde, to shadowe, to beholde aboute.



Lustror, aris, ari, to serche out.



Lustrum, a denne or caue of wylde beastes
in woddes, an hidde place and vyle, a hous
where gluttonye and lecherie is haunted,
also the hauntynge of the same vices: some­
tyme it sygnifyeth the space of fiue yeres,
Also the generall purgation of the citie by
sacrifice euery fyfte yere.



Luter, eris, a cuppe, wherin wine is delayde
with water.



Lutesco, scere, to be claye.



Lutens color, the colour of yelowe, appro­
chinge towarde redde, of the colour of the
yolke of an egge, or of waxe newe made.



Luteola, a lytell floure of the colour of ye­
lowe, in greatnes and fauour, not moch vn­
lyke a vyolette.



Luteum oui, the yolke of an egge.



Luto, are, to claye.



Lutra, siue lytra, a beuar, or a beast moche
lyke to it, whiche gnaweth trees asonder.
and dothe haunte greatte waters, and ly­
ueth lyke an Ottar.



Lutum, claye.



Lux, lucis, lyght.



Luxo, are, to lowse or make loose.



Luxatus, whole bones are out of ioynte.



Luxurio, ire, to excede, to abunde more than
is necessarie in the body or personage.



Luxurior, aris, ari, to abounde excessiuely in
thynges concernynge the mynde or goo­
des: Also to be wanton with to moch welth
or prosperitie.



Luxuriosus, to prosperouse, or lyuynge in
to moche pleasure.



Luxuriosus, a, um, excedynge in abundance.



Luxus, luxuria, & luxuries, all superfluitie or
excesse, as well in carnalle pleasure, as in
sumptuous fare, apparayle, or buyldyng.

 

¶ L  ANTE  Y.

LYæus, one of the names of Bacchus,
called god of wynes.



Lyceum, was the schole of Aristotell
in Athenes.



Lycæus, a mountayne in the countreye of
Archadia.



Lycaon, the kyng of Archadia, whom Iu­
piter tourned into a wolfe.



Lycaonia, a countrey in Asia: after somme
writers, it is a parte of Archadia.



Lycaones, people in Asia the lesse, nere to
Lycia, as writeth Ptolome. 



Ptho. li.3.



Lycastus, a citie of Candy.



Lychnis, an herbe whose floure shyneth by
nyght, and fyrste springeth, and longest du­
reth: whiche in drynke helpeth them that
are stongen with the Scorpion.



Lychnites, whyte marbyll.



Lychnobij, they whiche do tourne the daye
into nyght, and the nyght into daye.



Lychnus, a matche of a candelle, sometyme
the selfe candell.



Lycia, a countrey in the lasse Asia.



Lycidas, the name of a Centaure, and of a
shepeherde in Vergile. 



Lycion, a thyng made with the iuyce of an
herbe, wherwith soore eis be cured.



Lycisca, a dogge commen of a wolfe and
a dogge.



Lycius, one of the names of Apollo. 



Lycurgus, a kynge of the Lacedemoniens,
whiche gaue to them their fyrste lawes.



Lycus, a ryuer in the countreye of Cæsaria.



Lydia, a royalme in Asia the more.



Lydus, a, um, of the countrey of Lydia.



Lyenteria, the flyxe or continuall lowsenes
of the bealye.



Lympha, water.



Lymphaticus, a madde man, which lyke to a
wodde dogge, runneth hither and thither.



Lympidus, a, um, cleere, smothe.



Lynceus, was a manne, who (as Varro wri­
teth) coulde see shyppes on the see. Cxxx.
myles from hym, & dyd nombre them. And
some wrate, that he coulde see throughe a
walle. And therfore they, whiche haue ve­
ry sharpe syghtes, be sayde to haue
Lynceos oculos, the eien of Lynceus. 



Lyndus, a citie atte the Rodes, where they
dyd sacrifice to Hercules with reproches
and curses.



Lynter, eris, a cockebote.



Lynx, cis, a beaste lyke to a wolfe, hauynge
many spottes, whose syght dothe perce all
thynges. It is also a byrde, whyche hath a
tongue lyke a serpente.



Lyra, an harpe.



Lyricen, cinis, an harper.



Lysander, a Capitayne of the Lacedemo­
nyans, a man contentious, whiche dydde
sette all Grece in the Lacedemonians top,
and was slayne of the Thebans.






Lysanias, an oratour of Grece.



Lysias, an oratour moste pleasant, of whom
Quint. speaketh. 



Lysimachus, a noble man of Macedony, the
scholar of Callisthenes. 



Lysippus, an excellent caruer.



Lysius, a ryuer of Archadie.



Lytta, a worme in a dogges tongue.






¶ M  ANTE  A.

M##sp##A##sp##C##sp##A##sp##R##sp##I##sp##V##sp##S, the name
of a manne. In latyn it
sygnifieth blessed.



Maccab&ecedil;us, the name of
certayne noble menne,
whiche were capitains
of the Iewes.



Mac&ecedil;donia, a realme ioi­
nyng to Grece, where of the great Alex­
ander  was kynge.



Macedo, onis, a man or woman of Macedony.



Macedonicus, ca, cum, of Macedonie.



Macellarius, a vittayllour or seller of all
maner of vittayle.



Macellum, a place where all maner of vy­
tayle is solde. Macellus is somtyme taken
for a leane man.



Maceo, & macesco, scere, to be leane.



Macer, cra, crum, leane.



Maceresco, scere, to make softe with lyeng
longe in lycour.



Maceries, & maceria, a wall of stone with­
out morter, made in the stede of an hedge.
also leannesse.



Macero, are, spoken of the body, signifieth
to make leane, or thynne, or softe by stea­
pynge in lycour: referred to the mynde,
it sygnifieth to vexe or inquiete.



Mach&ecedil;ra, a sworde.



Mach&ecedil;rophorus, a sworde bearer.



Mach&ecedil;ropios, a Cutlar, or a bladesmythe.



Machaon, the sonne of Aesculapius, an ex­
cellent surgeon.



Machina, a thynge craftilye inuented, or a
crafty inuention, an engyne.



Machinor, aris, ari, to inuent craftily, to de­
uyse, to ymagine.



Macies, & macritudo, leannesse.



Macidatus, ta, tum, wette.



Apuleius.



Macilentus, leane.



Macio, aui, are, to make leane.



Macra, a ryuer, whiche rounneth betwene
the mountaynes of Liguria.



Macresco, scere, to waxe leane.



Macreo, ere, to be leane.



Macrobij, people of Aethiopia, whiche do
lyue very longe.



Macrobius, the name of a great lerned man.



Macrochie, he that hath longe handes.



Macrochera, a garmente with longe sleues.



Macteæ, precious meates.



Macticus, he, whiche hath greatte chekes,
and a gapynge mouth.



Macto, are, to slee or kylle: also to beate,
sometyme to honour.



Mactra, an hutche, wherin breade is putte:
some doo calle it a brake, wherwith dowe
is wroughte.



Macte uirtutis & uirtute, procede in vertue.



Macte animi, be of good courage.



Macti ingenio, men of excellent wyttes.



Macula, a spotte, a blemyshe: Also infamye
or reproche. Sometyme the masshe of a
nette or hole betwene the thredes: also a
nette, images wrought in marble.



Varro.



Maculo, are, to spotte or make fowle.



Maculosus, spotty, vncleane, or foule.



Madaura, a citie set in the boundes of Ge­
tulia and Numidia.



Madefacio, cere, to weate, to washe, to bain.



Madefio, fieri, to be washed.



Madeo, dere, to be wette or washed.



Madesco, scere, to sweat, or be through wet.



Madian, a citie beyond Arabia on the south
part in the desert of the Sarasyns, ageinst
the easte parte of the redde see.



Madido, dare, to make wette.



Madidus, dida, didum, wete or washed with
lycoure.



Madifico, facere, to make weate.



Mador, oris, moysture. somtyme sweate.



Mados, a certayne kynde of white vynes.



Madulsa, dronken.



M&ecedil;ander, a ryuer of the countray of Phri­
gia, whiche hathe many tournynges and
wyndynges: and of that all crooked and
subtyll tournynge wayes, meanes, and de­
uyses, be called Meandri. There is also of
that name a mountayne in India.



M&ecedil;dia, a citie in the realme of Thracia.



Mæe, a kynde of great crabbes of the see.



M&ecedil;macterion, the moneth of Septembre.



M&ecedil;nala, uel M&ecedil;nalus, a hygh mountayne in
Archadia.



M&ecedil;nas, adis, a fyshe, whiche I suppose we
do calle a Menowe.



M&ecedil;nades, women, whiche dyd alwaye fo­
lowe Bacchus, with their heare scatterid
like mad women, running hither & thither.



M&ecedil;noles, one of the names of Bacchus. 



M&ecedil;onia, is a countrey in Asia the lasse, cal­
lyd also Lidia.



M&ecedil;onius, a, um, of M&ecedil;onia. Homere the ex­
cellent poete was named M&ecedil;onius, eyther
bicause that he was borne in that countrey,
or els that his fathers name was M&ecedil;on. 






M&ecedil;otis, a greatte mere in the countrey of
Scithia, whiche is alway frosen.



M&ecedil;reo, es, loke after in M&ecedil;reoet Mereor. 



Mæro, are, to make heuy.



Mæror, heuinesse with wepynge.



Mæstitia, et mæstitudo, heuynesse.



M&ecedil;sto, et mæstifico, care, to make heuy.



Magalia, villagis.



Magia, Magike, whiche is in two sortes,
one is the secrete knowlege of the natu­
rall qualyties and hydde operations and
causes of thynges, and that is called Ma­
gia naturalis, naturall magike: A nother
is superstiouse & deuillishe, called witche
crafte, sorcery, or other lyke detestable
names, whiche is vnlefull by the lawes of
god and man.



Magicus, ca, cum, perteynyng to magike.



Magidæ, kychen bourdes, or instrumentes
perteynynge to the kechyn.



Magida, a kynde of breade.



Maginor, aris, ari, to trifle.



Magis, more.



Magisterium, the dignite or office of a master.



Magistratus, tus, a great offycer, a man ha­
uynge autoritie in gouernance of people.
all be it that some haue more authoritie by
the lawes, and some haue lesse.



Magister populi, the chefe ruler of the peo­
ple, by the whiche name the Dictatour a­
monge the Romaynes was called.



Magister, tri, a master or teacher of sciences.



Magistro, are, to rule.



Magister scriniorum, an offycer lyke to the
mayster of the rolls.



Magmata, confections made of dyuerse
sweete spices in paste only for the sauour,
as pomaundres and washing balles. som­
tyme it is taken for the dreggis of sweete
oyles.



Magna Gr&ecedil;tia, that parte of Italy from La­
rentum to Cumas.



Magnalia, gret thinges to be wondered at.



Magnarius, a greate marchaunt.



Magnanimitas, tatis, valiantnesse of courage
or harte, magnanimity.



Magnas, atis, et Magnatus, a noble man, a man
of great estimation.



Magnes, etis, an Adamant stone.



Magnesia, a parte of Macedonia.



Magnifico, are, to extoll.



Magnificus, he that doth great thynges.



Magna, at a great price.



Magnificentia, a disposition and administra­
tion in doinge or makynge of great thyn­
ges and sumptuous.



Magnus, a, um, great.



Magog, the sonne of Iapheth. 



Maguderis, a kynde of Caules called also
Laserpitium. 



Magus, signifieth in the Persiane tongue a
wyse man, expert also in the misteries of
theyr ceremonyes, sometyme it signifieth
a witche.



Maia, the mother of Mercurius. 



Maiestatem constituere, to confirme the a­
state of princes dignitie.



Maiales, barowe hogges.



Maiestatem soluere, to lese the preeminence
of princes dignitie.



Maiestas, tatis, maiestie.



Maiestatis crimen, mysprision.



Maiores, auncetours, progenitours.



Maior, oris, greatter.



Maius, the monthe of Maye.



Malæ, the chekes.



Malaca, a citie in Spayne.



Malatia, calme of the See, also the griefe
of the stomacke not susteynyng meate, ab­
horrynge all thinges, as a womanne with
chylde, some do cal it the abhomination of
the stomake.



Malachites, a stone of a dark grene colour.



Malacisso, are, to knede or make softe.



Malaces, ces, a kynde of malowes.



Plaut. in
Epi.



Malacostracha, soft as fishe without shelles.



Malacus, ca, cum, softe.



Malagma, tis, a mollifienge playster, wher­
by hard impostumes be made soft or rype. Also
to exercyse.



Male, ylle, vnhappily, vncommodyousely,
myscheuousely



Malea, a promontorie or hylle lienge into
the see by Laconia, which is daungerous
for shyppes to passe by.



Male audire, to be yll reported of, to haue
an yll name.



Male cogitare de aliquo, to haue yll opyni­
on of one.



Male accepti, yll handled, yll intreated.



Ci. in Ver.
Brutus in
Cice.



Maledicentia, yll reporte.



Maledico, xi, cere, to curse.



Maledicus, yll tonged.



Malefica, a wytche, whiche with sorcerye
dothe hurte to her neyghbours.



Maleficus, a harme doer.



Maleficium, & maleficentia, damage, wrong
displeasure, hurt, a myscheuous dede.



Malefice, myscheuousely, harmefully.



Male meritus est de me, He hathe ylle in­
treated me.



Male optare, to curse.



Male accipere, to intreate one ylle.



Male accipere uerbis, to gyue ylle language
to one.



Male acceptus, yll intreated, yll handelyd,
shrewdely welcome.






Male cadere, to chaunce ylle.



Male conciliatus, coste lost, he on whome a
man hath lost al that he hath bestowid. Fu­
gitiue prodi, male conciliate, Come forthe
mycher, on whome I haue loste all that
thou costest me.



Plautus in
Amph.



Male formido, I am yll or soore aferde.



Male me habet hæc res, I am sorie or yll a­
payde for that mattier: or that mattier
greueth me soore.
Plautus in
Asinar.


Maleloqui, & maledicere, to curse.



Plaut in
Castel.



Male maceror, I am yl vexed, I am il at ese.



Male mereri, to doo displeasure.



Male metuo, I am yll aferde.



Male moratus, yll manerde.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Male morigerus, disobedient, or frowarde.



Male odi, I hate deedly.



Male precari, to as ke a vengeaunce.



Male uertat illi, God sende hym yuell lucke
therof, yll maye he brooke it.



Male suada, she that giueth shrewed councel.



Maleuolentia, malyce, yll wylle.



Maleuolus, malyciouse.



Malicorium, the rynde of a pome granade.



Maligne, enuiously, disdainfully, maliciously



Malignor, & maligno, to beare malyce, to
be hatefulle.



Vergilius.
Plinius.



Malignus, a, um, wycked, cruell, enuyous,&
couetous. maligna uia, an yll way.



Malignus ager, grounde that is ylle to be
broughte to tylthe.



Maligna lux, a dymme lyghte.



Malignitas, tatis, wickednes, malignitie, en­
uye, malyce, vnprofytablenesse, the vyce
contrarye to lyberalitie.



Malitia, contrary to vertue & goodnes. som­
tyme it signifieth subtilitie with deceyte.



Malitiose, malyciousely.



Malleatus, a, um, hammered.



Malleo, are, to warke with an hammer.



Malleolus, a lyttelle hammer . It is also a
smalle boughe or twygge of a vyne. Also
Malleoli be sometyme taken generallye
for smalle stickes.



Malleus, an hammer.



Malluuium & malluui&ecedil;, arum, a basyn, wher­
in menne do washe their handes.



Malobathrum, a swete oyntment, wherwith
men where wonte to washe their heare.



Malo, I had leauer, or rather: mauis, mauult.



Malobathron, whiche in latyn is callyd fo­
lium, is a swete herbe growing in India, v­
pon waters without any roote. 



Malta, a clay, whyche touchynge anye o­
ther mattier or substaunce, settethe it
on fyre.



Malua, an herbe callyd Mallowes.



Malus, an appull tree of the femynyne
gender.



Malus assyria, uel medica, an orenge tree.



Malus, in the masculyne gender, a maste of
a shyppe.



Terent. in
Phorm.



Malum, beinge an aduerbe, sygnifieth with
a myschiefe, or like thyng. Quid uos ma­
lum ergo me sic ludificamini? Than wher­
fore with a myschiefe do you thus mocke
me. Quid tua (malum) id refert? what with
a myschiefe reckest thou therfore, or hast
thou therwith to do?



Malus, a, um, yll, contrary to good: somtime
labour, vexation, sycknesse, grefe, malice.



Mamertini, people in Campania.



Mamilla, a lyttell dugge, or pappe.



Mamma, a dugge or pappe.



Mammare, to gyue the dugge or breste to a
chylde.



Mammeata, a womanne with greatte dug­
ges or breastes.



Mammilare, a kerchefe, wherwith women
do couer theyr pappes.



Mammona, in the language of Syria, world­
ly substaunce, rychesse.



Mammosus, sa, & mammeatus, ta, tum, ha­
uynge great dugges.
Plaut.


Mammothreptus, the chylde that souc­
keth longe.



Mamphula, a certayne bread vsed in Syria,
whiche ere it be throughe baken, fallyth
into coles.



Mano, are, to droppe or stylle out, or runne
out softly. also to descende, to procede.



Mana, in the olde tyme, was taken for Bo­
na, good.



Manapia, an Ilande in the northe parte of
Britannia.



Manceps, cipis, he that byeth or hyreth any
thynge of the people.



Mancinati, persones condemned.



Manciol&ecedil;, lyttell handes.



Mancipium, that which is solemnely bought
before wytnesses. Also a mannes peopre
goodes or catell. sometyme a bondeman.



Mancupi, the solempne fourme or maner of
byenge any thynge before wytnes, by ly­
uerye and seyson, or possessyon takynge,
with other thynges executed, requysyte
for the assuraunce of any bargayne & sale.



Mancipatio, the assuraunce by lyuerye and
possessyon.



Mancupes, the principall takers of lande,
or other thynge, wherof groweth yerely
reuenues. Also they, whiche doo take on
them to perfourme any worke in greatte.



Mancipio dare, to gyue or selle a thynge
with warrantie.



Mancupio accipere, to take a thynge with
warantie of hym, the whyche gyueth or
selleth it.






Mancipi, the interest or right of a thinge.



Mancipo, are, to delyuer in bondage, to de­
lyuer possession, to make lyuery & sayson.



Mancipij sui esse, to be his owne manne, and
none other mans subiect or seruant.



Mancipio dare, to delyuer possession, reser­
uynge a rente.



Virruuius.



Mancipio accipere, to take possession or ly­
uerye and saison.



Mancus, lackynge one hand. also generally
that, whiche lacketh any thyng necessary.



Mandatarius, he to whome commaunde­
mente is gyuen.



Mandatum, a commyssion. Also a comman­
dement, a charge.



Mandatus, ta, tum, giuen in charge.



Mandibula, a iawebone, wherin the teethe
be sette.



Mando, are, to committe. memori&ecedil; mandare,
to remembre, to put in remembraunce, to
leaue in memorie, or for a memoriall.



Mandare æternitati, to wryte a thing, to the
intent to be in perpetuall remembraunce.



Mandare literis, to put in memorie.



Mandare fidei alicuius, to put a man in truste
with a thynge. Mandare terr&ecedil; semina, to
putte sede into the grounde.



Mando, di, dere, to chewe meate, or grynde
it with the tethe.



Mando, onis, a great eater, or he that is al­
way eatynge.



Mandra, a cabin, a shepehouse, or oxehous.



Mandragora, an herbe callyd Mandrag,
whiche beareth a lyttell apple: the iuyce
whereof dronken or smellyd to, causeth a
manne to slepe.



Manduces, imagis caried about in pageantis
with great chekes and wide mouthes.



Manduco, are, to chewe meate.



Manduco, conis, a gret eater.



Manducus, idem.



Mane, earely, also the mornynge.



Maneo, mansi, manere, to abyde, to tary, to
persiste, to happen hereafter.



Manere promissis, to kepe promyse.



Mane dum, tarye a whyle.



Mansio, onis, a place to abide in, also a poste
place, for conuayinge of letters or other
thynges spedyly.



Manes, the good and badde aungell. Some­
tyme they be taken for deuylles, somtyme
for spyrytes or sowles, not pourged of
synne, sommetyme for the peynes, whiche
soules do suffre.



Mango, onis, was taken for a seller of chil­
derne to abhominable vses. It is also ta­
ken for suche one as polyssheth or payn­
teth a thynge with a fals colour, to selle
it the deerer.



Mangonicus, a, um, pertainynge to that craft.



Mangonium, the crafte to make thynges
saleable:



Mangonizo, nizare, to polysshe, paynte, or
trymme a thynge, to make it more vendi­
ble, or to be better solde.



Mania, madnesse.



Maniacus, a madde manne.



Mani&ecedil;, arum, ymages defourmed.



Manibus, pedibusque, with all might & mayne.



Manibus pedibusque ire in sententiam, is where
in a parlyament, greatte counsayle, or o­
ther great assembly, to haue the consente
of many men, the greatter parte consen­
tyng to one mannes opinyon or sentence,
to goo towarde hym, holdynge vp theyr
handes, in token that they be therevnto
agreed.



Manicæ, sleues of a garmente. Also mana­
cles to tie the handes togither. Also gant­
lettes and splyntes, and myttaynes, or
longe gloues.



Manich&ecedil;i, a secte of heritikes, so callyd of
an Archeherytyque called Manychen. 



Manicula, a lyttell hande.



Manifestarius, a, um, notoryous.



Manifesto, tare, to manyfeste or make ap­
paraunt.



Manifestum, manyfeste or clere.



Manifestum habere, to knowe surely.



Manifestus mendatij, proued a lyer.



Manifesto, an aduerbe, sygnyfyeth clere­
lye, playnely.



Manifestarius, a, um, clere, euydente, open­
ly knowen.



Manimoria, thynges, whiche doo abyde in
remembraunce.



Maniolæ, Iles agaynst India, beyonde the
ryuer of Ganges, where as he rockes of
Adamant stones, which do drawe to them
shyppes that haue yron nayles.



Manipulus, an handefull, a grype, a bende
of men, proprely of tenne souldiours.



Manipularis, & maniplaris, a standerd bea­
rer, or baner bearer.



Manipulatim, by bendes.



Manliana imperia, cruelle gouernaunce or
rule, without any mercy.



Manlius, a noble Romayne.



Manna, a delycate meate, whiche god sent
to the Iewes beinge in the deserte. also a
sweete dewe, whyche falleth in the mor­
nynges, and lyethe on leaues congelyd
lyke whyte hony, whyche phisicions do
vse for a medycine to purge coler easily.



Manna thuris, the pouder or duste that co­
meth of frankincense.



Mannus, an amblynge hackeney.



Mannor, aris, ari, to steale.






Mannobarbulus, a balle of leade to throw.
also the caster therof.



Mart. li.12



Mannulus, a nagge, a lyttel hors.



Mansisterna, a pytcher potte.



Mano, are, to runne oute, as lycour dothe:
also to droppe out, to appere out, as sweat
out of the poores.



Mansio, one dayes iourney.



Manstus, stollen.



Mansito, tare, to abyde longe.



Mansuesco, scere, to waxe tame or gentyll.



Mansues, for mansuetus. 



Mansuetudo, dinis, mekenes, gentylnesse, a
moderate temperance betwixte pride and
symplicitie.



Mansuetus, ta, tum, meke, gentyll, tame.



Mansuete, mekely, gentylly.



Mansum, meate, whiche the nourices doo
chewe, and after giue it to the chyld, put­
tynge it into his mouthe.



Festus.



Mansutius, a great eater: also ripe and apt
to be eaten.



Mansus, a, um, chewed.



Mant&ecedil;lum, & mant&ecedil;lium, & mantile, a towel
wherwith menne do wype their handes,
whan they haue washed. Also a cloke.



Manteum, a place where dyuels in ydolles
gaue aunsweres.



Manthicora, a beast which is in India, in bo­
dy like to a lion, but more rough, hauynge
a face like to a man, & in his mouth .ii. rewes
or set of teeth, the taile of a scorpion, & the
voyce of a smalle trumpette: and is of co­
lour redde, and wyll neuer be made tame.



Mantica, a bagge, sometyme a cloke.



Manticula, a purse.



Manticularius, a stealer of napry, also a pike
pours, or cutte pourse.



Manticularia, towels or other lyke thyngis
wherwith men do wype their handes.



Manticulor, aris, ari, to do a thynge slyly, as
to pike a purse.



Manticulatio, slyenesse, deceite.



Mantinea, a cytie in Grece.



Mantis, a prophete.



Mantiscinor, aris, ari, to stele or pike craftily.



Mantissa, the addition in weight.



Manto, tare, among the old writers to abide.



Mantua, a noble citie in Italy, where Ver­
gile the excellent poete was borne.



Mantuanus, a, um, of Mantua.



Mantuariæ tunicæ, sleuyd iackettes.



Manuarius, a, um, manuall.



Manubi&ecedil;, the pray taken of ennemies: also
money, for the whiche the pray was solde.



Manubinarius, the partner of a proye.



Manubrium, the hylte or handle of a wea­
pon or instrument.



Manuleatus, ta, tum, hauinge longe sleeues.



Manum de tabula, a prouerbe, sygnifienge.
Leaue whiles it is wel.



Manum conferere, to ioyne in battayle, to
ioyne in issue, whan one sueth a nother.



Manum ferulæ subducere, to lerne as scho­
lers do in the scholes.



Manumitto, to manumyse or infraunchise a
bonde man.



Manuconfertum ex iure vocare, to chalenge
right or propretie in a thynge, it maye be
taken for derayning of battayle in a wryte
of ryght, after the lawes of Englande.



Manus, a hande, a grapul to fasten shippes
togither, somtime it signifieth a multitude
of men in the ayde of one, sometyme po­
wer, sometyme writynge, also the nose or
snoute of an olyphant.



Manus iniectio, attachement, also saisen or
saisure of a thing, wherunto we make title.



Mapalia, cotages builded rounde like ouens.



Mappa, a table clothe.



Marathon, a felde in the countrey of Athe­
nes, and also a towne there.



Marathron, et Maratrum, an herbe, whiche
is called fenell or fenkill.



Marathusa, an yle wherin is abundaunce of
fenell, and is is also called Clazomenia.



Marceo, cui, cere, to corrupte, to putrifie



Marcellus, a propre name.



Marchia, a countrey in base Germany.



Marcor, oris, corruption, or putrifaction.



Marcomanni, people in Germany, whiche
are nowe supposed to be either of Boeme
or of Morauia.



Mardi, people adioyninge to Persia.



Mare, the See.



Mare cœlo miscere, to trouble al the world.



Marcipor, oris, the seruant of Marcus. 



Mareotis, otidis, a Ryuer in Egipte, also a
parte of Libia, a parte of Epirus.



Mariotides, grapes of that countrey.



Margarid&ecedil;, smalle dates, rounde and white.



Margarita, margaritum, margarites, marga­
ris, garidis, a perle, a Margarite: some­
time generally all preciouse stones ar cal­
led Margaritæ. 



Plinius.



Margaritarius, a seller of perles.



Margariteferus, ra, rum, that which beareth
Margarites.



Margina, a region in Asia.



Margo, ginis, the brymme or edge of euery
thynge, the margent.



Margus, a riuer in Asia.



Maria, a propre name.



Mariaba, the chiefe citie in Saba.



Marinus, na, um, of the see.



Marisc&ecedil;, vnsauery fygges, wylde fygges,
fygges which do open, that the sedes do
appere, also great piles in the fundement.






Mariscus, a bull rushe.



Marita, a wedded woman, a wyfe.



Maritigenus, a, um, com of the kyndof Mars 



Maritimus, of the see syde, or of the see.



Maritus, a wedded man, a husbande.



Marito, are, to wedde.



Marius, a propre name of a man.



Marmarica, a countrey of Affrike.



Marmor, oris, marble stone.



Marmoratus, ta, tum, wrought with marble.



Marmoratio, buyldynge with marble.



Marmoreus, a, um, of marble.



Marpesus, an hyll in the yle callyd Parus.



Marpesius, of the same hylle.



Marplacid&ecedil;, shyps or barges vsed in Media.



Marra, a mattocke.



Marrubium, an herbe called horehounde.



Marrucini, people in Italye.



Mars, martis, callyd god of battayle. some­
tyme it is taken for battayle.



Martia, a countrey in Italye.



Marte suo, of his owne propre wytte, with
out any counsayle.



Marspiter, the father of Mars. 



Marsupium, a powche or pourse.



Martiacus, ca, cum, belongynge to warres.



Martiaca, wages gyuen to souldyours.



Martialis, borne vnder the planet of Mars.



Martius, a, um, pertaynyng to Mars. 



Martius campus, a fyelde at Rome, dedy­
cate to Mars. 



Martius mensis, the moneth callid March.



Martyr, in greke, a wytnesse.



Martyrium, martyrdome.



Mas, maris, a man, or mankynde.



Masculus, a, um, manly, great, wyse.



Masculesco, sci, scere, to be manly, great, or
wyse, to be come of the male kynde.



Masculo, are, to make manly, or stronge.



Masdoranus, a mountayne, whiche diuy­
deth Parthia from Aria.



Massaget&ecedil;, a people in Asia, whiche roun­
nynge on horsebacke throughe desertes,
doo drynke their horses bloudde myxte
with mylke, they also doo eate theyr pa­
rentes, if they die for age: but if they be
sycke, they caste theym to wylde beastes
to be deuoured.



Massinissa, kynge of Numidia, and greate
frende to the Romaynes.



Massica, a countrey in the southe parte of
Spayne.



Massicus, a mountayne in Campania.



Massilia, a cite in hygh France, callid Mar­
siles.



Massiliensis, se, of Marsiles.



Massylia, cum y,a countreye in Affrike, a­
monge the westerne Moores.



Masticeos, reuerende, honourable.



Mastiche, a soote gumme commonlye callyd
Mastix.



Mastigia, & mastigeus, a knaue worthye to
be beaten.



Plautus in
truculen.
Plaut.



Mastigophorus, a felow worthy to be whip­
ped. Also certayne ministers, which with
whyppes remoued the people, where
there was moche prease.



Mastos, a treate. also a cesterne, whereinto
water doth runne, and eftesones runneth
out by a cocke or spoute.



Mastruca, a garment, whiche men of Sar­
dinia vsed to weare.



Mastix, cis, a whyppe.



Mastrupari, to touche dishonestly the priuy
membres of a man.



Masurius, the name of a famous lawyer,
whiche wrate on the lawes ciuyle.



Matella, an vrinall, or other vessell, seruyng
to that pourpose.



Matellio, onis, idem.



Matæotechina, the vanitie, whiche is in a
science or crafte.



Mater, tris, a mother.



Materfamilias, æ, an houswife, goodwyfe of
the house, she that hath gouernaunce of
other women, be she maried or vnmaried.



Mater matrina, she that is a mother,   
& hath a mother liuing.



Materia, & materies, matter, wheerof any
thyng is made, be it mettal, wodde, stone,
erthe, or any thynge elles.



Materialis, le, that which is of som matter.



Materiarius, a carpenter.



Materior, aris, ari, to warke in tymber.



Materis, a frenche speare, or a iauelyn.



Matertera, an aunte or mothers syster.



Mathematicus, he that is cunnynge in aul­
gryme, musyke, geometry, and astronomy.



Mathesis, & mathema, lernyng by a demon­
stracyon.



Matralia, the solemne feastes of Matuta,
called the mother of goddes.



Matresco, scere, to be lyke a mother.



Matricida, he that kylleth his mother.



Matrimonium, wedlocke, matrimonie.



Matrix, cis, the mother or matrice in a wo­
man, in the whyche the chylde is concei­
ued. also matrix is any female kynde that
conceiueth and beareth. Also the citie in a
countrey, where as is the archbishops see
is callyd matrix vrbs, whiche in greke is
callid Metropolis.



Matrona, a wyfe. also the name of a ryuer
in Burbon.



Matronalis, pertaynynge to a wyfe.



Matruelis, the sonne or doughter of my
mothers syster.



Matta, a matte.



Mattiac&ecedil; pil&ecedil;, sope balles.



Mattiacum, a towne in Germanye.






Plaut. in
Milite.



Matura ætas, full or perfyte age.



Maturate, quickely. Iube maturate illam exi­
re huc, Byd her come forthe quickely.



Mature, tymely, nor to soone, nor to late.



Maturesco, scere, to be rype.



Maturitas, tatis, rypenes in all thynge, and
as it were perfection.



Maturo, are, to make rype or perfyte, to do
a thynge perfectly in due tyme & measure:
sometyme to do a thyng spedily or quickly.



Maturus, a, um, rype, perfite, somtime it sig­
nifieth aged. Maturus homo, an aged man.



Matuta, the mornynge, or morowe.



Matutinus, a, um, of the morowe.



Mauors, ortis, Mars. 



Mauortius, a, um, pertayninge to Mars. 



Mauritania, Moriske, or the countreye of
Moores.



Mauri, people called Moores.



Mausolus, the king of a realme callid Caria



Mausoleum, a sepulchre or tombe, whiche
Arghemisia made for her husband Mausolus, 
which for the excellent warkmanship was
accountid to be one of the meruailes of the
worlde, & for the famousnes therof, euery
gret & notable sepulchre is callid Mausoleum 



Maxilla, the cheke bone.



Maximus, a, um, greatest, or most in estimation.



Maximates, the greattest men in auctoritie.



Maximitas, tatis, auncient wryters vsed for
greatnesse.



Maza, a cake made of floure and mylke.



Mazaca, a cytie in Cappadocia vnder the
hyll callid Argeus, nowe called Cesaria.



Mazeras, a ryuer in the mouthe of the see,
called mare Hircanum.



Mazononium, a platter wherin meat is caried

 

 M, ANTE E.

MEapte, myne owne.



Meatus, tus, a passage, a waye.



Mecastor, a fourme of swearynge, as
who sayth, so Castor helpe me.



Mechanicus, a craftes manne.



Mechanica ars, a handy crafte.



Mecœnas, atis, minion to Augustus the em­
perour, and bicause he was the supporter
of great lerned men, all fauourers and suc­
courers of lerned men be so called.



Meconis, a kynde of letuse, which causeth
a man to slepe.



Mecon, in greke, is popye in englyshe.



Mecum, with me. mecum facit, it maketh for my
purpose. Mecum sentit, he is of min opinion.



Medea, wyfe vnto Iason, a witche and cru­
elle womanne.



Medela, remedy by medicine.



Mederga, for erga, towarde me.



Medeor, eris, eri, to heale or cure.



Media, a region in Asia.



Media vocabula, wordes whiche maye be
taken in a good or ylle parte, as tempestas
whiche signifieth tempest and tyme, faci­
nus, a notable dede good or ylle, ualitudo,
helth, or syckenes, and other lyke.



Medianus, na, num, that which is in the midle.



Mediastinus, a drudge or lubber, which doth
in the howse all maner of vyle seruice, as
swepe or clense the house, carie wodde to
the kytchen, and other like drudgery.



Budeus.



Mediastimus, a, um, the myddelmoste.



Mediastrinus, the seruant, whiche hath the
rule of the hous vnder his maister.



Medica, an herbe, whiche specially noury­
sheth horses, and ones beinge sowen, efte­
sones springeth ten yeres continually, and
commonly it is called Sylla.



Medibile, in state to be healed, curable.



Medicabilis, le, curable.



Medicabilis, le, curable.



Medicamentarius, a phisycion.



Medicamentarius, a, um, pertaynyng to me­
dicyne.



Medicina, medicamen, medicamentum, a me­
dicine. sometyme it sygnifieth poyson.



Medicinalis, le, medicynable.



Medico, & medicor, aris, ari, to hele or cure.



Medicus, a phisytion.



Medicus, ca, cum, pertaining to phisike.



Medimnus, a certayn measure of corne, con­
taynynge syxe tymes the measure callyd
modius. Vide modium.
rede in the table of measures.
An entry for modium was not found in the dictionary.


Mediocre, diocre, measurable, in a meane,
moderate.



Mediocritas, tatis, a meane.



Mediolanum, the chiefe citie of Lombar­
dy, callyd Myllayne.



Medioximus, a, um, meane, or in the middes



Medipontus, an instrumente, wherwith ro­
pes are made.



Meditabundus, carefull, studiouse.



Meditari se, to exercise hym selfe.



Plautus in
Stich. in
Bacch.



Meditate, studiousely, perfectelye on the
fyngers endes.



Meditatio, a thynkynge or dyuysynge in
thought. also an exercise, aswell of minde,
as of bodye.



Meditatorius, a, um, whyche belongethe to
medytation.



Mediterraneus, in the myddel of the lande,
and furthest from the see.



Meditor, aris, ari, to thynke deepely, and in
thynkynge to fynde out, to purpose, to lay
snares, to synge or playe swetely.



Meditrina, the goddesse of phisyke.



Meditrinalia, ceremonyes vsed by theym.
whyche dranke muste or newe wyne.



Meditullium, the myddell.






Medius, a, um,  in the myddell.



Medium commun&ecedil;, amonge all.



Medius, a meane or meditatour betwene .ii.
menne.



Medius fidius, an othe, whiche althoughe
somtyme it had a nother signification, yet
may it nowe in a commune fourme of spe­
kynge be vsed in this wise, by the faythe
of my body: sens Dius for Iupiter, and fi­
dius for filius, be nowe out of vse.



Meduacus, a Ryuer aboute Venyce, called
nowe Brent.



Medulla, marowe, whiche is in bones.



Medullo, are, to take out marowe, somtime
to expresse vtterly. Narra iam rem nobis
omnem, atque emedulla, Tell and expresse
vtterly to vs all the hole matter.
Plaut.


Medullitus, innerly into the marowe.



Medusa, a lady, of whom fables do report,
that her heares by Minerua were tourned
in to adders, and they which behelde her
were tourned into stones: whom Perseus
afterward slewe. she is somtyme taken for
one of the furies of hell.



Mefansilium, a certayne weapon to throwe.



Mægabizi, priestes of Diana, whiche alway
were gelded.



Megera, a furie or turmentour of hel, whi­
che Paynyms supposed dyd prouoke and
stere men to woodnes.



Megalesia, the festiual day, dedicate to Cy­
bele, called the mother of goddes among
Paynyms.



Megalenses, & megalesia, playes to the ho­
nour of Cybele. 



Megalium, a swete oyntement.



Megaloprepeia, an honourable facyon in
gyuynge or imployeng of great thynges,
whych besemeth a man of great courage.



Megaloprepes, he that doth great thinges
accordynge to his dignitie.



Megara, a Cytie belongynge to Athenes.
It was also the name of oone of Hercu­
les wyues.



Megaris, idis, a countrey in Achaia.



Megistanes, whome we doo calle nobles or
pieres of the realme.



Me hercle, an othe sworne by Hercules. 



Meio, iere, to pysse.



Mel, mellis, hony.



Mellene, a citie in Arcadia.



Melampus, a mannes name.



Melamphyllon, an herbe.



Melancholia, melancolye.



Melancoryphus, a byrde called a fynche.



Melanthia, an herbe called also Nigella.



Melanurus, a fyshe hauynge a blacke taile.



Plini.



Melandria, the leane partes of the fishe cal­
led Tunny.



Melculum, a wanton worde spoken by lo­
uers vnto their paramours, my litelhony.



Meleagrides, byrdes, whiche we doo calle
hennes of Genny.



Melagina, an yle in the Venecian see.



Melenetus, a kynde of faukons very lytell
of body, black and puissant, which haun­
teth mountaynes, and feedeth her byrdes
alone, a merlyon as I suppose.



Mælibeus, a shepardes name.



Melibœa, a citie in Thessaly.



Meliceris, idis, a soore or skalle in the heed
lyke a hony combe, out of the whiche co­
meth an humour lyke hony.



Melicraton, wyne & hony sodden togither.



Melicerta, whome the gentyls dyd honour
for one of the goddes of the see.



Melicus, a musycyan.



Melilotos, an herbe called melilote.



Melimela, swete appulles.



Melina, a swete shalme.



Melinus, na, num, whyte russette, or a gyn­
ger coloure.



Melioresco, scere, to be better.



Melipecta, meates made with honye.



Melis, seu melius, a beaste called a graye, a
brocke, or a badger.



Melisphillon, smallache.



Melissa, a woman, who with her syster A­
malthea, nourysshed Iupyter. It is also an
herbe, commonly called baume.



Melite, siue melita, an Ile lyeng betwene I­
taly and Epirus. Also a citie made by the
Carthaginensis.



Melitites, a drynke made of hony and must,
or newe wyne.



Mellitones, places where bees be norished.



Melitæi canes, & melitenses, were praty lit­
tel houndes, in the which ladies toke ple­
sure and delyte, whiche were brought out
of the sayde yle of Melite.



Melites, a precyous stone of the colour of
an orenge.



Melissus, the name of hym, whiche dydde
fyrst sacrifice vnto ydolles. also the name
of an auuncient philosopher.



Mellium, a dogges coler.



Mellarius, a hony man, or sellar of hony.



Mellarius, a, um, of honye.



Mellatio, the tyme of driuynge of hyues,
whan hony is taken out.



Mellatium, new must, wherin hony is sodden.



Mellifico, care, to make hony.



Mellificatio, makynge of honye.



Mellificum, idem.



Mellifluus, a, um, swete as honye.



Melligo, ginis, a mell dewe, whiche falleth
on leaues of trees, and somtime on corne.






Melliloquus, a sweete speaker.



Melilla, my hony, my sweetynge, a worde
of wanton dalyers.



Mellisones, they which doo practyse dres­
synge of honye.



Melliturgus, a warker or maker of hony.



Mellitus, a, um, myxte with honye.



Melitus, the name of hym, whiche accused
Socrates. 



Melizonum, a confection made with honye
clarifyed.



Apitius.



Melleus, a, um, of hony. also swete, as Vox
mellea, a swete voyce.



Mellica, a kynde of poulse, of the coloure
of redde, of the fourme of Mylle



Melo, a ryuer callyd also Geon.



Melodia, melodye.



Melodes, he that syngeth cunnyngely, and
swetely.



Meloessa, an yle by Sicile, in the whyche
was great plenty of shepe.



Melomeli, whan apples, very rype & fayre,
be conserued in hony.



Mellonia, uel Melona, callyd the goddesse
of honye.



Melos, odis, melodye, armonye.



Melora, & melote, a shepes felle or skynne.



Melpomene, one of the nyne Musis.



Membrana, parchement or velume, wherin
men do write, also the ouermoste skynne
of any thynge.



Membrosus, a, um, hauyng a great membre.



Membraneus, a, um, of parchmyn or velum.



Membranulum, a small membre.



Membrare, to fourme membres.



Membratim, by euery membre.



Membratura, the setting or order of membres.



Membrum, a membre.



Memet, my selfe.



Memini, I remembre.



Memerylus, a lyttel tree lyke a citron tree.



Memnon, the sonne of Thiton, whiche came
to the ayde of the Troyans.



Memnoni&ecedil; aues, byrdes, which were suppo­
sed to growe of the ashes of Memnon.



Memor, oris, he that remembreth.



Memorabilis, le, worthy remembraunce.



Memoratus, tus, et Memoratio, a remem­
brynge.



Memoria, memory, remembraunce.



Memoriale, a thynge, whiche shulde be re­
membred.



Memoriosus, he that hath a good memory.



Memoriter, parfitely by hart, or with good
remembraunce.



Memoro, are, to remembre, somtyme to tel,
or expounde, to recite or reherse.



Memphis, a great citie in Egipt.



Memphiticus, of that citie.



Memphe, idem.



Mena, a lyttell fyshe, blacke in somer, and
white in wynter.



Menechmi, the name of a comedy of Plaut. 



Menalippa, quene of Amazon, whom Her­
cules vaynquished.



Menapij, people of the countrey called Gel­
larlande, or Gylderlande.



Menander, a famouse poete, a wryter of co­
medies.



Menaria, an Ile in the see betwene Car­
thage and Sicile.



Menceps, he or she, whiche is oute of her
wytte.



Menda, et Mendum, a faulte or vice in wry­
tynge.



Mendatium, a lye.



Mendaculum, a lyttell fault or lye.



Medax, acis, a lyar.



Mendicabulum, beggynge.



Mendaciloquus, a teller of lyes.



Mendicitas, tatis, et Mendicimonium, beggery.



Mendico, are, to begge.



Mendicula, a certayne vesture.



Mendicus, a beggar.



Mendix, an offyce amonge the olde Italy­
ans called Osci.



Meneletus, a byrde lyke to a small egle.



Memana ædificia, buyldynge outewarde in
prospectes or galeries.



Menix, an Ile agaynst the lasse Affrica.



Mens, tis, the hyghest and chiefe parte of
the mynde.



Mensa, a table or bourd to eate on. somtime
dyner or soupper.



Mensarius, the banker or exchaungeour, of
whom men do borow money vpon gayne,
called exchaunge.



Mensio, a measure.



Mensis, a moneth.



Menstrualis, & menstruus, a, um, pertaynyng
to a monethe.



Menstruatus, ta, tum, that which hath flou­
res lyke to women



Menstruum, a womans naturall purgation
called floures.



Menstruus, a, um, that whiche hapneth e­
uery moneth.



Mensura, a measure.



Mensurnus, a, um, monthly.



Menta, et Mentula, the preuye membre of
a manne.



Mentagra, a dyssease, whiche couereth all
the face with a skurfe.



Mente captus, a madde manne.



Mentha, an herbe called mynte.



Menthastrum, wylde mynte.



Mentibor, for mentiar, I shall make a lye.



Plaut.






Mentigo, a dyssease, whiche infectith bea­
stes with scabbes aboute theyr mouthes
and lyppes.



Mentior, iris, iri, to lye.



Mentoas, the famous ryuer, whiche is now
called Danubius.



Mentor, an excellent grauour of vessel.



Mentum, a chynne.



Menus, a riuer in Germany.



Meo, are, to go, to flowe.



Sidonius.



Meo nomine, for my cause, on my behalfe.



Mephiticus, ca, cum, stynkynge.



Meatus, condutes or ways, wherby any hu­
mour floweth.



Mephitis, a stenche or yl sauour, which pro­
cedeth of corrupt water or licour, mixt
with erthe.



Meopte ingenio, by myn owne wytte.



Meracus, ca, cum, et Merax, racis, pure with­
out any mixture.



Mercalis, le, Vendible, or that, which maye
be bought.



Mercator, oris, euery byar, a marchaunt.



Mercatura, the feate of marchaundyse.



Mercatus, tus, the act of byinge.



Mercatus, ti, a market, or fayre.



Mercatus, ta, tum, bought.



Mercenarius, an hyred seruaunt.



Mercenarius, a, um, that whiche maye be
hyred.



Merces, cis, marchaundise, ware, chaffer.



Merces, cedis, wages, the reward of labour
or seruice.



Mercimonium, that whiche is tourned in
byenge and sellynge.



Mercor, aris, ari, to bye for to sel for gaynes.
sometymes to bie generally.



Mercurialis, an herbe called mercury.



Mercurius, was of the paynimes called god
of Eloquence, and messager of Iupiter, it
is the name of one of the seuen planettes.



Merda, the excrement or ordure of a man
or beaste.



Merdo, are, to expell ordure.



Merenda, meate eaten at after noone, a col­
lation, a none mele.



Mereo, ere, et Mereor, eri, to take wages, to
deserue, to exercise a vile occupation. Me­
reor bene de te, I do somewhat for the, I
do serue to haue the my frende, or to haue
thy fauour. Male mereor do te, I doo the
displeasure, I do yll deserue thy fauour.
Also Merere, to serue in warres. Merere
stipendia, to take wagis as a souldyour, or
to be a souldiour.



Meretricie, hoorishely.



Plautus in
milite.



Meretricius, hooredome, or brothelry.



Meretricium, a, um, perteyning to brothelry.



Meretricor, aris, ari, to lyue in brothelry, to
playe the harlote.



Mere, purely.



Meretrix, icis, an harlot, or brothell.



Merge, pitcheforkes fo to take vp sheues.



Mergites, gripes of corne.



Mergi, vines, or other small trees, whiche
ar bowed and haue the toppes bowe wise
tourned and set into the erthe.



Mergo, si, gere, to drowne in the water.



Mergulus, an instrument where the marche
of a lampe is conteyned.



Mergus, goris, a bukket to drawe vp water.



Mergus, gi, a waterfoule called a dyue dop­
par, some do call it a foule of the see lyke
to a gull, whiche dyueth vnder the water
to take fishe.



Meribibulus, he that drynketh moch wyne
without water.



Meridies, noonetyde.



Meridianus, a, um, perteynyng to none.



Meridio, are, et Meridior, ari, to dyne, to eate
meate at noone, to slepe at none.



Meridiatio, noone reste.



Merismos, a fygure called also dystributio,
wherby the oration is distributed into son­
dry sentences.



Merito, worthily, with good cause.



Merito, are, to be worthye, also to serue in
warres.



Meritorius, a, um, that whiche is let or sette
for aduantage.



Meritoria taberna, a house wherinto a man
is receyued for his money.



Meritoria, howses or shoppes let to hyre.



Meritum, a benefite, a deserte good or ylle.



Meritus, ta, tum, deserued, conuenient.



Meritus, a mountayne in the thirde part of
Europa beyonde Grece.



Meroe, an yle on the great ryuer of Nilus
in Egipte.



Mero, was in scorne the name of Nero, bi­
cause he was so great a drynker of wyne.



Merobiba, she that drynkethe wyne with­
out water.




Merops, a byrde which doth eate bees.



Meroctes, a lyttell stone of the coloure of
leekes, whiche sweateth a lyckour lyke
to mylke.



Meropes, men of dyuers languages.



Meropus, a mountain in Grece by Thessaly.



Meros, a hylle of Inde, at the foote wher­
of is the citie callyd Nisa.



Merso, are, to drowne often.



Merto, idem.



Merula, a byrde.



Merum, wyne vnlayde, without water.



Merus, a, um, soole, mere, pure.



Merx, cis, one kynd of marchandyse.






Mesa, a ryuer whiche runneth by Braband
and the lande of Luke and Gellar, called
the Mase.



Mesapia, a countrey called also Apulia.



Mesauli, entrees betwene the haule and the
parlour.



Mesia, a Countrey ioynynge to Hungrye,
Myse.



Mesochorus, he that plaieth on a flute or o­
ther pype in the myddes of the daunsers.



Budeus.



Mesonauta, a drudge in a shyppe, or a shyp
page, whiche dothe all vyle seruice in the
shyppe.



Mesoleucos, a preciouse stone, blacke, ha­
uynge a whyte strake in the myddes.



Mesomelas, a whyte stone, hauyng a blacke
lyne in the myddes.



Mesonyxion, midnyght.



Mesopotamia, a countreye lyinge betwene
the two greatte ryuers Euphrates, and
Tigris.



Mespilus a medlar tree.



Mespilum, a fruite called a medlar.



Messala, a noble oratour of Rome.



Messalina, wyfe to the emperour Claudius
a woman of vnsaciable lechery.



Messana, a citie in Sicile.



Messene, a citie in Grece.



Messias, Christe.



Messis, haruest, sometyme it sygnifieth the
corne or the grapes newe mowen or ga­
ther ed.



Messio, onis, a reapynge



Messor, oris, a reaper.



Messorius, messoria, rium, perteynynge to
reapynge.



Meta, a but, or pricke to shote at, somtyme
a marke or gowle in the felde, where vnto
men or horses do runne, somtyme a bounde
in landes. Also a reyke of corne or heye,
also the lower part of a myll.



Meta lactis, a Chese.



Metabasis, a passage.



Metabole, chaunge.



Metagonium, a promontory or mountayne
lyinge into the see, whiche diuideth Affri­
ca fro Numidia.



Metalepsis, a fygure, whereby a worde is
put from his commune signification.



Mettalli, hyred souldiours.



Metallici, they which do dygge and warke
mettall out of the mynes, wherin mettall
is founde.



Metallum, mettalle.



Metamorphosis, eos, a transformation or
chaungynge of fygure.



Metaphora, a translation of wordes frome
their propre sygnifycation.



Metaplasmus, a fygure callyd transforma­
tion. It is a translatyng of wordes being
in prose into a fourme of meter, eyther for
necessitie, or to augmente the elegancye.



Metapontum, a citie in the realme of Naples.



Metempsychosis, the transposyng of soules
after the opinion of the Pythagoriens, out
of one body into an othe r body.



Metathesis, where one letter is transposed
from one place in a worde into an nother
as Tymber Tymbre.



Metaurus, et metaurum, a ryuer of Umbria,
whiche runneth into Flaminia.



Metellus, the propre name of dyuers noble
Romaynes.



Meteoria, speculation in high thynges.



Meteorologus, he that is studious in suche
speculation.



Meteora, a bokes of Aristotle, wherin he
treateth of sterres, and suche other cele­
stiall thynges.



Meteoroscopus, a beholder of high thingis



Methodus, a compendious or redy way, or
a rule certayne to lerne by any science.



Metonymia, a fygure called denomination,
as Bacchus for wyne, Venus for lechery,
Cupido for loue.



Methymna, a citie in the yle of Lesbos.



Meticulosus, temerouse or fearefull.



Metior, tiris, tiri, to mete or measure, to giue
by measure, to passe ouer.



Meto, messui, metere, to reape.



Metona, a towne in Grece called Modon.



Metor, aris, ari, to sette boundes, to mea­
sure lande, to dispose.



Metopion, oyle of almondes, also a tree in
Affrica, whiche destylleth downe gumme
lyke to rosyn.



Metoposcopus, he that consydereth a mans
face, and therby iudgeth his condycions
or affectes.



Metreta, a measure for lyckour, whiche is
also called Amphora, and contayned eue­
ry way square one foote.
rede the greke table of
measures.



Metropolis, the chiefe citie.



Metropolitanus, a man of that citie.



Metropolites, the bishop of the chiefe citie.



Metrum, a verse.



Metuo, tui, tuere, to feare or dreade with
tremblynge.



Metus, tus, feare, drede.



Metys, the refuse of waxe.



Meu, an herbe.



Meuania, a citie in the part of Italy, callyd
Umbria, wherein Propertius the poete
was borne.



Meneuia, a citie in wales called saint Dauid.



Meus, a, meum, myne.



Meum est, it is my duetie or my parte.






¶ M, ANTE  I.

MI, to me.



Mica, a crumme of breade.



Mico, care, to glisten, or shyne. Dig­
gnus qui cum in tenebris mices, is applied to
one, whiche is reputed to be an honeste
man, and a trusty, whiche wyll kepe touch
and deceyue no man. It may be this wise
translated, in a commune fourme of spea­
kynge. He is one, with whom thou mayst
assuredly bargayne. also to holde vp now
one fynger, nowe two, as men do whanne
they trete or bargain togyther by signes.



Miconium, an herbe called Popy.



Microcosmas, a lyttell worlde.



Micrologia, curiositie aboute thynges of
no valour.



Micrologus, a lyttell communication.



Micropsichia, feble courage, faynt harted.



Micropsichi, they which haue faint hartis.



Micturio, ire, to pysse.



Mictyris, poore folkes potage.



Mida, a worme bredynge in beanes.



Midas, a kynge of Phrigie, who excellyd
all other in rychesse.



Mi&ecedil;sa, a towne in Macedonia.



Migro, are, to remoue frome one place, to
dwell in an other.



Miles, militis, a man of warre, a souldiour.



Mihipte, Cato vsed for mihi ipsi.



Miletus, a citie in Grece.



Milesius, a, um, of that citie.



Militaris uia, the hygh way.



Militariter, warrely.



Militia, warre. sommetyme the exercise of
warre.



Milito, tare, to goo on warfare, or to be in
warres.



Milium, a smalle grayne callyd Myll.



Mille & millia, a thousande.



Millepeda, a worme hauynge a great num­
bre of feete.



Millearium, a myle, also a cawdron, also a
pyller in Rome, wherein was grauen all
the wayes of Italye.



Milliarius, a, um, of a thousande weight.



Millies, a thousande tymes.



Millus, a mastyues colar, made of lether
with nayles.



Milo, onis, the name of one, whiche at the
game of Olimpus with his bare hande,
slewe a bulle, and after caried hym a fur­
longe, and the same daye eate hym euery
morsel. It was also a noble Romayne, for
whom Tullie made an oration, conteining
incomparable eloquence.



Miluina tibia, a cornette, or smalle shaulme.



Miluus, & miluius, a kyte. There is also a
fyshe and a sterre of the same name.



Miluinus, na, num, of a kyte, or lyke a kyte.



Mimallones, women dedicate to the folishe
ceremonies of Bacchus. 



Mimas, a mountayne of Thracia.



Mimus, a bourder or rayler, which in moc­
kynge other men in gesture and counte­
naunce, dothe folowe them, faynynge to
be the same persones, whome they do re­
proue. Mimi, be verses counterfaytynge
moche wantonnes without any reuerence,
hauynge not withstandynge somme wyse
sentences myngled therwith.



Mimicus, ca, cum, of suche wanton facion.



Mimographus, a wryter of suche wanton
matters.



Mina, & mna, was the pounde of Athenes,
which in weight contained. lxxv. dragmas:
in money it conteined a hundred dragmas
or olde poysegrotes, wherof .viii. wente
to one ounce.
rede in the addicion and in the tables
of poyse and money.
Not found in the addicion.


Minæ, arum, thretenynges. also battylmen­
tes of walles.



Minax, acis, full of thretnynges.



Minaciter, thretnyngly.



Mincius, a ryuer of the Venecians.



Minei, people in Arabia, nigh to the red see



Minera, & mineralia, are of somme vsed for
mynes, out of the which mettal is digged.



Minerua, called goddesse of doctryne and
wysedom, which was also named Pallas. 



Minerual, & mineruale, a rewarde gyuen
somtime by scholers vnto their maysters,
in meate or drynke.



Mingo, gere, to make water, to pysse.



Miniacius, a, um, redde, of sinople colour.



Minime, & minimum, leste. minime gentium,
leste in all mens opinions. sometyme mini­
me signifieth no, in no wise. minime doctus
vnlerned. minime sapiens, vnwyse. minime
mirum, lyttell meruayle.



Minio, are, to dye redde.



Miniati libri, limned bokes, hauyng letters
of dyuers colours.



Minister, tri, a seruant.



Ministerium, seruice, sometyme generallye
all warke. somtyme ministeria be seruantis.



Ministro, are, to serue, to gyue a thynge in
doinge seruyce.



Minor, aris, ari, to thrette.



Minitor, aris, ari, to thrette soore.



Minium, Synople or redde leade.



Minius, a ryuer in Spayne.



Minoa, the name of a citie in Sycile, of an
other in the ile called Amorgos, by Sicile



Minos, was the kynge of Crete, and gaue
to theym lawes, whome paynyms for his
excellente iustice, supposed to be chyefe
Iudge of helle.






Minthos, dunge or ordure.



Minotaurus, was a monster kepte in Crete,
halfe a man, halfe a bulle.



Minturn&ecedil;, a citie in Campania.



Minuo, ere, to mynishe.



Minurizo, are, to synge smalle, or to feyne
in syngynge.



Minus, lesse.



Minutal, a meate made with chopped her­
bes, a iussell.



Minutarius, a sellar of tryfles or smalle ha­
berdashe ware.



Minutatim, pece mele, in gobettes.



Minutim, idem.



Minutia, the smallest thing that may be sene.



Minutus, a, um, minished.



Minyæ, a towne in Thessalia.



Miniariæ, mines, they be also vaynes of me­
tall, out of the whiche is taken synope.



Mira, wonders or meruayles.



Mirabilis, le, meruaylous, wonderfull.



Miraculum, a miracle, a thynge excedynge
nature, or commune reason.



Mirifico, care, to make wonderfull.



Mirificus, ca, cum, wonderfully done, mer­
vaylouse.



Mirmeciæ, wertes in the priuie partes.



Mirmillones, chalengers at fightynge with
swordes.



Miror, aris, ari, to meruayle, to like a thing.



Mirum in modum, in a meruaylouse facion.



Misanthropos, he that hateth the company
of men.



Miscellanea, a myxture of dyuers thynges.



Misceo, cui, scere, to myxe or meddell to­
gether, to confounde together, to trou­
ble or to do a thynge out of order or rea­
son, sometyme it sygnyfyeth to serue one
with drynke.
Vide com­
pos.


Misellus, a lyttell wretche.



Miser, eri, a wretche, sometyme innocent.



Miserabilis, le, myserable, wretched, lamen­
table.



Miserabiliter, miserably, lamentably.



Miserandus, to be pitied.



Miserator, he that dothe an acte of charytie
on hym whom he pytieth.



Misericors, dis, mercifull.



Misere, miserably, pitiousely, vnhappyly.



Misere amat, he loueth excedyngely.



Miserior, eris, misereri, to haue pitie.



Miseresco, scere, to be moued with pitie.



Miseret me, I haue pitie.



Miseretur, I am moued with pitie.



Miseria, misery, infelicitie.



Miseritudo, idem.



Misericordia, pitie.



Misericorditer, pitiefully.



Miseriter, miserably.



Miseror, aris, ari, to haue pitie.



Misogynia, an hater of women.



Missenus, an hyll in Campania.



Missiculo, are, to sende often.



Missile, all thynge that is throwen.



Missilia, thynges whiche the auncient em­
perours were wonte to caste amonge the
people, as breade, cakes, swete oyntement,
and suche lyke thynges, which was done
in the Theatre, in the feastes, called Sa­
turnalia.



Missio, a message, also leaue to departe.



Missito, tare, to sende often.



Missus, a, um, sente.



Missus, us, a course, whan one thynge com­
meth in a distance after a nother, a turne.



Missum facere, to omit or passe ouer a  thing,
also to gyue leaue to departe.



Mitellum, a lyttel miter.



Mitis, mite, mieke, symple, quiete.



Mitesco, scere, to waxe tame or quiet, som­
tyme to waxe rype.



Mithra, the Persians do call the sonne, and
also the chiefe priest of the sonne.



Mithrax, a stone of the colour of a rose, but
agaynst the sonne he is chaungeable.



Mithria ca sacra, ceremonies of the sonne.



Mithridates, a puissaunt kynge of Ponthus
in Asia.



Mithridaticum, a medicine lyke to tryakle,
called Mitridate.



Mithylenæ, arum, a citie in the ile of Lesbos.



Mitigo, are, to mitigate, to swage.



Mitifico, to pacifye or make quyete.



Mitra, a myter, It was also a tyre of wo­
mennes heedes.



Mitto, misi, mittere, to sende, to leaue or lay
aparte, to gyue. Mittere sanguinem, to let
bloudde. Mittesanguis, a bloudde lettyng,
or a bloudshede.



Mitterin, an Iyle syxe dayes saylynge oute
of Englande, wherein is greatte plentie
of tynne.



Mittas frenum affectibus, Brydelle thyne
affections.



Mitte hunc ire, Lette hym goo.



Mitte hanc noxiam, Forgyue me that faute.



Mittere in consilium, to lette the iuges de­
parte to gyue sentence, after that the ora­
tour hath finished his oration, or the law­
yer his plee.
Cice. pro
Cluencio.
Asc. Ped.


Mixtarius, a cuppe, wherin wyne is alayde
with water.

 

M, ANTE N.

MNa, idem quod mina.



Mnemosyne, memory.



Mnesteræ, wowars.



Mnestheus, the name of a Troyane.






¶ M, ANTE O.

MOab, a citie of Araby. also the name
of oone of the sonnes of Loth, of
whom the peple are called Moabit&ecedil;



Mobilis, le, mouable, sone moued.



Moderatus, ta, tum, moderate, temperate.



Moderator, oris, a gouernoure.



Moderor, aris, ari,  et Modero, are, to go­
uerne, to rule, to sette a measure in thyn­
ges, to moderate.



Moderatio, moderation, temperaunce.



Modestia, modestie, temperaunce.



Modesté, temperately, sobrely, aduisedly.



Modestus, temperate, well aduised.



Modialis, le, that which conteineth a bushel



Modicus, ca, cum, which excedeth not, mea­
surable, sometyme lyttell or fewe.



Modice, meanely.



Modificor, caris, cari, to take the measure
of a thynge.



Modiolus, a buckette, where with water is
drawen out of a well: or a pot fastned to a
whele, whiche bryngeth vp water, & pou­
reth it out.



Modiparatores, men ordeyned to see mea­
sure kepte.



Modius, a bushell: it was proprelye a mea­
sure of drye thynges, whiche conteyned.
xvi. Sextarios, vide postea in sextario.
rede in the table of measure.



Modo, nowe, nowe late, somtyme it signy­
fieth so that. Non refert, modo id faciat, It
maketh no mattier, soo that he doo it. al­
so onely.



Modo nostro, after our facion.



Modulor, aris, ari, to make or doo a thynge
by numbre and measure, also to synge.



Modulus, et Modulamen, a songe, a modu­
lation, the tyme in syngynge.



Modus, maner, measure, furme, facion, way,
quantite, ende. Etsi nihil scripsit, nisi de mo­
do agri, although he wrote nothyng but of
the quantitie of the felde.
Ci. ad At.
Columel.


Mœchor, aris, ari, to commytte auoutry.



Plautus in
Castel.



Mœchus, an auoutrer, or lechour.



Mœchisso, are, to commytte auoutry.



Mœnia, walles of a towne or castell.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Mœnitus, ta, tum, walled.



Mœreo, ere, to be sorowfull.



Mœro, are, to make one sadde and heuy.



Mœror, oris, sorowe.



Mœstitia, idem.



Mœsia, a prouince in Asia nygh to Pontus.



Mœstiter, heuyly, sorowfully.



Mœro, are, to make one sorye.



Mœstus, a, um, sory or sorowfull.



Mœsto, are, Mœstifico, care, to make sorow­
full.



Moga, a countreye in Asia, called nowe
Cesaria.



Moguntia, a noble Citie in Germany, cal­
led Mense.



Mola, a myl, it is also a great pece of fleshe
without shape, growen in a woman, whi­
che causeth them somtyme to thynke, that
they be with chylde, it is also a cake made
of mele and salte.



Molaris, a cheke tothe.



Molaris, re, et Molarius, ia, um, perteyning
to a myll.



Molendinarius, ia, um, idem.



Molarius equus, an horse, whiche dryueth
about a malte myll.



Molendinarius, a myllar.



Moles, a thynge that is verye greatte and
weightye: sommetyme it is taken for dif­
fycultie.



Molestia, griefe.



Molesta tunica, a garment which was myxt
with some mater, whiche gathered fyre,
putte on some persones that shulde suffre
deathe.



Moleste, greuousely.



Molesto, are, to greue, to offende, to do dis­
pleasure to one.



Molestus, a, um, that whiche greueth, offen­
deth, or discontenteth.



Moletrina, a morter or querne, wherin any
thynge maye be grounde with the hande.



Molimen, et molimentum, that whiche we
go about and endeuour vs to do.



Molior, iris, iri, to moue, to be moued, or
styrred to doo a thynge. moliri classem, to
prepare a nauy. moliri iter, to perfourme
a iourneye. moliri habenas, to rule. moliri
insidias, to laye snares, to laye in awayte.
Moliri arcem, to buylde a fortresse. Moliri
bellum, to make warre. Moliri is somtime
to deuyse or inuent, also to go about to do
a thynge, to make, to be taryed or lette.
Moliri moram, to tary.



Molitor, oris, a myllar.



Mollesco, scere, to waxe softe, to be pacifi­
ed from wrathe.



Molestra, a shepes fell.



Mollicies, et mollicia, softnesse, tendernes,
delicatenesse, womanlynesse.



Mollicina, fyne clothe or silke.



Molliculus, la, tender delycate,



Mollifico, to make softe or tender.



Mollio, ire, to make softe or tender, to pa­
cifie or appayse, to make wanton or tender.



Mollis, softe, tender. molle ingenium, a wit
whiche lyghtely taketh. mollis homo, a
man effemynate, or womanly, not hardye
or constant of wytte, inuolued an wanton
pleasures and sensuall appetite, somtyme
mollis sygnifieth type, also remisse, some­




tyme pleasaunt, also easy to be pleased.



Molliter, gentylly with good wylle, easily,
delycately.



Mollitudo, inis, softnes and gentylnes.



Mollusca, a nutte with a softe shale, a fyl­
berde.



Molluscum, the wenne of a tree.



Molo, molui, lire, to grynde.



Molochinus color, a colour like to the flou­
res of mallowes.



Molorthus, a plumrule, suche as masons
and carpenters doo occupie in squarynge
of stone and tymber.



Molossa gens, people in the parte of Grece
called Epirus.



Molossus, a mastiue dogge. it is also a fote
in meter.



Molothros, a kynde of white vynes.



Molucrum, a square piece of tymber, wher­
on the paynyms dyd sacrifyce. It is also
the trendyll of a myll. Also the swellynge
of a womans bealy, whiche dothe happen
as well to maidens, as to wyues.



Molybdena, an herbe called also Plumbago, it
is also the oore of leade or syluer.



Molybditis, the spume or fome of leade.



Momentaneus, a, um, that whyche durethe
but a lyttell whyles, or shortly altereth.



Momentarius, a, um, that whiche is done in
a lyttell space.



Momentum, the lefte parte of tyme, which
can not be assigned, a moment.



Momus, called the god of reprehencion.



Momo satisfacere, to contente hym, whom
almoste nothynge may please.



Momo iudice decertare, to contende afore
a rigorous and extreme iudge.



Monachus, a solytarie person, all be it that
it is vsed for a monke.



Monachris, a mountayne in Archadia.



Monarcha, a prynce, whiche reuleth alone
without piere or companyon, monarche.



Monarchia, the rule of one monarchie.



Monas, monadis, the numbre of one, vnitie.



Monasterium, a place solytarie.



Monedula, a byrde callydde a Choughe or
Cadesse.



Moneo, monere, to warne, to putte in re­
membraunce.



Monitor, toris, he that warneth a man, or
putteth hym in remembraunce.



Moneta, money. also the name of Iuno. 



Monetalis, le, pertaynynge to money.



Monetarius, a maker of money, a coyner.



Monile, a colar or bee, whiche women vse
to weare aboute their neckes. It is also a
poytrell of a horse.



Monitio, warnynge.



Monitus, tus, idem.



Monitorius, a, um, that whiche doth warne,
or exhorte.



Monna, an Ile pertaynynge to Englande,
whiche some do suppose to be Anglesey,
somme Manne, betwene Lancaster and
Irelande.



Monobeli, they whiche haue a longe thing
lyke to spyttes. Also they that be veraye
hyghe in personnage and aboue other.
Lampridius in uita Alex.



Monochordium, an Instrumente, hauynge
manye strynges of oone sowne, sauynge
that with smalle pieces of cloth, the sou­
nes be distincte, as Clauycordes be.



Monœchus, a hauen of Liguria.



Monoceros, otis, an Unycorne.



Monoculus, a man hauynge but one eye.



Monodia, a lamentable or mournyng song,
suche as is songen in funeralles.



Monodos, was a manne, whyche in stede
of teethe, hadde but oone boone, lyke as
kynge Pirrhus hadde.



Monogamus, he that neuer hadde but one
wyfe.



Monogammi, menne leane and yuelle co­
loured.



Monologium, a longe tale of one mattier.



Monomachia, a battayle, wherein oonely
two menne doo fyghte.



Monomachus, he that fyghteth alone.



Monophagia, a meale of one onely meate
or dyshe.



Monopodium, a table sette on one footeor
trestylle.



Monopolium, where one manne ingrosseth
thynges, to haue all in his owne hande,
that no manne maye gayne, but he onely.
It maye be also one countrey or market,
that taketh away the gaynes from other
countreyes or markettes.



Monoptaton, a worde hauyng but one case.



Monosceli, men in India, whiche haue but
one legge, so greate, that therwith they
couer them selfes from the sonne.



Monostelon, where as is but one pyller.



Monotropos, solitarie, of one facion alway.



Monoxylon, a bote made in oone piece of
tymber.



Mons, tis, a mountayne or hylle.



Mons feratus, a countrey in Italye.



Monstrificus, a, um, monstruous.



Monstro, are, to shewe.



Monstrum, a monster, that which excedeth
or lacketh in naturall fourme or order.



Monstruosus, monstruosa, struosum, mon­
struous.



Montanus, a, um, of a mountayne.



Monticulus, a lyttell hylle.



Montigena, borne on a hylle.






Montiuagus, wandringe by hilles.



Montosus, a, um, tull of hilles.



Monumentum, a remembrance of some no­
table acte, as sepulchres, images, pylars,
grete stones, inscriptions, bookes, and o­
ther lyke: whereby any thinge excellent,
concernynge grete wittes, kunnynge, en­
treprise in armes, puyssaunce, or rychesse
is remembred.



Monycha, ch&ecedil;, the name of saynct Austens
mother.



Monychus, a gyant, one of the Centaures.



Monyma, the wyfe of kynge Mithridate,
whiche after that her husbande was vain­
quisshed, killed her selfe.



Mopsopia, the contray of Athenes.



Mopsus, the name of a Poete.



Mora, taryenge, leysar.



Moralis, le, pertayninge to maners.



Moramentum, taryenge, or abode.



Moratus, instructed in good maners.



Morbidus, a, um, sycke or scabbed.



Morbificus, ca, cum, that which causeth dis­
ease or sickenesse.



Morbus, sickenesse, disease, a sore.



Morbus animæ, a vice inueterate and harde
to be cured, as ambition, auarice.



Morbus regius, the yelow iaundyse.



Mordax, acis, he that doeth byte, be it with
the teeth, or with langage.



Mordeo, momordi, dere, to byte, to detract,
or rebuke vehemently.



Mordere frenum, to gnawe on the brydell,
which is spoken where it signifieth one to
repugne against seruitude or bondage.
Erasm. in
Chil.


Mordicibus, with bytinges.



Mordico, care, to hurt with bytinge.



Mordicus, bytinge harde and faste, as a man
holdeth a thinge.



Mordicus tenere, to holde fast, to persist ob­
stinately in an opinion or sentence.



Moribundus, dyenge.



Moriger, geri, obedient.



Morigeror, aris, ari, to obaye, to do as a man
bedeth, to conforme one mannes maners
to anothers.



Morini, people in fraunce, dwellynge about
Turwan.



Morio, onis, a foole.



Morior, iris, & eri, moriri, & mori, to dye.



Morologus, he that speketh treatably, som­
tyme wordes treatably spoken: sometyme
it signifieth him, that speketh foolyshely.



Moror, aris, ari, to tary or abyde, to let, or
cause to tary.



Moros, a foole.



Morosus, waywarde, dyuerse in condicions,
whome no man can please, more curiouse
than nedeth.



Morotis, & Morosis, a madnesse or frenesy,
where a man loseth his memory.



Mors, tis, deth.



Morsicatim, bytynge one another.



Morsiuncula, a lytle bitte or snacke.



Morsus, us, a bytt with the teeth, a taunt in
spekinge.



Morsus, a, um, bitten.



Plinius.



Mortalis, le, mortall.



Mortarium, a mortar, wherin thinges are,
brayed or grounden.



Morticina caro, moren fleshe, whiche dyeth
by it selfe, carrayne.



Morticini, cornes which be on mennes fete.



Morticinum, corrupt.



Mortiferus, a, um, which causeth any thinge
to dye.



Mortuale, pertayninge to deed men.



Mortuum mare, a grete mere in Syria, where
in no heuy thinge may synke.



Morula, a lytel taryenge.



Morus, a Mulbery tree, and a brembyl that
beareth blacke beryes.



Morum, a Mulbery, or blacke bery.



Mos, moris, a maner, a condicion, also custome.



Morem gerere, to obey.



Moscatulæ, pearis, whiche do sauoure lyke
muske,



Mosculus, a calfe, also an herbe.



Moschum, Muske.



Moscus, a Region in Asia nyghe to the ry­
uer of Phasis, deuyded into thre partis, in
the one doo dwell people called Colchi, in
the second Hiberes, in the third Armenii.



Moses, sis, si, the great captayn of the iewes
which lad them out of Egipte.



Mosini, people in Asia towarde the north.



Motabilis, alwaye mouinge.



Motacilla, a byrd called a wagtayle.



Motiuus, a, um, mouynge, not abydynge.



Moto, are, to moue often.



Motus, ta, tum, moued. 



Motus, tus, mouing.
This entry displays on the same line as the previous entry.


Moueo, ere, to moue, to remoue or put away



Mouere animum, to styre or allure the minde.



Mouere tragœdias, to do thynges to be la­
mented.



Mouere camerinam, to stere thinges, which
shall be to his owne displeasure, that be­
gynneth it.
reade in the addition.



Mox, anon, forthwith.

 



Muceo, cui, to be fylthy or vinewed.



Mucidus, a, dum, fylthy, vinewed.



Mucor, oris, fylth, vinue, suche as is on bred
or meate longe kept.



Mucro, onis, the point of a sworde or knife.
sometyme it is taken for a sworde.



Mucronatus, ta, tum, poynted.



Mucus, the fylthe, whyche commeth oute
of the nose.






Mugil, lis, A fishe called a codde.



Lucilius.



Muginor, ari, to murmure.



Mugio, gire, to bellowe lyke a cowe or bull:
somtyme it signifyeth the noyse of thun­
der, or grete wyndes.



Mugonia, a gate at Rome, whereby catell
dyd entre into the citie.



Mugitus, tus, bellowynge of kyne, or other
noyse lyke.



Mularis, re, pertayninge to a mule.



Mulceo, si, cere, to pacyfye, to appease, to
mitigate, to make sweete, to anoynte, to
polyshe.



Mulciber, eris, one of the names of Vulcane,
called god of fyre.



Mulctor, ctaris, ctari, to punysshe, or be pu­
nysshed.



Mulcta, a penaltie, a condemnation, a fyne
sessed.



Mulctam dicere, to gyue an iniunction.



Mulctam committere, to forfayte, to runne
in the peyne.



Mulctam remittere, to pardone.



Mulctra, the mylkyng, the payle, wherinto
it is milked, which is also called Mulctrale. 



Mulctrum, the acte of mylkynge.



Mulei, certayne shooes of purple coloure,
whiche the kynges of Alba ware, and af­
terwarde the noble men of Rome.



Mulgeo, mulsi, mulgere, to mylke or stroke.



Mulgo, are, to publishe.



Muli mariani, forkes, wheron fardels were
trussed and borne by men.



Muli mariani, a prouerbe referred vnto them,
whiche be obedient to euery commaund­
ment, be it neuer so greuouse. It may also
be applied vnto them, which be inuolued in
perpetuall and intollerable laboures and
businesse.



Muli mutuum scabunt, mules do gnappe one
an other, a prouerbe applied to persones
ylle and defamed, whan one of them com­
mendeth the other.



Mulier, eris, A woman, proprely she that is
no virgine.



Muliebre folliculum, dicebant vuluam.



Muliebria, naturall euacuations, which wo­
men haue, called their floures.



Muliebris, bre, perteynynge to women.



Muliebritas, delicatenesse, tendernesse.



Muliebriter, womanly, delicately, tenderly.



Mulierarius, a folower, or dotar on women.



Muliero, are, to effeminate, or make lyke a
woman.



Mulierosus, a great louer of women.



Mulio, onis, & Mulius, a dryuer of Mules,
a muletour.



Mullus, a fish called a Mullet.



Mulsum, wyne and hony soden togither.



Mulsus, a, um, any licour mixt with hony.



Multa, idem quod mulcta.



Multatitius, pertayning to a forfait, or payne
assessyd.



Multesima, a part representinge an infinite
quantitye. Quam paruula pars, quam mul­
tesima constat, so lytle a porcion, se of how
wonderfull gretnesse it is.



Multibarbus, he that hath moche heare on
his bearde.



Multibibus, he that drinketh moche.



Multicolorius, a, um, of many colours.



Apuleius.



Multifacio, ere, to make moche of, to esteme
moche.



Multifariam, many wayes, in many facions.



Multifarius, dyuers in maners or condicions.



Multigeneris, re, of dyuers kyndes.



Plautus.



Multiforatilis, le, with many holes.



Lucilius.



Multi iugus, a, um, dyuerse, many dyuerse,
manyfolde.



Multiloquus, full of speche.



Multipes, hauynge many feete.



Multiplex, plicis, manyfolde, dyuers.



Multiscius, a, um, knowinge moche.



Multitia, garmentes made of fyne thredes
or sylke.



Multiuidus, he that seeth moche.



Multo, & Mulcto, are, to punysshe, to con­
demne, to put fro, to intreate yl, or disorder.



Multare matrimonio, to deuorse, or dissolue
matrimony.



Multus, ta, tum, moche, many.



Mulus, a Mule.



Mundanus, na, um, worldly.



Mundities, & Munditia, clenlynesse.



Mundifico, are, to klense.



Mundo, are, to wype, to make clene.



Mundus, the worlde, a womans attyre.



Mundus, da, dum, clene, nete.



Muneralis, le, pertayning to gyftes.



Munerarius, he that maketh a commune game
or playe at his propre charges.



Muneror, aris, ari, & munero, are, to rewarde



Mungo, xi, ere, to make clene, proprely ones
nose.



Municipalis, le, priuately or particulerly, be­
longinge to one citie.



Municipale ius, the priuate lawe of euery
particuler citie.



Municipalia magisteria, ciuile offices in eue­
ry citie or towne.



Municipatim, towne by towne.



Municipium, a citie or towne incorporate,
hauynge their propre officers and lawes.



Municeps, a citezen, or burgeyse, enioyinge
the liberties of the towne.



Munificus, liberall. Munificentior, more libe­
rall, Munificentissimus, most liberall. in the




olde tyme Munifici, were taken for them,
whyche consented to that, whiche theyr
frendes dyd or spake.



Munimen, & munimentum, a fortifycation
of a towne or castelle.



Munio, iui, & ij, nire, to fortifye, to prepare,
to repayre.



Munia, commune dueties, offices.



Munis, he that beareth the charges, which
the people shulde do.



Munus, neris a gyft, acharge, a duetie or of­
fyce. Munera, commune playes and gaye
fightes for the peple to behold, to reioice
them, prepared by officers of cities. As
in Rome, sondry playes, sworde players,
called Gladiatores, huntyng of wyld bea­
stes. Also now in the citie of London, the
watches & fyghtes on midsomer nightes.



Munychia, orum, the solemnities of Pallas. 



Murena, a lampraye.



Murenul&ecedil;, smalle chaynes, whiche women
do weare.



Muralis corona, a garlande gyuen to hym,
whiche in the siege of a citie fyrste skalyd
the walles, and entred.



Muralis herba, an herbe callyd perytorye,
or pelitory of the wal.



Murani, were the kynges of Alba.



Muratus, ta, tum, walled.



Murcia, goddesse of slouthe.



Murcus, a slouthfull or luskyshe person.



Murex, icis, a shell fyshe, of whome com­
meth the lycour, whyche maketh purple
colour. Sometyme it sygnifyeth the same
coloure. Also an herbe, whiche groweth
in a pyt, where no sonne shyneth.



Murginor, ari, to tary, to be slouthfulle.



Murgitana regio, a countrey in the southe
partes of Spayne.



Murgizo, murgizonis, an ydell or slouthe­
full persone.



Muria, water, wherin salt is sodden, brine.



Muricatus, salted in bryne.



Murices, caltrappes, lyke thre yron pryc­
kes so ioyned, that beinge throwen, one
standethe vpryghte, vsed in battayle for
horsemenne.



Fulgentius.



Muricati gressus, where oone gothe feare­
fully, as if he went on caltraps or thornes



Plaut.



Muricidus, a mousekiller, a fole, a rat killer.



Muries, a bryne made with salte sodden in
water.



Murimilonica scuta, targettes, wherewith
men faught vpon walles.



Murmur, the noyse of rounnynge water .



Murmurillum, idem.



Murmurabundus, & murmurator, he that
murmureth.



Murmuro, to murmour, or make noyse lyke
to water.



Murmurillo, idem.



Murmurillum, a murmurynge.



Plautus.



Murrha, a stone of dyuers colours, clere as
cristall, hauynge spottes purple & whyte.



Murrheus, & murrhinus, a, um, of that stone
called murrha, wherof cuppes, pottes, ta­
bles, and other vessels were made: there
be of them dyuers sent from Venyce.



Murrhina, seu murrhynia, was wyne made
with dyuers spices, as that which is cal­
lyd ypocras.



Murtius, a hylle atte Rome, callyd also A­
uentinus.



Murtia, one of the names of Venus. 



Murus, a walle.



Mus, muris, a mouse or ratte.



Musa, a swete songe.



Mus&ecedil;, Muses, were maydens, whome po­
etes fayned to be the doughters of Iu­
piter and Memorie, and that they were
ladyes and gouernours of poetrie & mu­
syke, whiche were in numbre nyne. Some
call them gyuers of eloquence, and doo
name them goddesses.



Mus&ecedil;a, Musaica, & Musiua, be warkes cun­
nyngely paynted, that they seme to be in
some place imbocid out, in som place gra­
uen, although it be all playne.



Museus, an auncient poete, whiche was in
the tyme of Orpheus, & was one of them
whiche went with Iason to the wynninge
of the fliece of golde.



Mus&ecedil;um, a house, whervnto lerned men in
all sciences vsed to repayre, and dispute:
it is also a house dedicate to the musis.



Musca, a flye.



Muscula, a smalle flye.



Boetius.



Muscari, to be couered with mosse.



Muscarium, & muscaria, a flappe to dryue a­
way slyes. It is also the toppe of fenelle,
dylle, and suche other like herbes, wher­
in be the seedes.



Muscarius, a, um, pertaynynge to flyes.



Muscenton, a certayne Rose, that springeth
of a stalke with many smal braunches, and
hath leaues lyke to an olyue tree.



Muscerda, mouse dunge.



Muschus, a beaste, whiche beareth muske,
a muske catte.



Muscinus, a, um, of a flye.



Muscio, onis, a catte.



Muscipula, a trappe, wherwith myse or rat­
tes are taken.



Musculus, a lyttell mouse. Sommetyme an
engyne of warre, whereby they are de­
fended, whiche doo approche the walles
of a place besyeged, to fylle the dyches.
It is also a lyttell fyshe, whiche guydeth




the whale that he do not runne on rockis.



Musculi, be certayne pieces of harde fleshe
compacte with synewes in the body, whi­
che do inclose the spirituall membres.



Muscus, mosse, whiche groweth in welles
and moyste places, sommetyme on trees,
specially in colde countreyes.



Musica, & musice, musyke.



Musice, hole, that nothynge lacketh.



Musicus, a musycion.



Musmones, shepe with hearye wolle.



Mussitabundus, a manne speakynge to hym
selfe priuily.



Mussito, tare, to speake or talke alone.



Musso, are, to talke softely and secretely, to
kepe sylence.



Mustace, a tree hauynge leaues lyke to lau­
rell, but greatter and weaker.



Mustacula, a lyttell instrumente made with
two rules, betwene whiche the showe is
put, whyles the sole is in sowynge.



Mustaceus, & mustaceum, a caake or paste
made to comforte the stomacke.



Mustela, a beaste called a wesell. also a fishe
lyke a lampraye.



Mustelinus, a, um, of a wesyll.



Musteus, a, um, swete as muste, or mustye.



Mustum, newe wyne, newe ale, newe beere.



Mustus, ta, tum, newe, yonge, late made.



Mutabilis, le, chaungeable, mutable.



Muteo, mutui, tere, & mutesco, scere, to be
muete, or dumme.



Mutili, horned beastes, of nature lackynge
hornes, as oxen, gotes. &c.



Mutilus, la, lum, lackynge somme principalle
part, mutilate.



Mutilo, are, to cutte of, to mynyshe, to take
awaye.



Mutinensis color, a naturall colour, as wull
or clothe neuer dyed.



Mutio, tiui, tire, to speake softely, or with an
vnperfyt voyce, to muttre.



Mutito, rare, to feaste one an other.



Mutuli, scaffolde holes, or places made on
the walles for culuers to brede in.



Muto, tare, to chaunge, to translate, to bar­
ter one thinge for an other.



Muto, tonis, the priuie membre of a man.



Mutuatitius, a, um, borowed.



Mutunus, who was also called Priapus. 



Mutuo, togither, or one an other, Mutuo di­
ligebant, They loued one an other.



Mutuare, sygnyfieth bothe to borowe and
to lende.



Mutuor, aris, ari, to borowe.



Mutus, he that can not speake.



Mute, dumme.



Mutuum, a lone, that whiche is borowed.



Mutuus, a, um, one for an nother, mutualle.



Mutuus amor, mutuall loue, where one lo­
ueth an nother equally.

 

¶ M ANTE Y.

MYa, a shel fishe in the see called Bos­
phorus, whiche bryngeth forth ly­
tell redde stones, and rounde.



Myagrus, the god of flyes.



Mycæne, & Mycæna, a citie in the parte of
Grecia, called Peloponesus, and a lyttell
region, where Agamemnon raigned, the
chiefe capitayne of the grekes agaynste
Troy, called nowe Morea.



Mycon, the name of a famous paynter.



Mycone, nes, a lyttell yle.



Mydia, an yle, named also Delos.



Mydriasis, a syckenesse of the eyes, where
no colour of the eies ar changed, but ma­
keth them moche broder: all be it it taketh
away the syght, or maketh a man to se the
lasse, and the thynges, whiche be sene, to
seme lasse than they are.



Mygale, a ratte.



Mygdonia, a part of Macedonia on the see
syde, where Niobe was tourned in to a
stoone. Aristotle saythe, that it is a parte
of Phrigia, ioynynge to Lidia. Solynus
sayth, that it was called Bebrycia, and af­
ter Bythinia.



Mylochos, a butterfly, whiche is in mylles.



Myoparo, onis, a kynde of shyppes vsed in
the see called Mare Tirrhenum.



Myophnos, a kyller of myse.



Mymphur, a tourners pynne or spyndelle,
wheron he turneth or warketh any thing.



Myra, a citie in Licia, wherof saynte Ny­
cholas was byshoppe.



Myriarches, a captayn of ten thousand men.



Myriades, many tymes tenne thousande.



Myrias, adis, the numbre of ten thousande.



Myrica, a lyttell bushe called in Italye Ta­
marico.



Myrinus, the male kynde of a lampray, whi­
che hath a tothe out of his mouthe.



Myrmus, the propre name of Apollo. 



Myriophillum, an herbe called myllfoyle.



Myristica nux, a nuttemygge.



Myrlea, a towne in Bythinia.



Myrmecia, a lyttell warte.



Myrmecites, a stone, wherin is the fygure
of an emotte.



Myrmetium, a kynd of spiders, lyke an emote
hauyng a black bealy with white spottes.



Mirmillones, were sworde players, where
the one prouoked the other to battayle.



Myrsenium, a kynd of fenell, hauyng gret­
ter leaues, and a sharper taste.



Myrsum, a towne in the part of Grece, cal­
lyd Peloponesus.






Myrmicoleo, a lytell beaste, which deuou­
reth emotes.



Myrobalanum, a fruite growinge in India,
lyke vnto plummes or damsyns, wherof
be dyuers kyndes, which easily do purge
al superfluous humours, and also comfor­
teth nature, in so moche as a manne, whi­
che eateth them, beinge condite, shall not
loke oldely.



Myrobrecharij, they whiche do make swete
oyntmentes.



Myron, onis, the name of an excellent car­
uer. also olde oyle.



Myropola, a seller of oyntementes.



Myropolium, a place where oyntementes
were solde.



Myrothetium, a boxe of swete oyntmentes.



Myrrha, a swete gumme, callyd myrre.



Myrrheus, & myrrhinus, a, um, of myrre.



Myrtetum, a place, where Myrtelle trees
be sette.



Myrteus, & myrtinus, a, um, of myrtelles.



Myrtopetalum, an herbe called blodewort.



Myrtoum, a porcyon of the see, whiche is
betwene the sees called Aegeum & Ionium.



Myrtus, a lyttell tree, bearynge bearyes of
swete odour.



Mys, mios, the name of a cunnyng grauer.
also a shell fyshe of the see.



Mysia, a countrey beyonde Hungarye, to­
ward Grece. Ptholomeus writeth of two
countreys called Mysia, the more and the
lasse, and both in Asia, beyonde Bythinia,
not farre from Ida.



Mysteria, mysteries, thynges secrete or hid
in wordes or ceremonies.



Mysticus, ca, cum, mysticall.



Mystris, a fyshe called a see mouse.



Mythologia, a declaration or exposytion
of fables.



Mythos, a fable.



Myxa, the fylthe whiche commeth oute of
a mannes nose.



Myxus, a snuffe of a candell.


 


¶ N, ANTE A.

N##sp##A##sp##B##sp##A##sp##T##sp##H##sp##A, the name
of a certayne citie.



Nabathea, a countreye
betwene the redde see
and the see callyd Per­
sicum, contayning with
in it Arabie.



Nabatheus, a, um, of that
countreye.



Nabis, in the langage of Ethiope, is a beest
hauyng a heed lyke a camell, a necke lyke
a hors, legges and fete lyke an oxe.



Nablum, & nablium, an instrument of mu­
syke, called a psaltrie.



Naccæ, & neæ, fullers.



Nactus, the participle of Nansciscor, Na­
ctus sum, I haue gotten, nactus es, nactus
est, thou, he hath gotten.



Næ, sygnifieth valde, or nimis. Næ tu homo
facetus es, thou arte a very mery felowe.
somtyme it signifieth Certe, profecto, ita.
N&ecedil; illi vehementer errant, surelye they be
farre out of the waye. N&ecedil; ego multo liben­
tius emerim diuorsorium Tarracin&ecedil;, In good
faythe I had leauer haue bought a howse
at Tarracine.



N&ecedil;era, a womans name.



N&ecedil;nia, a mournynge songe, wont to be son­
gen at burielles, somtyme it signifieth the
songe that the mother or norice doth singe
dandyllynge of her chylde.



Neuia, a womans name.



Neuus, a mole or lyke marke in the body or
face, from the tyme of the byrthe.



Naiades, fayries, of the ryuers and foun­
taynes.



Nain, a citie of Galyle.



Nais, a riuer, whiche cometh out of the hil
called Taurus, and runneth in to the see
called Pontus.



Nam, for, therfore.



Nanciscor, sceris, nactus sum, nancisci, to get
or opteyne. sometyme to fynde.



Nancisci hospitium, to fynde a lodgynge.



Pom.
Fest.



Nancitor, for nactus erit.



Nanque, verily, truely: if it be sette afore o­
ther wordes: if it be putte after, it sygni­
fyeth for.



Nanum, a lyttell vessell and brode.



Plaut.



Nanium, a lyttell woman.



Nanus, a lyttell person, a dwarfe.



Napat&ecedil;i, paople in Ethiopia.



Nape&ecedil;, called goddesses of flowres and
woddes.



Nap&ecedil;i, people in the yle called Lesbos.



Naphtha, a kynd of pitche, also lyme, wher­
with fyre is nourished.



Napina, a place where Nauewes be sowen.



Napit&ecedil;, people in Scithia.



Napus, a Nauew.



Nar, the name of a riuer.



Narane, a riuer in Dalmatia.



Narbasis, a citie in Spayne.



Narbonensis gallia, the south part of Fraunce
wherin is Dolphinay, Prouance, Lange­
dok. &c.



Narciscus, a flowre in facion lyke a lyllye,
and whyte, sauing that the chalese, wher­
in the floure is closed, is purple: some haue
purple floures, leaues narower than leke




blades, a stalke halfe a foote hygh, plaine
without leaues, a rounde rote and white.
Also the name of a yonge man of excellent
beautie, who for the loue of a maiden died,
and after the fables of poetes, was trans­
fourmed into the same lylly.



Narcoticum, a qualytie or vertue in thyn­
ges to make a manne to slepe. also to make 
a membre insensible . Physytions vse me­
dycines, whyche haue this vertue, where
the griefe or ache is otherwise incurable,
or where they wylle cutte any parte of a
mannes bodye.



Nardinum, the name of a swete oyntment.



Nardus, the herbe and rote, whiche is cal­
led Spikenarde.



Virg.
Geor.



Nare, to swymme. sometyme t o flee.



Nares, nosethrylles.



Narica, the name of a lyttell fyshe, whiche
dothe swymme very swyftely.



Naris, a ryuer in Umbria.



Naritia, an yle in the see called Aegeum.



Naritium, a citie of the people named Lo­
cri in Grece.



Narnia, a towne in Italy.



Narnienses, men of that towne.



Narratio, a narration or report of thynges
that are doone.



Narratiuncla, a lyttell narration.



Narro, are, to telle.



Nartheticium, a place, wherein medycines
are kepte.



Nasamones, people in Affrike about Libia



Nasamonites, a stone of coloure sanguyne,
hauynge blacke vaynes.



Nascor, sceris, sci, to be borne.



Nascia, the surname of one of the Scipions
a noble Romayne.



Nasiterna, a water vessell, wyde aboue, ha­
uynge handelles.



Naso, suspendere, to mocke couertely, or
craftelye.



Nassa, a fyshers weele or bow nette, wher­
in if a fyshe be ones, he can not gette out.



Nasturtium, an herbe callyd Cresses.



Nasus, a nose: somtime sharpenes in speche,
and tauntynge wytte. also iudgement in
letters.



Nasuti, taunters, checkers, skorners, som­
tyme wytty personnes, whiche do quikly
perceyue a thynge. also men, which haue
their priuie membres very great.



Nasute, wyttyly, skornefully, tauntyngely.



Nasutila, a tauntynge wenche, or a shrewe.



Natalis, le, et natalitius, tia, tium, the daye of
birthe or natiuitie.



Natales, is taken for progeny or dyscente,
or bloude. Generosi natales, gentyl bloud,
Obscuri natales, a poore dyscente or lowe
byrthe, somtyme it is vsed for yeres.



Natalibus restitui, where a man hath armes
and tytle of nobylitie, gyuen vnto hym by
the kynge.
Budeus.


Natatilis, that whiche can swimme.



Natatitius, a, um, that which doth swimme.



Natator, toris, a swymmer.



Natatorium, natabulum, et natatio, a place
wherin men do swymme.



Natatus, tus, the acte of swymmynge.



Nates, buttockes.



Natinatores, trauaylours, or they whiche
haue moche businesse.



Natio, a nation.



Natiuitas, tatis, byrthe.



Natiuus, where a thyng is borne or begon.
Natiuus color, the naturall colour.



Nato, are, to swymme. sometyme to go, to
tremble, to sayle, or rowe.



Natrix, a water serpent. also an herbe, whose
rote smelleth lyke a gote.



Natura, nature, membres of generacyon.
Sometyme facion or maner.



Naturalis, le, naturall.



Naturalia, the priuy membres.



Natus, ta, tum, borne.



Natus, nata, sonne and doughter.



Natus grandis, aged or olde.



Naualis, le, pertaynynge to shyppes.



Nauale, the docke where shyps be laid vp.



Nauale, a docke or place where shyppes
are made.



NaNauarchis, the admyralles shyppe.



Nauarchus, an admyrall.



Nauaria, a countrey in Spayne called Na­
uarre.



Nauci, a nutte shale, a thynge of naughte.



Nauci esse, to be naught worthe.



Naucifacere, to set naught by one.



Naucleriacus, et nauclerius, a, um, pertey­
nynge to a shyppe mayster.



Nauclerus, & nauiclarius, a shyppe maister.



Naucrates, a citie in Egypte.



Naufragium, a shypwrecke.



Naufragor, aris, ari, to peryshe on the see.



Naufragus, whose goodes are peryshed.



Nauia, a holowe tree lyke a shyppe, whiche
is occupied whan grapes be gathered.



Nauicularius, a capitayne of a shyppe.



Nauiculor, aris, ari, to rowe or be rowed in
a bote for solace.



Nauigabilis, le, where a shyppe maye passe,
Nauigable.



Nauigatio, a iourneye or goinge by water
in a shyppe.



Nauiger, the pilate of a shyppe, whych ru­
leth the sterne.



Nauigium, the leadynge or settynge forth
of the shyppe. It is also all kynde of ves­




selles to sayle or rowe in.



Nauigo, are, to sayle or rowe, that is to say,
to be caried on water in a shippe or any o­
ther thynge lyke.



Nauis pompatica, a shyppe whiche serueth
onely for pleasure, hauynge chaumbers
and bankettynge tables for greate men to
solace in.



Nauis, a shyppe.



Nauiter, diligently, valyauntly.



Naulium, a citie in Liguria.



Naulum, the fraite or fare paied for passage



Naumachia, battayle on the See, also the
place where the batayle is.



Naumachiarij, they which do fyght on the
see or water in shyppes or botes.



Nauo, are, to accomplyshe dylygentely, to
gyue, to applye with effect, to be in ayde.
Iam mihi videor nauasse operam quem huc ve­
nerim, nowe me seemeth I haue well ap­
plyed my labour, that I am come hyther.



NaNauare beneuolentiam, to conferre or de­
clare beneuolence.



Naupegus, a shyppe wrighte.



Naupontus, a ryuer, whiche passeth out of
Slauony.



Nausea, the abhorrynge of thynges seene,
wherby a man is prouoked to vomyte.



Nauseosus, a, um, dysposinge to vomyte.



Nausiabundus, dysposed to vomyte.



Nauseo, eare, et nauseor, to be dysposed to
vomyte, somtyme to vomyte.



Nausicaa, was doughter to Alcinous, kyng
of Ph&ecedil;aces, whiche founde Ulysses, whan
he escaped from drounynge, and brought
hym to her father.



Nausio, ere, to open or gape as a beane doth
whan he spryngeth.



Nausithous, the sonne of Neptunus, and fa­
ther of Alcinous. 



Naustibulum, an hiue made of the facion of a shyppe.



Nauta, et nauita, a shyppeman.



Nautea, curriers bleche or lycour, also the
stynkynge water, which issueth out of the
pumpe of a shyppe.



Nauticus, a shyppe mayster.



Nauticus, ca, cum, perteynyng to shipmen.



Nautulus, a shypman, also a fyshe, which is
in similitude lyke to some that sayled.



Nautilia, the craft of shypmen.



Nauus, quicke, actife.



Naxos, an yle in the see called Aegeum.



Nazareus, a man consecrate or dedycate to
god. Nazarei were men, which had made
vowes vntyll a certayne tyme.



Nazaret, a lytle towne in Galilea.



Nazura, a citie in Cappadotia, afterwarde
called Cæsaria.

 



NE, an aduerbe, signifieng forbeading
or dissuading. Tu ne cede malis, giue
thou not place to aduersitie or mys­
aduentures. sometyme it is a coniunction
copulatiue, and signifieth nor or neyther.
somtime rational, and signifieth wherfore.
somtyme causal, & signifieth not. somtyme
leste, also or not, whither. somtyme it is
an interrogatiue. Ego ne? I trowest thou?



Nea, an ile betwene Lemnos & Hellespontus.



Necunde, nor from any place.



Ne plura, ne multa, but to be short, what ne­
deth any longer tale, to make a short tale.
Cice. pro
Cluencio.
& in Ver.
Ci. pro Clu.


Ne multis, in fewe wordes. Ne multis Dio­
genes emitur, In fewe wordes Diogenes
is bought.



Ne dicam, I wyll not saye.



Nectere moras, to make delayes.



Cor. Taci­
tus li.13.



Nec, nor. neque, nor. nequaquam, no.



Necnon, and, or also.



Nequicquam, in vayne, no or not.



Ne viuam, I wold I lyued not. Ne viuam si tibi
concedo, I wolde I lyued not, or I wold
I shulde not liue, if I graunt that to the.



Cicero.



Neutiquam, in no wyse.



Nequaquam, no.



Necubi, in no place.



Nedum, not onely, somtyme nor yet, where
the thynge of least estimation is put laste.
Nedum, sygnifieth not onely, as funderem
pro te sanguinem, nedum pecuniam, I wolde
spende for the not only my money, but al­
so my bloode. where the thinge of moost
estimation is last put, it signifieth nor yet.
Ne crederem tibi obulum, nedum vitam me­
am, I wyll not commytte my lyfe vnto thy
credence, nor yet lende the one halfepeny.



Nec dum, nor yet.



Neapolis, a citie called Naples.



Neapolitanus, na, num, of Naples.



Nebrides, feastes in the honour of Bacchus, 
also skinnes of dere wherwith they were
clad which kept the ceremonies of Bacchus 



Nebrodes, an hyl in Sicile, where there is
great plentie of falowe dere.



Nebrundes, the stones of beastes.



Nebula, a vapour or myst rysynge from the
water, whiche eyther tourneth forthwith
into a cloude, or shortly vanysheth.



Nebularium, a house where corne is thres­
shed, or wynno wed in tyme of rayne.



Nebulo, onis, a thefe, a knaue, a lewde per­
son, or vacabunde.



Nebulosus, a, um, mysty.



Necessarius, a kynnesman.



Necessarius, a, um, necessary, nedefull.



Necesse uel necessum, of force, it must nedes be.



Necessitas, tatis, nede, necessitie. sometime a
bonde of frendship or kynrede.






Necessitudo, dinis, idem. also amitie.



Necim, the olde writers vsed for nec cum,
nor with.



Perottus.



Necunquam, for necunquam aliquem.



Necne, or not.



Necum, in the olde Spanyshe tungue was
the image of Mars, garnyshed with bea­
mes lyke the sonne, it also signyfied in la­
tyne mas, the male kynde.



Necydalus, a sylke worme, whan he is yonge
sprounge out of the sede.



Neco, caui, care, vel necui, to slee.



Neci datus, slayne without weapon, as with
poyson, famyne, prisonement.



Necromantes, a Necromancer, or caller vp
ofyll spirites.



Necromantia, necromancy.



Necromanticus, a necromancer.



Nectar taris, the drinke of goddes, somtime
it signifieth immortalitie.



Nectareus, a, um, immortall, deuyne.



Necto, nexui, nectere, to wynde or plat togi­
ther.



Necubi, in no place.



Necunde, from no place.



Nefandus, da, dum, horrible, not to be spoken
or named.



Nefarius, a, um, cursed not worthy to lyue.



Nefas, a cursed dede, a wycked thynge, ex­
ecrable, detestable.



Nefasti dies, dayes whan it is not lefull.



Nefrendes, pygges weaned, called shotes.



Negabundus, he that denyeth.



Negabundus, for negans, denyenge.



Negatio, a denyer, a nay.



Negatiuus, a, um, that whiche denyeth.



Negito, tare, to denye.



Plautus in
mercatore



Negligo, glexi, gligere, to neglect, to haue
lyttel regarde.



Neglectus, tus, contempte.



Neglectus, ta, tum, contemned not regarded.



Negligentia, negligence.



Negligens, tis, negligent.



Negligenter, negligently, contemtuousely,
dysdeynousely.



Nego, aui, are, to deny, to refuse, to say not.



Negocialis, le, perteynynge to denyenge.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Negato esse ituram, say that she wyl not go.



Negotior, aris, ari, to practyse marchaun­
dyse, to be occupied in businesse.



Negociator, toris, a marchaunte, he that is
busied in an other mans affaires,



Negotialis, ale, perteynyng to businesse, oc­
cupation, or trouble.



Negotium, remedye. Omnis res palam est,
neque vllum pol de hac re negotium est, quin
male occidam, All the matter is knowen:
therfore in this case in faith there is no re­
medy, but that I wyll kyll hym.



Negotiosus, a, um, full of businesse, care, or
trouble of mynde.



Negotium dare, to gyue in charge.



Negotium, businesse, occupation, somtyme
trouble, care, or labour of mynde.



Negotiorum curator, a factour or sollicitor
in a mannes busynesse.



Neleus, the father of duke Nestor, whiche
was at the siege of Troye.



Nem, was vsed of old writers for somtime,
also for but, or excepte.



Nemea, a greate wodde, where Hercules
slewe an horrible lyon.



Neme&ecedil;us, of the wodde callyd Neme&ecedil;,
whiche is in Grecia, not farre frome the
citie of Argos.



Nemesis, a goddesse, whiche was supposed
to take vengeance on malefactours. some­
tyme it sygnifieth fortune, also iustyce, al­
so reproche.



Nemartes, nymphes or maydens of the see.



Ne my quidem, is applied to hym that dare
not speke. Ne my quidem facere audet, He
dare not ones mutte, or make countenance
to speake.



Nemo, no man, or none.



Nemo non, some man.



Nempe, is an aduerbe confyrming a thing,
for bycause, surely, verily, sometyme for.



Nemus, nemoris, a wod for pleasure, wher­
in deere or other beastes may fede.



Nemoralis, et nemorensis, perteynynge to
a woode.



Neo, neui, nere, to spynne.



Neogamus, newe maried.



Neomenia, the fyrst day of the newe mone.



Neophitus, a newe man, or a plante newely
sproungen.



Neoptholemus, is in englishe a new knight,
It was also the name of Pirrhus the sonne
of Achilies. 



Neotericus, he that is nowe, or was of late
tyme.



Nepa, vel nepes, a scorpion.



Nepenthes, a drynke or an herbe, whiche
causeth a man to forgete heuynesse. Also
the herbe called borage.



Nepeta, a citie of the countrey of Thuscane
in Italy.



Nephalia, feastes wherin no wyne was sa­
cryfysed or drunke, but onely mede, and
they were called the feastes of sobre men.



Nephele, a cloude. also the name of a wo­
manne, whiche was mother of Helles,
who gaue the name to the see callydde
Hellespontus.



Nephritis, peyn in the raynes of the backe.






Nepita, an herbe called nepe, or calament.



Nenum, was somtyme put for non. 



Nepos, otis, the sonne or doughters sonne,
sometyme a waster of goodes, a riottouse
person. Nepotes, do sometyme signify all
the discent, whiche commeth after a mans
sonnes or daughters.



Nepotor, ari, to liue prodigally, or riotously.



Nepotulus, a dimynutiue of Nepos. Meus
Nepotulus, my lyttell sonne, or yonge son,
from the fyrst discent.



Nepotatus, tus, ryot, superfluous expenses.



Neptis, the doughter of a mans sonne or
doughter.



Neptunus, callyd god of the see.



Nepus, vncleane.



Nequa, no where.



Nequalia, detrimentes or harmes.



Nequam, a noughty felowe, a manne to be
nothinge estemed.



Nequando, at no tyme.



Nequaquam, in no wyse, not a whitte.



Nequior, oris, Nequissimus, warse, warste
of all.



Nequiquam, in vayne, Nequicquam, not.



Ne quid nimis, nothyng to to, that is to say,
moche excedynge, or moche lackynge.



Nequino, are, to be wanton, also to denie.



Nequinum, a citie in Italy, now callid Narnia.



Nequinunt, in the olde tyme they vsed for
nequeunt, they may not.



Ne quis, that no man.



Nequitia, vnthriftynesse, lecherous, wan­
tonnes, vicious dalyaunce.



Nequitus, & nequiter, vnthriftily.



Nereides, nymphes or maidens of the see.



Nereus, was called oone of the goddis of
the see, and somtime it is put for the see.



Nerio, enis, the wife of Mars, called god
of battayle.



Neritæ, a certayne kynde of shelle fysshe.
see Plinie. 



Neritos, vel Neritum, an yle or citie nyghe
to Epirus, a countrey of Grece.



Nerium promontorium, Compostella, where
saint Iames the apostelle lyeth. It is also
a lyttell tree, hauyng leaues lyke to an al­
monde tree, but greatter and fatter.



Nero, the name of an emperour, of a mon­
struous and cruell nature.



Neruiæ, harpe strynges, or lute stringes.



Neruiceus, a, um, of synewes.



Neruicus, he that hath pein in his sinewes.



Neruij, people aboute Tournay.



Nerulani, people by Rome.



Nerulonenses, people in Campania.



Nerulum, a towne in the countreye callyd
Lucania.



Neruosus, a, um, that whiche hath many si­
newes. It is somtyme taken for stronge.



Neruus, a synewe, it signifieth sommetyme
strength. Also stockes, wherin offenders
be put. Nerui be also stringes of an instru­
ment. Sometyme it sygnifieth the priuye
membre of a manne.



Nesa, a countrey in Sicile, ioynynge to the
hyll of Ethna, which alway sendeth forth
flames of fyre or smoke.



Nescio, sciui, scire, to not know, to be igno­
rant of a thynge.



Nescius, he that dothe not knowe, or is not
knowen.



Nesium, uel Nesis, an yle by Campania.



Nesia, a nymphe or mayden of the see.



Nessus, & Nesius, sonnes of Ixion the Cen­
taure.



Nessotrophion, a place, where duckes are
kepte to be made fatte.



Nestor, oris, a Capytayne of the Grekes,
which were at Troy, who lyued the ages
of thre olde men, and in gyuynge counsell
was excellent.



Neu, for ne ue, nor yet.



Neuceria, a citie of Vmbria, whyche is a
parte of Italy.



Ne ue, or not, or no.



Ne unquam, in no wyse.



Neuolo, I wyll not.



Neuri, people of Scithia.



Neurobat&ecedil;, goers on cordes.



Neuter, tra, trum, neutrius, none of them.



Neutiquam, in no maner of wyse, in no con­
dicion.



Neutralis, le, neutre, of no parte.



Neutro, neyther on the one parte, nor the
other.



Neuus, a marke in the vysage or body of a
manne or womanne, as a mole, a redde or
blacke warte.



Nex, necis, deathe by force.



Nexilis, nexile, any thynge that may be knit.



Nexo, as, & is, nexui, nexere, to knitte often.



Nexus, a, um, knytte, bounden.



Nexus, nexus, uel nexi, a bond, an obligation



Nexi, free men, that do bynde theym selues
to labour or seruyce, to be acquited of the
dettes, whiche they owe.
Varro.


Nexus inire, to be bounde by oblygation or
couenaunt. also to be wrapped in bondes,
as is the commune sayenge.


 
¶ N, ANTE I.

NI, but if, except, leste that.



Nicander, the propre name of a man.



Nicanor, a mans name.



Nicator, a great vanquysher.



Nicea, & Nicia, a citie in Asia.






Niceteria, thynges gyuen for vyctorie, as
rynges, colers of golde, and crownes or
garlandes.



Nicopolis, a citie in Egipte, where the em­
perour Octauian vanquysshed Antonie &
Cleopatra. 



Nicomedia, a citie in the countrey of Bithi­
nia, in the lasse Asia.



Nicostrata, the mother of Euander the old
kynge of latynes.



Nicto, tere, to vent as the hound doth, whi­
che foloweth the dere or hare, or other
game.



Nicto, are, to wynke.



Nictus, tus, a wynkynge, as whan one doth
sygnifie his mynde to an other by loking.



Nidifico, are, to make a neste.



Nidere, somtime to sauor, somtime to shine.



Nidor, oris, a sauour or smell of some thing
burned or rosted: sometyme it signifyeth
grennynge. also brightnes.



Nidulor, aris, to brede as a byrde dothe, to
make a neste, or eyre.



Nidulus, a lyttell neste.



Nidus, a neste, sommetyme it signifieth the
byrde that bredeth. Also a vesselle lyke to
a neste. Also Nidi be coffyns, wherin mar­
chantes do lay their sondry wares.



Nigella, a wiede growinge in corne, callyd
also Lolium, cockle. Also a blacke seede,
good to smelle vnto agaynste rewmes or
distillations.



Nigellus, a, um, somewhat blacke, browne.



Niger, gra, grum, blacke, fowle. Also it is
sometyme vsed for deed.



Nigidius, a noble philosopher of Rome.



Nigredo, nigrities, & nigritia, blacke colour.



Nigrefacio, & nigrefio, to make blacke.



Nigreo, & nigresco, to be blacke.



Nigrico, care, to be somewhat blacke.



Nigris,  a fountayne in Ethiopia, whiche is
of somme men supposed to be the heed of
the greatte ryuer Nilus.



Nigro, are, to make blacke, also to be black.



Nigror, oris, blackenesse.



Nihildum, not yet.



Nihilifacio, cere, to sette haught by.



Nihili pendo, ere, to esteme nothynge.



Nihilominus, nethelesse.



Nihil, & nihilum, nothynge, nought.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Nihil cum fidibus graculo, Nihil cum 
amaracino fui, The dawe hathe nothynge to doo
with the lute: nor the sowe with maioram:
A prouerbe applyed to them, whiche pre­
sumynge to moche of their owne wyttes,
do meddel malapertly with thinges, wher­
of they can no skylle.



Nil, nothynge, none, nought.



Nilion, a stone lyke a Topace, but that it is
more duskyshe.



Nilus, a great ryuer in Egipte, callyd also
Geon, and is one of the greattest ryuers
of the worlde.



Niliacus, & niloticus, ca, cum, of Nile.



Nimbifer, the bringer of storms or shoures.



Nimblis, an yle in the see called Ionium.



Nimbus, a sodayne great showre or storme
of rayne or hayle. Also a cloude or a great
wynde, also a vessell, oute of the whyche
wyne is drawen or powred.



Nimbosus, stormy, or showrynge.



Nimirum, vndoubtedly, sur ely. somtyme it
signifieth but yet, no meruayle.



Nimis, & nimium, an aduerbe, signifyenge
abundance.



Nimis bonus, to good. Nimis malus, to ylle.



Nimietas, superfluousnes.



Nimius, a, um, wherof is to moch, or excesse.



Ningo, ninxi, ningere, to snowe.



Ninguidus, da, guidum, where there is mo­
che snowe.



Niniue, a great cite in Assyria, also an other
greatte citie in the corner of Iudea, to­
warde Arabia.



Ningulum, none, nor any.



Ninus, a great kynge of Assiria, & Babilon.



Niobe,  a woman, who hauynge a greatte
numbre of chyldren, and they beyng deed
all at ones, so moche lamented and soro­
wed, that she loste hir speche: wherfore
the paynyms fayned, that she was turned
to a stone.



Niphates, a ryuer in the countrey of Scithia



Niptrum, a lauer.



Nis, was of olde tyme vsed for nobis. 



Nis&ecedil;e, a ladye of the fayrye.



Niseus, a place in Media, where fayre hor­
ses were bredde.



Nissa, a citie in Lydia.



Nisi, but if, excepte.



Nisus, a kynges name, of whome it is fay­
ned, that he had one golden heare. It is
also a kynde of haukes.



Nisus, sa, um, the participle of Nitor, teris. 



Nisyros, a lyttell yle by Grece.



Nitedula, a feld mouse. Also a glow worme
that shineth by nighte.



Nitella, a toothe pike. sometyme it signify­
eth elegancy in speche.



Niteo, tui, tere, to be cleane, nete, gaye.



Nitesco, idem.



Nitidé, clenlye.



Nitido, are, to make cleane or bryght.



Nitidus, da, dum, cleane, brighte.



Nitor, teris, niti, to be styffe, or to resyste a­
gaynste a burdeyn, to indeuour, to leane
on a thynge, to flee, to be sustayned, to in­
force hym selfe, or take pein, to trauayle.



Nitere, to lyue a pleasaunt lyfe.






Nitor, oris, clennesse, brightnesse, gaynesse.



Nitrea, a region or Contray in Egypte, also
the name of two cities in Egypte, aboue
the citie of Memphis.



Nitrum, Salte peter.



Niualis, le, of snowe.



Niuatus, ta, tum, made colde as snowe.



Niueus, a, um, of snowe, snowy.



Niuosus, full of snowe, or where it snoweth
often.



Nixurio, I will endeuour me, I will assay to
do a thinge.



Nixus, a, um, borne as a childe is.



Nixus, us, ui, birth of a childe.



Nix, niuis, snow.

 

¶ N. ANTE O.

NO, are, to swymme.



Nobilis, noble, notable.



Nobilitas, nobilytie, noblenesse.



Nobilito, tare, to make noble, or to adde to
dignitie, or estimation, to cause to be kno­
wen.



Noceo, cui, cere, to hurt, to indamage.



Noctesco, cere, to be darke.



Noctes atticæ, a booke that Aulus Gellius
made, which was so called, bycause it was
writen in the wynter nyghtes at Athenes.



Nocticorax, a night crowe.



Noctifuga, he that fleeth or exchuith the
night.



Noctiluca, is a name, whereby the Moone
is called bycause that she doeth shyne by
night, also a lytle beest, which shyneth by
nyght.



Noctiuagus, a wanderar or goar by nyghte.



Noctu, at night, or in the nyght, by nyght.



Noctua, an owle.



Noctuæ Athenis, oules to Athenes, a pro­
uerbe, whereby is signified any thinge to
be abundant, and more than ynoughe.



Nocturnus, na, um, of the night.



Nocuus, a harme doar.



Nodo, are, to knytte.



Nodus, a knot.



Nodosus, a, um, knotty, or full of knottis.



Nodus herculis, where there can be founde
nor begynnynge nor endinge, that whiche
may neuer be losed.



Nodus is also in an host in batayle, a throng
of men, so thicke, that it can not be perced.



Nodum in scyrpo quæris, Thou sekest for a
knot in a rushe, it is applyed to him, which
is scrupulouse in a thing that is not doubt­
full, but playne.



Noëgeum, a whyte napkyn.



Noëma, maye be called euery sentence.



Noënon, for non.



Noëolæ, the wertes, which be in the chekis
of a gote or swyne.



Noes, a ryuer in Thracia, whiche runneth
into the ryuer of Ister, or Danow.



Nolani, people in Italy.



Nolito, for Noli, do not.



Nolo, non vis, nolui, nolle, to not will.



Nolo, I will not.



Nomarcha, a mayre, bayliffe, or prouoste.



Nomades, people in Scithia, called nowe
Tartary.



Nomæ, sores, which be greuous.



Nomen, minis, a name, or nowne, sometyme
it signifieth worshyp, auctoritie, noblenesse
of bloode, kynred. Also cause. Eo nomine,
for that cause. Meo nomine, for my sake.



Nomenclator, oris, an officer, which called
euery man by his name.



Nomenclatura, a namynge of men.



Nomentum, a towne in Italy by Rome.



Nomina, besyde the commune signification,
doeth also signifie dettours or dettes, also
articles writen.



Nomina facere, to lende to many men.



Nomina exigere, to demaunde or calle for
dettes.



Nominatim, by name.



Nominibus honestis, for an honest pretence
or consyderation.



Nomino, are, to name.



Nomisma, coyne.



Nomissis, nyne pounde weyght of brasse.



Nomophilax, acis, a kepar of lawes.



Nomus, a iurisdiction, as a mayraltie, a bay­
lywyke, or prouostshyp of a towne.



Non, no, not.



Nonaginta, fourescore and ten.



Nongenti, nyne hundred.



Nonus, a, um, the nynthe.



Non ita pridem, not longe agone.



Non modo, not onely.



Nonnullus, some man.



Nonnunquam, sometyme.



Non sobrius, drunke.



Non tacenda, prayseworthy.



Nonacris, a place in the countray of Ar­
cadia.



Nonæ, nyne dayes in euery moneth before
the Idus. 



Noricum, a contray in Germany, wherein
is the duchy of Bauaria, or Beuar, also the
towne of Nurenbergh.



Norma, a rule.



Normandia, a contraye in Fraunce called
Normandy.



Normatus, a, um, ruled.



Noruegia, a royaulme called Norwaye.



Noscito, tare, to knowe moche.



Nosco, moui, noscere, to knowe, to fauoure




tenderly.



Noscomion, an hospytalle or place, where
sycke folke are kepte.



Notabilis, le, notable.



Nonotæ, notes, cyfers, markes, made for re­
membraunce of some thynge.



Notarius, a clerke, whiche wryteth instru­
mentes or plees.



Notesco, notui, scere, to be knowen or made
knowen.



Nothus, a bastarde.



Nothia, that whiche by some lawes is ap­
poynted to a mans bastarde.



Notifico, are, to make knowen.



Notio, knowledge. Notitia, idem.



Noto, are, to note or marke, to make a mark
or token, to write after an example.



Notus, ta, tum, knowen: also a frende, or
of acqueyntaunce.



Notus, noti, the southwynde.



Nouacula, a barbers knyfe or raser.



Noualis, lande sowen euery other yere.



Nouelletum, a newe growen vyne.



Nouello, are, to tylle newe grounde, or set
newe vynes.



Nouellus, a, um, newe.



Nouem, nyne. Nouenus, the nynthe.



Nouenarius numerus, the numbre of nyne.



Nouendium, the space of nyne dayes.



Nouendiale sacrum, ceremonies the nynth
day after the burienge.



Nouenniæ, a citie in Thracia.



Nouerca, a stepmother, or stepdame.



Nouercari, to do lyke a stepdame.



Nouitius, a, um, newe or late begonne.



Nouo, are, to make newe.



Nouocomenses, a people in Italy.



Nouum Comum, a towne in Italy.



Nouuncium, of nyne ounces or ynches.



Nouus, ua, um, newe, fresshe, late commen
vp or begonne.



Noui homines, men of late commen vppe,
whiche are not gentylmenne of an auncy­
ent stocke.



Nouissimus, ma, mum, the laste.



Nouiter, newely, or lately.



Nouissime, laste of all.



Nox, noctis, nyght.



Notesco, scere, to be nyght.



Noxa, peyne, offence, or trespace. somtyme
it signifieth hurte or harme.



Noxia, a faulte.



Noxius, noxia, noxium, harmefull.

 

¶ N, ANTE  V.

NVbecula, a lyttell clowde.



Nubes, a clowde.



Nubilarium, a howse, wherinto corne
is caryed for feare of rayne.



Nubilis, maryable, of ful age to be wedded.



Nubilo, are, to make clowdy or darke.



Nubilosus, a, um, full of clowdes.



Nubilus, a, um, clowdy, darke.



Nubo, nupsi, nubere, to be wedded, or to
wedde, proprely of the womans part.



Nucamenta, thynges on the bowghes of
nutte trees or pitche trees hangyng down
lyke frynges, and be nat leaues.



Nuceria, a towne in Campania.



Nuceus, ea, eum, of a nutte.



Nuci frangibula, a nutte cracke.



Nucleus, the kernell of any thynge.



Nucula, & nucella, a lyttell nutte.



Nudipedalia, ceremonies done bare foted.



Nuditas, nuditatis, nakednesse, symplenesse,
playnnesse.



Nudius terius, the day before yesterdaye:
Nudius quartus, Nudius quintus, Fowre
dayes passed, fyue dayes sens.



Nudare, to make naked, to discouer, or open.



Nudus, da, dum, naked, vncouered.



Nug&ecedil;, nugarum, tryflynge tales, fables,
mary matters.



Nugalis, le, tryflynge.



Nugamenta, tryfles.



Nugatorius, a, um, tryflynge.



Nugax, acis, a tryfler or fabler.



Nugigerulus, & nugigerus, a teller of lyes.



Nugiuendus, a seller of tryfles.



Nugor, aris, ari, to tryfle, or go about vayne
thynges.



Nugator, toris, a tryfler or mocker.



Nullatenus, in no wyse.



Nullibi, no where.



Nullo negotio, withoute peyne or laboure,
without any difficultie.



Nullus, a, um, none.



Nullus sum, I am vndone.



Nullus dum, no man yet, none to this day.



Num, for an, or vtrum, whiche hapneth in a
demaunde or question. Num ego te spolia­
ui? Dyd I robbe the?



Num nam, for num.



Numa, was the seconde kynge of Ro­
maynes.



Numatio, hauynge great store of money.



Numell&ecedil;, a tumbrelle, wherein menne be
punysshed, hauyng their heedes and fete
put into it.



Numen, proprelye is the wylle of God.
Sommetyme the power of god, somme­
tyme it sygnyfyeth god, sommetyme ap­
parayle.



Numerabilis, rabile, that may be numbryd.



Numeralis, rale, pertaynynge to numbre.



Numerarius, seu numerator, he that casteth
accompt, or reckneth a thyng in numbres.



Augustinus






Numeratius, ia, um, wherin is numbre.



Numeratim, in numbre, or by numbres.



Numerato, promptely, redily, sometyme in
accompt or reckenynge. De Actore facile
dicente ex tempore dictum est ingenium eum
in numerato habere, of the plaintyfe, whan
he speaketh quyckely and without study,
it is sayde, that he hath a quycke wytte
and a redy . Claudius Isidorus testamento
suo dixit, quamuis multa Ciuili bello per­
didisset, tamen relinquere seruorum qua­
tuor millia, iuga boum tria millia sexcenta,
reliqui pœcoris ducenta quinquaginta mil­
lia, In numerato pondo sexcenta millia, Clau­
de Isidore sayde, that not withstandynge
that he hadde loste moche in the Ciuyle
warres: yet hadde he lefte in his testa­
ment foure thousande slaues, three thou­
sande and syxe hundred yoke of oxen, of
other cattel two hundred and fyfty thou­
sande, In money redy tolde syx hundred
thousande pounde.
Fab. Quin.
vi.Plin. li.31.


Numero, are, to numbre or counte, to telle
money, to reken catell.



Numerosus, greate in nombre.



Numerus, nombre, sometyme quantitie, as
of grayne. it is also a precise order in har­
mony, in lengthe and shortenesse of sylla­
bles. And therfore sommetyme verses be
called Numeri. Also it signifyeth compa­
ny or felowshyp. It is also taken for the
warste sorte of the people.
Erasm. in
Chil. 


Numeris omnibus absolutus, 
on euery part perfyte.



Numidia, a royalme in Affrike.



Numida, a man of Numidia.



Numitius, a ryuer in Italy by Lauinium.



Nummarius, nummaria, rium, pertaynynge
to money.



Nummarius, a keper and louer of money.



Nummatus, moneyed, ryche in money.



Numitor, toris, the grandfather of Romu­
lus and Remus on the mothers syde.



Nummularius, he with whome exchaunge
of money is made.



Nummulus, a lytle coine or piece of money



Nummus, & numisma, moneye. It was a
coyne, whiche was the tenthe parte of a
golden peny.



Nummus adulterinus, counterfayt money.



Numella, a payre of shakelles, or fetters
for a horse.



Nunc, nowe, at the laste.



Nunquando for num aliquando.



Valla in
Rauden.



Nuntiatio, reporte, relation.



Nuntio, are, to tell or sygnifye.



Nuntius, a messanger, sometyme a message.



Nuntium, idem.



Nuncupo, are, to name.



Nuncupare uota, to make a solemne auowe.



C&ecedil;sar.



Nuncupare testamentum, to declare a wylle
or testament by mouthe.



Nuncupatio, a namynge, a declaration of
a wylle.



Nundinæ, the market days, whiche in olde
time was the nynthe daye: and than dyd
the hus bande men come to the citie to bie
and selle, and also to here their lawes de­
clared, whiche were newe made.



Nundinalis le, & nundinarius, a, um, pertaining
to a market or fayre.



Nundinatio, marchaundyse exercysed in
fayres.



Nundinator, toris, a market man.



Nundinor, naris, to selle openly: sometyme
to bye often.



Nunquam, neuer.



Ci. in ver.



Nunquam non, euer.



Nunquid, a demaunde. Nunquid ego sum?
Is it not I?



Nunquis, que, quid ? Is there any.



Nunquid vis? wylle ye anye thynge with
me ? or, Is there any thynge that I maye
do for you?



Nuper, late, awhyle agoone. Sommetyme
longe ago.



Nuper admodum, a lyttell whyle ago.



Nuperrimus, the laste of all.



Nuperus, a, um, signifieth late done, or hap­
ned, or newe begonne.



Plautus in
capt.



Nuptialis, le, pertaynyng to mariage.



Nupti&ecedil;, mariage or weddynge.



Nupturio, ire, to desyre to marye.



Nuptus, ta, tum, maryed.



Nuptus, & nupta, the husbonde and wyfe.



Nuptus, tus, mariage.



Nursia, an olde citie in Italy.



Nurus, a daughter in law, the sonnes wyfe.



Nusquam, no where.



Nusquam gentium, no where, neuer.



Valla in
Rauden.



Nusquam non, for vbique, euery where.



Nutrico, are, & nutrio, ire, to nouryshe.



Nutricatus, tus, norture.



Nutritius, the foster father.



Nutritius, nutritia, nutritium, that nourys­
shethe.



Nutrix, cis, a nourse.



Nutricula, idem.



Nutus, tus, a becke, or countenaunce with
mouynge the eye or hande.



Nuto, tare, to becken or wynke.



Nutu, ac renutu, with a becke and rebecke,
with a calle and a becke.



Nux, nucis, a nutte.



Nux auelana, a fylberde.



Nux iuglans, a walle nutte.



Nux pinea, a pyneappull.



Nux gr&ecedil;ca, an almonde.






¶ N, ANTE  Y.

NYcteris, a reremous or backe, with li­
tel fete, that they seme to haue none.



Nicticorax, racis, a nyghte crowe, or
shryche crowe.



Nictileia, sacrifices by night vnto Bacchus. 



Nyctilopes, he that dothe see nothynge by
nyght, and lyttell in the euenynge.



Nictimene, the daughter of Nictes, which
lay with her father, and afterwarde was
tourned into an owle, who wolde not be
seene but at nyght.



Nymphæ, goddesses of the waters, or spi­
rites, beinge conuersaunt aboute waters,
elfes, women of the fayrie. sometyme the
Muses be so called. also yonge bees, as
sone as they haue receyued their fourme.



Nymphea, naturall bathes.



Nymphus, he that is wedded, the bryde­
groome.



Nysa, a mans name. also a citie in Arabia.



Nysia, a kynd of Iuie, hauyng black beries.



Nyserus, an yle by Grecia.



Nysus, the name of a manne.


 


¶ O, ANTE  A.

O##sp##A##sp##T##sp##A##sp##R##sp##I##sp##C##sp##A, the
spaune of fisshe salted.



Oaxis, a ryuer in the yle
of Crete or Candy.



Oaxus, a cytie in Crete
or Candye.

 

¶ O ANTE B.

OB, for at, ob rem, for my profyte, ob
oculos, before myn eyes.
Plaut.


Obæratus, bounden by ernest money.



Obacero, are, to lette a man that he can not
telle out his tale.



Obambulo, are, to walke a gaynst an other.
also to walke togither, or with an other.



Obacerbo, are, to make one angrie.



Obaresco, scere, to drye all aboute.



Obaudio, ire, to here hardly, or vnwilling­
ly. sometyme to obey.



Obba, a bottelle.



Obc&ecedil;co, care, to blynde.



Obdo, dere, to thruste agayne, or put to.



Obdormio, ire, to slepe fast or soundly.



Obduco, xi, ere, to lay ouer, or couer a thing
somtyme to vncouer or open. also to bring
agaynst or ouerthwart a place.



Obdulcesco, scere, to be swete aboute.



Obdureo, rui, ere, & obduresco, scere, to be
harde. 



Obduro, are, to make harde.
This entry displays on the same line as the previous entry.


Obedio, dire, to obeye.



Obedo, dere, to consume or eate al aboute.



Obeliscus, a great stone, square like a butte,
waxing smaller & smaller, vntyl the toppe,
of a great height, made plaine by a wark­
man: there were of them diuers in Rome.



Obelus, a spyt or broche, also a longe strike
in writing like a spit, for a note or diuersite.



Obeo, iui, ire, to go to, to go aboute, to be at
hande, to mete with one.



Obesus, a, um, fatte, grosse of body.



Obire mortem, obire diem, to dye.



Obire vadimonium, to go to be suretie.



Liuius.



Obire legationem, to go in ambassade.



Obire prouinciam, to exercise auctoritie.



Obire bellum, to go to battayle.



Obire h&ecedil;reditatem, to take possession of lan­
des, wherein a manne hath a state of in­
herytaunce.



Obedibo, was in the old time vsed for obe­
diam, I shall obey.



Obequito, tare, to ryde aboute.



Oberro, are, to wander aboute.



Obesco, care, to fede fatte.



Obesitas, fattenesse.



Obesus, a, um, in Virgil is fatte, in Niuio it
sygnifieth leane or lyttell. it is most com­
monly taken for fatte in the bodye.
Vergilius.
Suetonius


Obex, bicis, an obiecte or lette.



Obgannio, & oggannio, ire, to whister in ons
eare. Also to tell a thynge often.



Obherbesco, scere, to growe uppe as her­
bes doone.



Obiaceo, cui, cere, to lye aboute.



Obiecto, tare, to obiect, or often impute, or
lay to ones charge, also to caste out.



Obiectum, any thinge that is before a man­
nes eyen, and may be sene.



Obiectus, ta, tum, throwen or layde agaynste.



Obiectus, tus, the layenge or settynge of a
thynge before ones eyes.



Obiicio, ieci, iicere, to lay or throwe against,
or to lay before one.



Obigitare, to stere or moue before.



Obinunt, they dye.



Sex. Pom.



Obiter, by the waye, incidently, besyde the
purpose, in the meane tyme, precisely.



Obitus, ta, tum, the acte or conclusion.



Obitus, tus, the dieng or decesse of a man. som­
time the comming of one. The ancient wri­
ters toke obitum for the accesse of one.



Obiurgo, are, to chide or rebuke.



Obiurgatio, chydynge, rebukynge.



Obiuro, rare, to bynde by an othe.



Obiurgator, & obiurgatrix, he or she that
chydeth or rebuketh.



Oblatio, offryng. 



Oblatus, ta, tum, offred.
This entry displays on the same line as the previous entry.


Oblecto, ari, & oblector, ari, to delite. Oble­
ctatio oblectamem & oblectamentum, recreation






Oblicio, to take recreation or pleasure.



Obligo, are, to bynde.



Obligatio, an obligation or bonde.



Obligurio, ire, to eate delicate meates gre­
dily or rauenousely, and to consume goo­
des in feastynge and bankettynge.



Obliquus, a, um, contrary to straight.



Oblique perstringere, to taunte or checke.



Cor. Taci­
tus lib.2.



Oblimo, are, to couer with mudde or softe
claye. sometyme to stoppe or daube.



Oblino, ere, to imbrue or make foule.



Obliteratus, ta, tum, scraped out, or blotted.



Oblitero, are, to scrape out, or putte out of
remembraunce.



Obliteratio, a scrapynge or blottynge oute
of a worde.



Oblitus, ta, tum, forgotten.



Oblitus, imbrued, defyled.



Obliuiosus, a, um, forgettefull.



Obliuiscor, sceri, sci, to forgette.



Obliuium, forgetfulnesse.



Oblocutio, yll reporte.



Plautus in
Curgul.



Obloquor, eris, qui, to speake agaynste or
contrarie, to reporte ylle, to curse.



Obloquutor, an yll reporter, or detracter.



Plautus.



Oblucinio, are, to erre.



Sex Pom.



Oblucinasse, to haue erred.



Sex. Pom.



Obmanens, abydynge longe.



Sex: Pom.



Obmoueto, moue or putte to.



Obmordeo, ere, to byte.



Obmutesco, as we communely say, I holde
my peace, I speake not, I hold my tonge.



Obnato, tare, to swymme agaynste.



Obnecto, to knytte faste.



Obnexus, a, um, faste knytte.



Obnexio, a faste knyttynge.



Obnitor, teris, ti, to resyste.



Obnoxius, a, um, bounden, subiecte, apt, in
daunger. sometyme it sygnifyeth gyltie or
fautie. Sum tibi obnoxius, I am bounden
vnto the. obnoxius morbis, subiect to sick­
nesse. Periculis obnoxius, subiecte to pe­
rylles.&c. Minari interdum ferro, nisi sibi ob­
noxia foret, And thretned hir sommetyme
with his weapon, yf she wold not be obe­
diente to his requestes. Obnoxium feris,
Caste out ot wylde beastes.
Salustius.
Colum. 5.


Ci. ad At.



Obnoxie, fearefully, lyke a subiecte.



Obnubo, bere, to hyde.



Obnubilo, are, to make darke.



Obnuere, to couer the heed or body.



Obnuntiare, to denie, to resyste agaynste a
thynge purposed.



Obolus, a poyse wayinge halfe a scruple. it
was also a coyne of syluer, whiche varied
in poyse after the countrey, as obolus At­
ticus, obolus Romanus, obolus Hebraicus.
Salu. in o­
rati. Mem­
mii.


ObOborior, ri, to begin to spring or come forth



Obrado, rasi, dere, to shaue against the heer.

 

Obortus, a, um, begonne or spronge, as ru­
mor obortus, tydynges spronge.



Ob rem, for the purpose.



Obrepo, pere, to come priuily or steale in, to
come vnwares or vnloked for.



Ci. in Pis.



Ob repere ad honores, to come or attayne
to honour by crafty dissimulation.



Obreptio, the gettynge or obteynynge of a
thynge in fourme aforesayde.



Obreptici&ecedil; liter&ecedil;, letters opteyned by the
sayde meanes.



Obrideo, dere, to laugh agaynst one.



Obrideo, si, dere, to laugh at one, or to mock
one. 



Obsio, a mocke.
This entry displays on the same line as the previous entry.


Obrigeo, gui, gere, & obrigesco, scere, to be
or waxe styffe for colde.



Obrion, one of the yles called fortunate.



Obryzum, pure or fyne golde.



Obripio, ripui, ripere, is in hydynge somme
thyng, whiche shuld be spoken, to atteyne
the thynge that we desyre.



Obrodo, rosi, dere, to gnawe aboute.



Obrogo, are, to checke or interrupte a man
in his speeche. Obrogare legem, to dero­
gate one lawe by an other.



Obruo, ere, to ouerthrow, to couer a thing
in castynge an other thynge ouer it.



Obrutania fulmina, lyghtnynges, which so­
daynely happen, throwynge downe and
burnynge thynges, before they be procu­
red or loked for.



Obsaturo, rare, to be fylled to moche with
a thynge.



Obsaluto, are, to offre my selfe to salute one.



Obsatum, olde writers vsed for halowed.



Obsæuio, ire, to be wode angry against one.



Plautus in
Epid.



Obscœno, are, to brynge or cause yll lucke.



Obscœnus, na, num, abhomynable, all thyng
whiche is to be eschewed, dysshonest, vn­
cleane, pernicious, Also brynging yl lucke.



Obscœnitas, villany in actes, rybauldrie.



Obscurus, a, um, darke, hydde, dyffuse, vn­
knowen, of no gentyll bloode.



Obscuritas, darkenesse, difficultie, vngentyl­
nesse of bloudde.



Obscuro, are, to make darke, to shadow, to
hide, to kepe in silence or from the know­
lege of other, to make of no reputation.



Obsecratio, a speciall desyre.



No. Mar.



Obsecro, are, to besech or hartily pray, Ob­
secrare ab aliquo, to desyre of one.



Obsecro, is somtyme an aduerbe. Hem, ob­
secro an is est? Howe, I pray the is that he?



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Obsecundo, are, to make prosperouse, also
to obey or do all thing at an other mans wil,
to make a thing better than it semeth to be.



Obsecundanter, obediently.



Obsepio, iui, ire, to inclose about with an hedge



Obsequela, dilygence, indeuour.






Obsequia, thynges done to the pleasure or
appetite of hym, that they be done for.



Obsequens, obedient.



Obsequentissime, with great obedience.



Obsequere animo, Take thy plesure, make
good chere



Obsequibilis, diligent, redy to do that, whi­
che is commaunded.



Obsequiosus, idem.



Obsequium, redynes to do all that is com­
maunded. sometyme it sygnifieth flattery.



Obsequor, eris, qui, to folow an other man­
nes pleasure.



Obsero, seri, rere, to sowe or sette aboute,
to plante.



Obsero, are, to locke or shutte a doore.



Obseruabilis, le, mete to be obserued, wor­
thy to be had in reuerence.



Obseruantia, reuerence, obseruaunce.



Obseruatio, idem.



Obseruo, are, to awayte diligently with the
eyes, and also the mynde, to honoure, to
take good hede, to haue in reuerence.
Plautus in
Asinar.


Obseruare ianuam, to kepe the doore.



Obses, idis, an hostage, or pledge in warres



Obsessi, they whiche ar besieged, that they
may not issu out of the place where they ar.



Obsessor, oris, he that layeth siege.



Obsidiæ, arum, lyenge in awayte, to take a­
way any thynge craftily.



Obsidianum nitrum, a glasse whiche is pute
blacke.



Obsidionalis corona, a garlande gyuen to
them, whyche delyuered a towne or for­
tresse besyeged with ennemyes, whyche
was of grasse.



Obsidior, aris, ari, to ly in await to take one.



Obsidium, obsidio, obsessio, a syege about a
towne or fortresse.



Obsido, & obsideo, sessi, dere, to lay siege.



Obsigno, are, to close letters & seale them.
Also to sygne them.



Obsignator, toris, he that putteth to his sele
or sygne to a dede or instrument.



Obsipo, are, to throwe or caste, as whanne
men of the countrey do say,
Obsipa pullis escam, Caste meate to the
chyckens.



Obsisto, stiti, sistere, to resyste.



Obsitus, ta, tum, wrapped, sette about with
herbes or trees.



Obsolesco, scere, to decaye, to waxe olde,
to be out of vse.



Obsoletus, ta, tum, decayed, olde, oute of
vse, worne, as a garment, whan it is bare.



Valla in
Rauden.



Obsonium, all meates, excepte breade and
potage.



Obsonus, sona, num, that whiche hathe an
yll sowne.



Obsono, & obsonor, nari, to feest or banket.



Obsonito, tare, idem.



Obsonatio, feastynge or bankettynge.



Obsonator, & obsonatrix, he or she that ma­
keth feastes or bankettes.



Obsono, are, to sowne yll.



Obsorbeo, bui, bere, & obsorbo, psi, bere, to
suppe vp all.



Obsordeo, dui, sordere, to be fylthye or vn­
cleane, or sluttyshe . Nonius declaryth it
to waxe olde.



Obstaculum, an obstacle or impediment.



Obstetrico, care, to do the offyce of a myd­
wyfe.



Obstetrix, tricis, a mydwyfe.



Obstinate, obstinately, or fyrmely.



Obstinatus, ta, tum, obstinate, firme, or stable



Obstinatio, obstynacie, styffenes in opinion.



Obstino, are, to be obstinate, or persist firme
in one sentence or purpose.



Obstipo, pare, to stoppe.



Obstipus, crouped shouldred.



Obstitum, croked, sometyme vyolated.



Obsto, stiti, stare, to withstande, to lette.



Obstrepo, pere, to crye out on one, or make
a noyse.



Obstrigillo, are, to resist or repugne against,
to speake in detraction of one.



Obstringo, xi, gere, to bynde or tye.



Obstrictus, bounden.



Obstringere fidem, to make a faythefulle
promyse.



Obstrudo, si, dere, to hyde, to stoppe a mans
throte, that he can not eate meate.
Plautus in
Stich.
Pom. Fest.


Obstrudulentum, a stoppynge.



Obstruo, xi, struere, to shutte, to stoppe.



Obstructus, stopped or shutte.



Obstruere luminibus, to lette that a manne
canne not loke out of his wyndowes, or
to stoppe his lyghtes.
Cice. pro
domo sua.


Obstupidus, a, um, astonyed.



Plautus in
Milite.



Obstupefacio, facere, to abasshe, or make a­
bashed.



Obstupesco, scere, to be abasshed.



Obsum, obfui, obesse, to hurte or hynder, or
indamage.



Obsurdesco, obsurdescere, to be or waxe
deaffe.



Obtempero, perare, to obey, or be at com­
maundement.



Obtendo, to laye an excuse.



Obtendiculum, a colourable aunswere.



Obtentus, tus, a pretence.



Obtero, triui, obterere, to treade or thruste
downe, to suffocate, to bruyse.



Obtego, obtegere, to couer aboute.



Obtestatio, an humble desyre, proprely not
to do a thyng. Also to take god or some
other thynge to wytnesse.






Obtestor, aris, ari, humbly to beseche, to de­
syre for goddes sake, or for the remem­
braunce of some thinge, whyche to hym
that is desyred, is thankfully herde.



Obtexo, ere, to wayue aboute.



Obticeo, cui, cere, to keepe sylence, not to
speake.



Obturo, are, to shutte.



Obtueor, eri, to beholde, to loke on.



Obturatio, shuttynge.



Obtineo, nere, to opteyne, to holde, to re­
tayne styll, to gete, sometyme to haue. Si
istam animi firmitudinem obtines, salui sumus,
If thou haste that firmenesse of courage,
we be saulfe.



Obtingere, to happe.



Obtigit, it happened.



Obtorpesco, obtorpui, pescere, to be verye
slow or dull.



Obtorqueo, obtorsi, obtorquere, to wringe
or wrythe aboute.



Obtrecto, tare, to ylle reporte, to depraue,
to haue in despyte.



Obtrectator, toris, an yl reporter, or back­
byter.



Obtrectatio, ylle reporte.



Obtrigo, are, to bynde by an othe.



Obtrudo, si, dere, to thruste downe, to putte
to with force. Obtrudit fores, He pullid to
the doore. Also to set forth. Aliquid prius
obtrudamus, Lette vs fyrste sette forthe
sommewhat.
Plautus in
Curgul.


Terent. in
Andria. &
Hecyra.



Obtrudere vxorem, to gyue to a man a wyfe
against his will or appetite.



Obtrunco, uncare, to slee, also to stryke of a
mans heed.



Obbundo, dere, to stryke, to breake, to make
dull, to hurte a man with speking, to make
werye.



Obturbo, are, to trouble all.



Obtusus, a, um, dulle.



Obtutus, tus, & obtuitus, a looke or regard.



Obuagio, gire, to crye oute, as a childe.



Obuallo, are, to enuyronne or compasse a­
boute with a dyche or walle.



Obuaricator, toris, he that tourneth one out
of the ryght waye, or letteth hym that he
maye not passe.



Obuaro, are, to peruerte.



Obuarico, care, to stoppe or lette oone of
his passage.



Obuenio, nire, to comme agaynste, to mete
with. also to happen.



Obuersor, aris, ari, to be presente, to come
in remembraunce.



Cicer. pro
Sextio.



Obuerto, & obuerso, tere, to tourne agayne,
or backe. Sed mihi ante oculos obuersaba­
tur reipub. dignitas, qu&ecedil; me ad se rapit. But
before myne eyes camme the estate of the
publyque weale, whiche plucketh me vn­
to hyr.



Obuiam, an aduerbe, which signifieth before
in the waye, against one. Obuiam ire, to go
against one, to preuent.



Obuio, are, to meete with one.



Obuius, a, um, that which meteth with one.



Obumbro, brare, to make darke with a sha­
dowe: sometyme to defende.



Obuolo, are, to flie againste.



Obuos sacro, the auncient Romayns vsed
for obsecro, I beseche you.

 

¶ O, ANTE C.

OCca, an harowe or dragge, whyche
hath yron teeth, wherwith cloddes
are broken.



Occatio, a breakynge of cloddes, or har­
rowynge.



Occ&ecedil;co, care, to make blynde.



Occalleo, ere, to waxe or be harde flesshed,
or brauned, lyke as a bore is.



Occano, & occino, occanui, & occini, occa­
nere & occinere, to synge agaynste one, to
laye in rebuke.



Occaso, sere, to be loste, or vndone.



Plautus in
Casi.



Occasio, occasyon.



Occasiuncula, a smalle occasyon.



Occasus, us, dethe of manne or beaste. Also
the goynge downe of the sonne, or sonne­
glade.



Occatorium, an harrowynge.



Columel.
li.2.
Pom. Fest.



Occedo, pro accedo.



Occentassint for conuitia fecerint, They shal
gyue rebukes or wordes of reproche.



Occento, tare, to crye oute against one with
rebukefull wordes.



Occentus, tus, where one syngeth against
another. It maye be also taken for a coun­
tretenor.



Plautus.



Occepso, pro incepero, I shall begynne.



Occidens, tis, the west, or ponent.



Occidio, onis, a slaughter.



Occido, di, dere, to slee or wounde to deth, to
fall greuously.



Occisa res est, the matter is dasshed.



Occitantur, for frequenter occiduntur, they
be slayne here and there, or in dyuers
places.



Occido, dere, to fall downe, to perysshe vt­
terly, to dye, to goo downe, as the sunne
doeth, and other sterres.



Occidit spes nostra, oure hope is lost.



Plautus in
Pseudolo.



Occisa est hæc res, this thinge is lost or in
despayre.



Occiduum, the place where the sunne goeth
downe.



Occino, nere, to synge to another.






Occilare, to beate or buffat.



Plaut. in
Casina.



Occissimus, of all other mooste lost or des­
perate.



Occisio, onis, a slaughter or deth of men or
catell.



Occidi, I am deed, I am lost.



Occipio, pere, to begynne.



Occiput, & occipitium, the hynder parte of
the heed.



Occlamito, tare, to crye oute.



Occludo, dere, to shytte faste.



Occludere linguam, to stoppe a man frome
speakynge.



Occlusus, occlusior, occlusissimus, fast shut.



Occo, occare, to harrowe and breake clod­
des and balkes in the corne fieldes, Also
to couer with erthe.



Occulo, lere, to hyde.



Occulto, tare, idem.



Occultus, ta, tum, hyd, whiche is not knowen.



Occulte, priuyly, vnknowen.



Occumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be slayne, to
be deedly wounded.



Occupatitius ager, the fielde, whiche is ne­
glected of the owner, & labored by other.



Occupo, are, to occupie, to get or take be­
fore an other man, to vse in commune, to
take or holde a thynge with force, to lette
or empeche, to possede, somtyme to lende
for auauntage.



Occupans, tis, he that dothe occupie or vse
a thynge, the occupier.



Ci. in Ver.
act.2.



Occupatus, let, in busynesse, occupyed.



Occupatio, a colour in rhetorike, where the
playntyfe in preuentynge the wordes of
the defendaunt, reherceth that whiche he
will laye for excuse, and disproueth it.



Plautus in
Menech.



Occupare consilium, to fynde aduyse or coun­
sayle.



Occupare locum, to take or kepe a place
with force.
Liui. li.33.


Occurro, si, rere, to meete with, to come to
remembraunce, to offre hym selfe. Also to
resiste, to runne, to come to mynde, or re­
membrance, also to be proffred.



Occurso, are, the frequentatiue of occurro,
to come often to remembraunce, to mete
ofte, or runne agaynste one.



Occursus, us, a runnynge agaynste one.



Oceanus, the see, whiche gothe aboute all
the worlde. Alsoo a great poole made in
Rome, for many persones to swymme in.



Oceanius, a, um, of the occean see.



Ocellatus, ta, tum, that whiche hath eyen, or
holes lyke to eyen.



Ocha, a goose.



Ocquinisco, scere, to inclyne or bow to.



Ochus, a ryuer which passeth throughe A­
carnania, a countray in grece.



Ochra, oker, whiche paynters do vse.



Otior, aris, ari, to be vnoccupyed, or with­
oute busynesse.



Otiosus, ydell, vnoccupied, quyete.



Otium, vacation from labour, leyser, quiet­
nes, ydelnes, lacke of busynes.



Ocreæ, legge harneyse, bootes.



Ocreatus, boted or harneised on the leggis.



Octangulus, a, um, eight cornerd.



Octo, eight.



Octies, eight tymes.



Octonius, a, um, the numbre of eight, in son­
dry partis.



Octobris, the moneth of Octobre.



Octopes, hauynge eight feete.



Sueton. in
Cali.



Octophorum, a carre with eight wheles.



Oculatus, full of eyen, also quick sigted, cir­
cumspect, espyenge a thinge shortly.
Quint.


Oculatus testis, a witnesse whiche sawe the
thinge.



Oculeus, full of eyen, wyly.



Oculis captus, blynde.



Oculitus eam amat, he loueth her as well as
his owne eyen.



Oculus, an eye, alsoo a yonge budde of a 
tree.



Oculum adijcere, to be in loue with the thing,
which is sene.



Ocymum, an herbe.



Ocyor, swifter, ocyus idem.



Ocyssimus, a, um, most swift.



Ocyus, sooner, quicklyer.

 

¶ O, ANTE  D.

OD&ecedil;a, wherin syngynge is ex­
ercysed.



Ode, a songe.



Odfacio, for Olfacio cere, to smelle.



Odi, I hate, or haue hated: Odisse, to hate,
or haue hated.



Odiosus, he that is hated, displesant, trou­
blous, tediouse.



Odiose, with hate, displeasantly.



Odit eum cane peius, & angue, He hatethe
him wars than a dogge or a serpente: as
who sayth, mortally without hope of re­
concylynge.



Odites, o one of the sonnes of Ixion the
Centaure.



Odium, hate, displeasure, tediousenes.



Odœporicon, an Itenerary, wherin is wri­
ten the distance of one place from an no­
ther, or a lyke thyng, as the iestes of prin­
cis are, assignynge their iourneys.



Odor, oris, & odos, sauour, sente.



Odoramentum, euery thynge that sauou­
reth well. also sauour.



Odorarius, a maker or seller of thinges that




smelle swete.



Odoratus, ta, tum, that which is perfumed.
sometyme that whiche doth sauour, odo­
riferous, or smellynge swete.



Odorator, a hounde made to the sute.



Odoriferus, a, um, idem.



Odorisecus, a hounde or spanell, which hun­
teth by sent.



Odoro, & odoror, ari, to smell.



Odorus, a, um, that whiche sendeth furthe
sauour, or hath a good sauour.

 

¶ O, ANTE E.

OEagrus, a ryuer in the countraye of
Thracia.



Oeanthe, a citie, alsoo the floure of a
vyne.



Oebades, kynge Darius horsekepar, by
whose polycye he atteyned to the kynge­
dome of Persia.



Oebalia, the countraye in Grece, called al­
so Laconia.



Oebalus, a mannes name.



Oechalia, a citie in Laconia.



Oeconomia, the orderinge and prouydinge
of thinges concernyng housholde, alsoo an
order in writinge, whereby euery thinge
is set in his propre place.



Oeconomica, pertayninge to husbandry.



Oeconomus, a stewarde of housholde.



Oeci, placis, where women do sitte & worke
with woull or sylke.



Oecumenicus, vniuersall, pertayninge to all
the worlde.



Oecumenicum consilium, a general counsail,
wherein thinges are vniuersally treated
concerninge all countreys.



Oedipus, a man, which dissolued subtyll and
darke questions.



Oedipodionius, nia, um, belongynge to Oe­
dipus. 



Oenanthe, the bery of a wylde vyne.



Oenanthinum, an oynemente made of the
sayde bery.



Oeneus, the father of Deianira, the last wife
of Hercules. 



Oenophorus, a seruaunte, whyche bringeth
wyne to the table.



Oenophorum, a potte wherein wyne is ca­
ryed.



Oenopola, a vyntenar, or tauernour.



Oenopolium, a wyne tauerne.



Oenotria, Italy.



Oenotrides, two Iles nyghe to Calabria.



Oesipum, the fylthy oyle, which is in wull,
that is in the flankes of a shepe, or aboute
his necke, which oyle is soden oute, & vsed
for medicyne.



Oestrum, woodnesse, or madde fury: alsoo a
fly, which maketh a great noyse, whan he
flyeth, some do suppose it to be, a dor, lyke
to a bee, but that he is blacke & grettar.



Oeta, a mountayne in Thessaly.



Oeteus, the father of Medea, wyfe of Ia­
son. 

 

¶ O, ANTE F.

OFfa, a poodinge, also a dish made with
fatt broth, harde chese, peper, and
cynamom, or other lyke iunkat. som­
tyme it is taken for a morsell.



Offarius, & offaria, a maker of suche iunc­
kettes.



Offatim, in morselles.



Offector, toris, a dyar.



Offella, a lytell morsell, as of fleshe mynced,
also a potage made with pieces of flesshe,
as stuyd brothe or forced gruell.



Offendo, dere, to meete with, to fall into, to
fynde by chaunce, to stryke or hytte any
thinge vnware, to offende. Offendere apud
aliquem, to do a thinge, whyche lyketh not
theym that do see it done.



Offendiculum, an impediment or let, an ob­
stacle.



Offendimentum, & offendix, the knotte of a
ribon or lase, wherewith a bonet or hatte
is knytte fast to the heed.



Offensa, offensio, & offensus, us, an offence.



Offensatio, a metynge.



Offensaculum, that which is layd in a mans
waye, whereat he stumbleth.



Offensator, satoris, he that stackereth in re­
dinge, as yf he were not perfyte in reding,
or redeth otherwyse than it is wryten.
Quint.


Offensans, tis, that which hurteth or letteth.



Offenso, are, to hytte ofte, or to lette.



Offensiuncula, a small offence.



Offercio, to stuffe or fill.



Offero, obtuli, offerre, to offre, or present, to
gyue willyngly, to promyse.



Offerumentæ, strypes. Ne offerumentas ha­
bebis plureis in tergo tuo, quem vlla nauis longa
clauos, tum ego ero mendacissimus, and yf
thou haue not moo strypes on the skyn of
thy backe, than a galy hath nayles, I shall
be the falsyst lyar that euer was.
Plau in
Ruden.


Offerumenta, offrynges, thynges offred to
God.



Offerre auxilium, to promyse ayde.



Offerre crimen, to put a complaynte against
one.
Iustin.


Offerre incendium, Cice. ad Pont. Domus ar­
debat in Palatio non fortuito, sed oblato in­
cendio, My house in the Palaice dyd burne
not by any chaunce, but by fyre thrast in




by some man.
Cicero
in L&ecedil;lio.


Plautus in
Ruden.



Offerre mendicitatem, to bringe one vnto
pouertie.



Offerre moram, to let.



Offerre se obuiam, to mete with one.



Cic. off.3.
Terent. in
Adelph.



Offerre stuprum, to commit aduoutry.



Offerre vitium virgini, to defloure a virgyn.



Officere luminibus, to stoppe the lyghtes.



Officina, a werkhouse, a shoppe.



Officialis, ale, pertayninge to offices or due­
ties.



Quint ilia.



Officialis, an officer.



Officio, ficere, to hurte, sometyme to do, also
to dy cloth.



Officiosus, a seruysable man, or he that is
glad to please, or doeth well his duetye.



Officiosus dolor, a grief which procedeth of
a good cause or raison.



Officium, office, duetye, or a thinge, whiche
ought to be done. It is sometyme taken for
honour done to one, and it may be vsed for
that, whyche we do called homage, done in
suche fourme as our lawe doeth appoynt
it, it is also taken for benefyte.



Cic. de a­
micitia.



Officium vsurpare, to do his duetye.



Officiose, diligently, seruisably.



Offirmo, are, to abyde in one purpose or opi­
nion, to be obstinate.



Offlecto, xi, tere, to tourne a thinge contrary
or aboute.



Offoco, are, to powre water into the mouth
of a man or beast.



Offriti&ecedil;, crafty or deceytfull taches.



Offringo, ere, to breake with a plough, lande
eared before.



Offuci&ecedil;, cawtellis, crafty wayes to deceyue.



Offula, a lytell morsell.



Offundo, fusi, dere, to powre aboute, to make
darke or blynde, to stayne, to cast in, or
bringe in.



Offuco, care, to put water or other lycour in
to a mannes mouthe, to sowke downe, as
they vse to do syke men, which for feo­
blenesse canne not by them selfes take any
sustenaunce.



Offusco, are, to make blacke, or darke.

 

¶ O, ANTE G.

OGdous, a kynge of Egypte, whyche
first buylded the citie of Memphis.



Ogdoas, adis, the numbre of eyght.



Ogdolapis, a ryuer which commeth oute of
the hilles called Alpes, and runneth to
Rome.



Oggannio, ire, to prate, to braule, to speake
with chydinge.



Oggero, ssi, gerere, to cast in, or set.



Oculos oggerere, to caste or set the eyes
on one.



Oggrassari, to go.



Ogyges, he which first buylded the citie of
Thebes.
Plaut. in
Trucu.


Ogygeus, a, um, made or founde by Ogyges. 



Ogygea, an Ile betwene Phenicea and
Syria.



Ogyris, an Ile in Syria.

 

¶ O. ANTE H.

OHe, an exclamation, signifienge that
he, which speketh that worde, is sa­
ciate or wery of that, which he seeth
or heereth.

 

¶ O, ANTE I.
¶ 

Oinomeli, wyne and hony soden togither.

 

¶ O, ANTE L.

OLea, is moost proprely the frute of an
olyue: yet sometyme it is vsed for an
olyue tree.



Oleaceus, a, um, oyly.



Oleacum, a colour, which is mixt with grene,
blacke, yelowe, and whyte.



Oleaginus, a, um, of an olyue tree.



Oleagineus, idem.



Olearis, re, & olearius, a, um, pertayninge to
oyle.



Olearius, a maker of oyle.



Olearus, one of the Iles called Ciclades.



Oleaster, a wylde olyue.



Oleastellus, a diminutif of Oleaster. 



Oleastrinum, oyle of wylde olyues.



Oleatus, a, um, of oyle.



Oleitas, the tyme of gatheringe of olyues.



Olenus, a citie in Grece.



Olenius, a, um, of that citie.



Olentica, thinges which haue an yll sauour.



Oleo, eui, & olui, olere, to sauour, or haue
sauour.



Oleosus, a, um, ful of oyle.



Olesco, lescere, to growe.



Oletum, a place where olyues do growe, al­
so the dung or ordure of a man, proprely it 
is a draught or iakes.



Oleum, oyle.



Olfacio, feci, facere, to smell.



Olfacto, are, to smell moche or often.



Olfactus, tus, the sence of smellyng.



Olibantum, a measure of wyne.



Olidus, da, dum, that which hath a great sa­
uour, eyther good or badde, mooste com­
munely stinkinge.



Oligarchici, they whiche doo aduaunce the
state of noble men and ryche men, aboue




the popular astate.



Ollim, sometyme, as well in the tyme passed
as in the tyme to come, nowe late, longe
tyme passed.



Olitor, a gardynar, or sellar of herbes and
rootes.



Olitorius, a, um, pertayning to a pot garden.



Oliua, an olyue tree.



Oliueta, the tyme of gatherynge of olyue
beryes.



Oliuetum, a place where doo growe olyue
trees.



Oliuina, plenty of olyues, alsoo reuenues,
which do come of olyues.



Oliuitas, & oleitas, the qualytie of olyues,
the gatheringe tyme of olyues.



Oliuo, are, to gather olyues.



Plautus in
Pseudolo.



Oliuum, oyle olyue.



Olla, a pot.



Ollares, grapes conseruyd in pottes.



Olli, for illi.



Varro.



Ollula, a lytell pot.



Ololygones, crokynge frogges.



Olor, oris, a wylde swanne.



Olus, leris, herbes which serue for potage,
pot herbes.



Oluscula, small herbes.



Olus atrum, an herbe called Alysander.



Olympia, a citie betwene the hilles of Ossa
and Olympus.



Olympia, orum, playes and greate games,
on the hyll of Olympus, made to the ho­
nour of Iupiter. 



Olympiacus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to that
playes or hyll.



Olympias, piadis, the space of fyue yeres,
whereby the olde grekes dyd account, as
we do now by the yeres of oure lorde: as
the first Olympias, the seconde, the third.
ans so forth.



Olympicus, ca, cum, of Olympus.



Olypionices, he that hath had victory in the
games at Olympus.



Olympius, a, um, heuenly.



Olympus, a mountayne or hyll in Grece, a­
boue the which appereth no clowde: and
therfore amonge the Poetes it is vsur­
ped for heuen.



Olynthus, a citie in Thracia.



Olyras, a ryuer in Grece by the place called
Thermopylas.



Olysippum, a citie in portugall, nowe called
Ulysbona, in englysh Lusseborn.

 

¶ O, ANTE M.

OMasum, a fat gut, or chitterling.



Omen, minis, lucke, also a worde or
sentence sodaynly spoken, after the
which some thing hapneth to folowe ac­
cording thervnto, boue the expectation
of them which herde it.



Omentum, the call or sewet, wherein all the
bowelles are lapped, also the thynne skyn
in the heed, wherein the brayne is contay­
ned: of some called the ryme of the brayne,
and of surgeons Pia mater.



Omentatus, ta, tum, mixt with sewet.



Ominor, aris, ari, & omino, aui, are, to gesse
what shall happen or folowe.



Ominator, oris, he that telleth a mans lucke
or fortune.



Ominosus, a, um, lucky.



Teren.
in Heaut.



Omissus, a, um, left, not medled with. Omis­
so animo, Vbi te vidi animo esse omisso, whan
I sawe that thou caryddest for nothinge.



Omitto, omisi, omittere, to forbeare, to leue,
to neglect.



Teren.



Omitte hunc, let hym alone, pardon hym.



Phorm.



Omitte me, let me go.



Omne tulit punctum, he touched euery point,
A prouerb. applyed to hym, whiche omit­
teth nothinge expedient or necessary, and
is therfore of all men commendyd.



Omnibus numeris, in all poyntes. Res est o­
mnibus numeris absoluta, it is a thing per­
fyte in all poyntes.



Omnifariam, all maner of wayes, of euery
kynde.



Omnifarius, a, um, sondrye, dyuerse.



Omnigenus, a, um, of euery kynde.



Omnimodus, da, dum, all maner.



Omnino, holy, throughly, allwaye, finally.



Omnipotens, tis, allmyghty.



Omnis, ne, all.



Omophagi, they which do eate raw fleshe.



Omphax, acis, a grape not fully rype.



Omphacium, licour made of frute that is
not ripe, as of grapes, and than it is called
veriuyse.



Omphacium vinum, a grene wyne not plea­
saunt or swete.



Omphacinum oleum, oyle made of olyues,
not beinge rype.



Ommutesco, tescere, to be dombe, and can not
speke.

 

¶ O, ANTE N.

ONæ, swete fygges.



Onager, onagri, a wylde Asse.



Onerarius, a, um, that which seruethe
for bourdon.



Onero, are, to charge, bourdon, or lade.



Onerare populum, to put impositions or ta­
xes on the people.



Oneratus, ta, tum, bourdayned, ladyd.



Onerarius, raria, rarium, that whereon bour­




bourdayne is layde.



Onerosus, a, um, bourdeinous.



Onixes, a kynde, of marble.



Oniscus, a worme, which bendeth him selfe
lyke a bow whan he goeth, which is reed,
and founde vnder trees, which haue lyen
longe on the grounde.



Onoba, a citie.



Onocentaurus, a beast halfe a man, halfe an
asse.



Onocrotalus, a byrde lyke to a swanne, whi­
che putting his heed into the water, bray­
eth lyke an asse.



Onomatopeia, a worde made of sowne or
pronouncinge, as bletinge of a shepe, low­
inge of a cow, hissinge of an adder.



Ononium, a blynde nettyll.



Onus, oneris, a bourdon, a lode.



Onustus, ta, tum, lodyd.



Onyx, ychis, a whyte stone, lyke to a mannes
nayle, also some be founde in Inde, which
are of dyuerse colours, hauynge whyte
spottes lyke vnto eyen.



Onychinus, na, um, made of the stone called
Onyx. 

 

¶ O, ANTE P.

OPaco, care, to shadowe.



Opacus, ca, cum, shadowed, or in the
shadowe.



Opera, æ, wark, labour.



Operæ, plurali tantum, warkmen, labourers.



Opera, warkes, buyldinges, priuate or com­
mune.



Operam do, operam impendo, operam nauo, 
I do myne yndeuour, I put to my diligence
I spend my labour.



Operarius, a laborar.



Operarius, a, um, that whiche is done with
labour.



Operculo, are, to keuer a vessell.



Operculum, a keueringe or lede.



Operæprecium, profytable, necessary, a ioy­
full thinge, moche to be estemed.



Operimentum, any thinge that keuerith.



Operio, rui, to keuer, or hyde.



Operior, iris, iri, to tary, to abyde.



Operor, aris, ari, to wark.



Operatio, the wark, or that wheraboute a
man laboureth.



Operosus, a, um, busy, diligent in labouringe
laboriouse, paynefull.



Opertorium, a coueringe.



Ophiaca, pertaynynge to serpentes, they
were bookes, which Nicander, and Petri­
dius wrate, of the nature of serpentes.



Ophiophagi, people in Ethiope, whiche do
eate serpentes.



Ophiucus, the name of Esculapius, bycause
that he is ymagyned to holde a serpent in
his hande.



Ophites, a stone hauynge spottes lyke a ser­
pente.



Opicus, pica, picum, vnclene, dishonest, sha­
meles.



Opici, they whyche vsed abhominable ry­
bauldry.



Opifex, ficis, a warkman, a craftys man.



Opifi cium, the wark.



Opigena, Iuno. Iuno was so called of wo­
men, bycause theysupposed, that whe holpe
them when they trauayled.



Opilio, onis, a shepeherde.



Opima spolia, the spoyle, which by one chief
Capytayne is taken from another in ba­
tayle, as his cote armure or harneys.



Opimé, aboundauntly, richely.



Opimo, are, to make fat.



Opimus, ma, mum, fat, also riche.



Opimium, seu opimianum vinum, wyne whi­
che moughe endure good, two hundred 
yeres.



Opinabilis, le, that maye be conceyted in o­
pinion.



Opinio, onis, opinion, sometyme hope, also
fame.



Opino, for opinor, I suppose.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Opinor, pinaris, nari, to suppose, to haue o­
pinion.



Opinatus, ta, tum, supposed.



Opinator, toris, a suppposar.



Opiparé, plentuously.



Opiparus, a, um, aboundaunt, fresh, or gaye.
Cœna opipara, a delicate souper.



Opis, opis, a lady, companyon to Diana, she
was also wyfe to Saturnus, and by her is
signified the erth amonge the Poetes.



Opistographus, a booke wryten on the back
syde.



Opisthotonicus, he that can not tourne his
necke.



Opisthotonos, the cricke, or disease, whiche
letteth a man to tourne his necke.



Opiter, itris, he whose father deyed before
his grandfather.



Opitulor, aris, ari, to helpe.



Opitulator, oris, a helpar.



Opitulus, Iupiter, Iupiter the helpar at
neede.



Opium, the iuyce of an herbe called blacke
Popye, alsoo Opius, is he that fighteth in
armure.



Opobalsamum, balme naturall, whyche in
a part of Iudea, called Ierocinthe, stilleth
oute of a lytle thorne.



Opoponax, acis, the iuyce of an herbe, cal­
led Panax.






Oporice, a medicine made of fruytes.



Oporæ, all fruites whiche do growe in the
last ende of somer.



Oporotheca, a place, wherein frute is kept.



Oportet, it behoueth, it is expedient or ne­
cessary.



Oppedo, dere, to fart against one.



Oppeto tere, to dye: also to be slayne.



Oppetere febrem, to fall into the feuer.



Oppidanus, a cytezen or townes man.



Oppidicus, idem.



Oppidatim towne by towne.



Oppido, an aduerbe, signifienge very moch,
sometyme it signifieth furthwith, veryly.



Oppidulum, a lytell towne.



Oppidum, a walled towne, or citie.



Oppignero, are, to laye in pledge.



Oppilo, are, to stoppe or shit.



Oppleo, ere, to fill full.



Opploro, are, to lament.



Oppono, ere, to lay or put against.



Opportunus, na, num, that whiche is in due
tyme, and as it ought to be.



Salustius
in iugur.



Opportunus iniuriæ, fete or apte to take
wronge.



Opportunitas, tatis, oportunitie, conuenient
tyme.



Opportuné, opportunatly conuenientely, as
it ought to be.



Opprimo, ere, to oppresse, to kepe or shit in,
to take sodaynely, to rauyshe a woman, to
grieue, to thrust harde.



Opprobrium, & opprobramentum, a reproche



Opprobro, are, to obiect against one, to re­
proche.



Oppugno, are, to assault.



Ops, opis, the suster and wyfe of Saturne:
also it signifieth ayde or helpe.



Opes, richesse.



Opsonator, atoris, a puruayour of vytayles,
or Catar.



Opsonatus, tus, & opsonatio, preparation for
dyner, or souper.



Opsonito, tare, to prepare often for dyner or
souper.



Opsonium, al thinge belonginge to a meale,
except bred and drynke.



Opsono, nare, & opsonor, onari, to prepare
thynges necessarye for dyner, souper, or
bankat.



Optabilis, le, that which is desyred.



Optato, with desire.



Opticus, ca, cum, perspectife, pertaynynge
to sight.



Optice, the science whereby the raison of
sight is knowen.



Optimates, the heed men of a citie, also they
whiche defende the parte of nobilitie and
riche men.



Optimatus, tus, the state or condicion of heed
men of a towne or contraye.



Optimus, best.



Optio, the choyse, the request or desyre. It
was also to a captayne in warres, a mini­
stre to do his commaundement, and be as­
sistent vnto hym.



Opto, tare, to desyre, to couse, to require.
Adopto, coopto, exopto, vide suis locis.



Opulento, tare, to make riche or plenteouse.



Opulentus, ta, tum, ryche abundant.



Opulentia, & opulentitas, rychesse.



Opuncalo, he that syngethe lyke to a she­
parde.



Opulesco, scere, to be ryche.



Opus, operis, a warke, a laboure. Eius opere
by his meane or diligence.



Opus est, it is necessary, or nede. Si opus sit,
yf nede be.



Opus, opuntis, a citie in Locris.



Opus intestinum, that which most commun­
ly is called implementes of housholde, pro­
prely of tymber, as fourmes, stooles, cup­
boordes, and other lyke thinges.



Opus est conuento. Ita res subita est, celeriter
mihi hoc homine opus est, The chaunce is
so sodayne, or the mater requireth suche
hast, that I must nedes speke with the man
shortly or quickely.



Opus est facto, it must nedes be done, or ex­
ecuted.



Opus est remissam . Vosmet videte iam Laches
& tu Pamphile, remissam opus sit nobis an
reductam domum, Now Laches and Pam­
phile aduyse your selfes wel, whither it be
necessary, that she be sent home, or fetched
home.
Terent in
Hecyra.


Opus sunt tibi, thou hast nede of them. Vt cum
desponderim, des qui qurum ac vestem, atque
alia quæ opus sunt, That whan I haue af­
fiauncyd her, thou delyuer money and ap­
parayle, and all other thinges nedefull.
Plautus in
Capt.Terent. in
Heau.


Opere maxumo, with all meanes possible, in
most harty wyse. Rex Seleucus me opere o­
rauit maxumo, vt sibi latrones cogerem,
Kynge Seleucus desyred me, as moche as
he possibly mought, that I wolde geate
him souldiours to be aboute his persone.
Thais maximo te orabat, opere vt cras re­
dires. Thais desyred the as hartyly as she
can, that thou woldeste come agayne to
morowe.
Plautus in
Milite.Terent. in
Eunucho.
 

¶ O, ANTE R.

ORa, the extreme part of euery thing,
as the edge, the brym, the skirtes,
the hem, the border, the cabull that
tyeth the shyppe.






Ora marittima, the see syde.



Oraculum, where aunsweres were gyuen
by ydolles: sometyme the aunswere, som­
tyme the sayinge of some wise man.



Orarium, the vestement, wherin the priest
dothe saye masse.



Orata, a fyshe called a gylte heed.



Oratio, an oration, a prayer.



Orator, toris, an oratour.



Oratoria, Rhetorike.



Oratoriæ, lyke an oratour, or in fourme of
Rhetorike.



Oratorius, a, um, pertaynynge to an orator.



Oratus, tus, prayer.



Orbiculatus, ta, tum, made rounde.



Orbiculus, a lyttell cerkle.



Orbicus, ca, cum, founde.



Orbis, a cerkle. Also the worlde.



Orbes, dyshes, the holes of the eien. some­
tyme the eyen.



Orbem facere, where people doo gather
them rounde togyther in battayle.



Orbita, a whele. sometyme the tracke that
wheeles do make in the grounde.



Orbo, are, to depryue.



Orbus, proprely blynde.



Orbi, they whyche haue loste their chyl­
derne. Also orphanes.



Orbitas, the lacke of chylderne: sometyme
the lacke of a father.



Orbitus, ta, tum, rounde as a cerkle.



Orca, a great monster of the see: also a great
vessell, as a butte or vate, wherein Ren­
nyshe wyne is putte. Also a boxe, wherin
dyce be shaken, and after throwen on the
tables. sometyme a coffer. wherin womens
payntynge is kepte.



Orchades, thyrty Iles in the see by Scot­
lande.



Orchestra, a place, wherin the Senatours
& honourable persons sat to behold plays



Orchomenus, a mountayne in Thessaly. al­
so a citie in Eubœa.



Orcomana, a beere, wheron deade corses
doo lye.



Orcus, a ryuer of helle: alsoo an nother in
Thessalye. it is sometyme taken for helle.



Ordinarius, a, um, wherin order is obserued
ordinarye. sometyme a scoffer or gester.



Ordinare, to order or dispose.



Ordior, iris, orsus, iri, to begynne to speake.



Ordo, dinis, order, the dewe place, the a­
state of menne.
In ordinem redigere, to keepe oone within
his boundes, that he doo not excede his
degree.



Sulustius
in Iug.



Ordines, is in battayle that, whyche is cal­
lyd the raye.



Ordines seruare, to kepethe raye.



Ordinatim, in order.



Ordines conturbare, to breake or scatter
the raye.



Orea, the bytte for a horse.



Oreus, a name of Bacchus. 



Orestes, the sonne of Agamemnon.



Ore tenus, to the mouthe.



Orexis, is moste taken for vomyte, all be it
sygnifieth appetite.



Organa, all instrumentes of musyke.



Organum, an instrumente pertaynynge to
buyldynge, also an ordinance of warres.



Organarij, makers of instrumentes.



Orgia, ceremonies or songes, pertaynyng
to infernall goddes, or to Bacchus. 



Orgyria, a measure contaynynge. vi. foote.
Guidas dothe write, that it is the space,
whiche is conteyned betweene the han­
des stretched abrode, whyche I suppose
is a spanne.



Oria, a fyshers boote



Orichalcum, a mettal, whiche as I suppose
is lattyn.



Oriculum, for auricula, a lytell eare.



Oricos, a citie of Epire.



Oriens, orientis, the Easte.



Orificium, the mouthe of any thynge.



Origanum, an herbe, callyd organny.



Origo, ginis, a begynnynge, kynde.



Orion, a sygne in the fyrmament.



Orior, eris, & oriris, riri, to be borne, to ryse,
to appiere.



Oriundus, commen by auncetours oute of
some countrey or citie. sommetyme borne,
Nati Carthagine, sed orundi a Syracusis,
Borne at Carthage, but by auncetoures
descended frome Syracuse in Sicile.



Oriza, a grayne callyd Ryse, which is most
commonly eaten in Lente, with Almonde
mylke.



Orminium, an herbe lyke to horehounde.



Ornamentum, apparayle, also honour.



Ornithoboscion, a howse where poultry is
fedde, a cowpe.



Ornithon, thonis, a place wherein byrdes
are kepte.



Orno, nare, to garnish, to decke or trymme,
to make faire, to prepare, to make meete, to
honoure with some auctoritie or dignitie.



Ornatus, ta, tum, apparayled, trimmed, gar­
nyshed, instructed, fournyshed.



Ornatus, tus, apparayl, trymming, deckyng.



Oro, orare, to praye, to demaunde, to speke
openly and eloquently, as Oratours do,
to pleade.



Orobia, a kynde of Frankynsence in lyt­
tell graynes.



Orontes, a ryuer by the cytie of Antyoche.



Orphanus, he whyche lacketh his father




and fatherly succour.



Orpheus, a poete, sonne of Apollo, and
Calliopes. 



Orpheus, a, um, of Orpheus. 



Orsus, he beganne.



Orsus, he that begynneth to do a thynge.



Orsus, a, um, begonne.



Orthodoxia, the right opinion or faith.



Orthodoxus, a man of the ryghte opynyon
or faythe.



Orthogonius, a ryght corner.



Orthographia, the ryght forme of writing.



Orthopnœa, a disease, whan a manne can
not fetche his breathe, but holdynge his
necke vpryghte.



Orthopnœci, they which haue that sicknes.



Orthostadios, a garmente, whiche was al­
waye worne vngyrte.



Ortus, ti, uide Hortus.



Orti pensiles, gardeynes made on howses,
or pyllours.



Ortus, ta, tum, borne.



Ortus, tus, the byrthe or natiuitie, Also the
rysynge of the sonne.



Ortygia, the name of an Ile.



Ortix, tigis, a byrde callyd a quayle.



Oryx, gis, a beaste of the kynde of gotes.

 

¶ O, ANTE S.

OS, oris, the mouthe, also the vysage:
sometyme the proporcion of all the
body, sometyme countenance, also
presence, and language.
Salustius
in iugur.


Os distorquere, to make a mowe.



Os durum, a shamelesse knaue.



Os sublinire, to mocke or deceyue craftily,
with faire wordes or promyses.



Os, ossis, a bone. Ossum, idem.



Plin. de vi.
illust.



Osæ, lawes concernynge deuotion.



Osanna, I pray the saue vs.



Osasum, for Odi, I hate.



Oscedo, dinis, yanynge or gapyng. somme­
tyme stenche.



Osci, people in Italye.



Oscillo, are, to bowe downe.



Ocilla, lytle images of waxe to be offred.



Oscillum, a lyttell mouthe. sometyme a lyt­
tell ymage or poppette.



Oscines, byrdes, whiche by theyr voyces
do sygnifie somewhat to come or happen.



O cinum, a generall name of byrdes, why­
che do synge, a syngynge byrde.



Oscis, the abhomynable vse of carnalle
synne.



Oscito, tare, to gape, as menne do for lacke
of sleepe.



Oscitatio, gapynge, Also quyetenesse from
laboure.



Oscitanter, softely, aduysedly, sobrely.



Oscitabundé, idem.



Osculana pugna, battaylle, wherein they,
whyche were before vaynquysshed, haue
the vyctorie.



Osculum, a lyttell mouthe, also a kysse.



Osculor, aris, ari, to kysse.



Osiris, osiridis, the sonne of Iupiter begot
on Neobe, the daughter of Phoroneus,
which succeded Phoroneus in the king­
dome of the Argiues, and afterward was
kyng of Egypt, who after his death was
honoured for a god.



Ossa, a highe mountayne in Thessalye.



Osseus, a, um, bonye, or of a bone.



Ossiculatim, one boone from an nother in
pieces.



Ossifragus, fraga, gum, that whyche brea­
keth boones.



Ossilegium, a gatherynge of bones.



Ossiculum, a lyttell bone.



Ossuaria, a shryne or lyke thyng, where the
bones of deed men are put.



Ostendo, di, dere, to shewe.



Ostento, ostentare, to shewe often. Alsoo
to booste.



Ostentum, a thynge, whiche happeneth sel­
dome, and betokeneth, that some strange
thynge shall happen. As a blasyng sterre,
thunder on a fayre daye. Sometyme it si­
gnifieth a thynge monstruous.



Ostento, tare, to boste.



Ostentatio, boostynge.



Ostentus, tus, a skorne.



Ostia, ostiorum, the entrees of greatte ry­
uers, sometyme hauens.



Ostia, a towne nyghe to Rome.



Ostiarius, a porter.



Ostiatim, from doore to doore.



Ostiensis, a lyttell hauyn at Rome.



Ostium, a doore or gate.



Ostracismus, a maner of exylynge of men
atte Athenes, whyche excellyd other in
power or authorytie: whyche exyle was
doone by delyuerynge of oyster shelles,
wherin the name of hym, whiche should
be exyled, was wryten.



Ostracum, a shelle.



Ostrea, an oyster.



Ostrearius panis, Browne breadde, the
whyche menne are wonte to eate with
oysters.



Ostreatus, ostreata, ostreatum, harde as an
oyster.



Ostrin&ecedil; uestes, garmentes of purple coloure.



Ostrum, purple or other lyke colour.



Osus, osurus, participles of Odi.



Osus sum, osus es, osus est, I hate, thou ha­
test, he hateth.







¶ O, ANTE  T.

OTior, swyfter.



Otior, ari, to be ydell or at reste.



Otiosus, a, um, ydell, sure.



Otiose, idelly, at leiser, surely, without care.



Otium, idelnes, vacation from labour, also
leyser, reste, quietnes.



Othryades, a mans name of Lacedemonia.



Othrys, a hylle in Thessaly.



Otides, byrdes lyke to partriches.



Otus, a shryche owle.

 

¶ O, ANTE V.

OValis corona, a garlande of myrtels,
gyuen to hym, whiche had vyctory
without effusion of bloudde.



Ouatio, a small triumph of a prince or cap­
tayne, whiche had victorie of his enmies
without slaughter of men, or where bat­
tayle was not denounced: in the whyche
tryumph the capitayne went on foote, or
onely dyd ryde on a horse, with a garland
of myrtelles on his heed, and his souldy­
ours syngynge aboute hym.



Ouatus, ta, tum, whiche is in symylitude of
an egge.



Ouans, ouantis, reioysynge, being ioyfull.



Ouiaria, a flocke of shepe.



Ouicula, a lyttell sheepe.



Ouifera gallina, a broude henne.



Ouile, a folde or sheepehowse.



Ouillus, a, um, of a sheepe. Ouinus, idem.



Ouis, a sheepe.



Ouo, are, to reioyce with noyse or voyce in
a multitude.



Ouum, an egge.



Ouum ouo simile, one egge lyke an nother,
applyed vnto theym, whiche be lyke of
condicions or persone.



Ouo prognatus eodem, of oone father and
mother, or brought vp vnder one maister,
or in one schoole.

 

¶ O, ANTE X.

OXygala, sower mylke.



Oxygarum, sharpe sawce.



Oxylapathon, sorrell.



Oxymeli, honye and vynegre sodden to­
gyther.



Oxyporon, sharpe sawce.



Oxyporopola, he that selleth meat in sharp
sauce, or sowce.



Oxysaccharum, suger and vynegre sodden
togither, of somme menne called Syrupus
acetosus symplex. 



Oxytoca, medicines to make a womanne to
brynge forth hyr byrthe quyckely.

 

¶ O, ANTE Z.

OZena, soores aboute the nose, which
haue an yll sauour.



Ose, stynche of the mouthe.



Ozimum, an herbe callyd basyll.


 


¶ P, ANTE A.

P##sp##A##sp##B##sp##V##sp##L##sp##A##sp##R##sp##I##sp##S, pa­
bulare, pertaynynge to
fourrage or meate for
beastis.



Pabulatio, fourraginge.



Pabulator, a forragiour.



Pabulor, aris, ari, to goo
in forragynge. somtime
to fede, as a beast dothe.



Pabulum, forrage or meate for beastes.



Pacate, peasybly.



Pace tua, pace uestra, by thy lycence, by your
leaue, or lycence.



Pachiri, hylles in the lasse Asia.



Pachisos, a ryuer of Sicile.



Pachynus, a mountayne in Sicile on the see
syde, or an elbowe of the lande there.



Pacifer, feri, a brynger of peace.



Pacificatorius, a, um, that whiche dothe pa­
cyfie.



Pacifico, care, to pacifie.



Pacificor, sceris, sci, to make couenaunte, to
bargayne,



Plinius.



Paco, are, to mitigate, to apease, to accorde.



Pactilis, le, platted, Pactilis corona, a plat­
ted garlande.



Pactio, an accorde, agreement.



Erasm. in
Chiliad.



Pactoliopes, excedynge rychesse.



Pactolus, a ryuer in Lydia, hauynge gol­
den grauelle.



Pactum, sometyme a participle sygnifienge
couenanted, promysed, somtime a nowne,
signifienge a couenant.



Pactum transitionis, a safe conduite, to passe
from one countrey to an other, a pasport.
Ti. Liuius.


Pacuuius, the name of a noble poete.



Padua, & Patauium, a Cytie in Italye, by
Venyce.



Padus, a ryuer in Italye callyd the Po.



Padusa, a ryuer, whyche somme saye is an
arme of the Po.



Pæan, an hymne in the prayse of Apollo.
sommetyme the same Apollo. It is nowe
taken for any hymne, made to the laude of
God, or our Ladye.



Pædagium, lodgynge for seruauntes and
chylderne.






Pædagogium, a bonde seruaunt.



Pædagogus, he that is appoynted to await
on chyldern to see them well ordred.



Pædaretus, a mans name.



Pæderastes, a louer of chylderne in vnho­
neste wyse.



Pæderastia, a viciouse loue of chylderne.



Pædia, erudition and institution in good ar­
tes, as Gellius teacheth.



Pædico, p&ecedil;dicaui, pedicare, to commytte
buggerye.



Pædor, pædoris, sluttysshenesse, vnclean­
nesse, fylthe.



Pædotribes, & pædotriba, a schoolemayster.



Pæon, a foote in metre, whiche is of oone
longe syllable and thre shorte.



Pæonia, an herbe callydde Pyonye. Also a
countreye in Europa, and is a parte of
Macedonye.



Pæstrum, a citie in Lucania, where there is
abundance of Roses.



Pæstanus, na, num, of that citie.



Pætus, he that loketh a squynte vpward.



Paganalia, ploughmens holyday, as wakes
be nowe adayes.



Paganus, a man of the countreye, or of the
vyllage: sommetyme it is taken for hym
that goth not to battayle.



Pagasa, a towne of Thessaly, whiche after
was called Demetrias.



Pagatim, vyllage by vyllage.



Pagina, the syde of a leafe in a boke.



Paginula, a lyttell syde of a leafe in a boke.



Pago, gis, pepigi, gere, pactus, to make co­
uenaunt.



Pagus, a vyllage.



Pagyris, the name of a ryuer and of a citie,
of whiche the people are called Pagyrit&ecedil;.



Pala, a spade, also a piele to put in breadde
into the ouen. Also a fanne to make wind.
Also the brodest parte of a rynge.



Palæ, wedges or pieces, or gaddes of met­
tall whan it is fyned.



Palaca, pieces of fyne golde.



Palæmon, onis, was callid a god of the see.



Palæstina, a countrey in Syrie, ioynynge to
Arabie, called in holy scripture Philistiim.



Palæstra, a wrastlyng place: also the exer­
cyse of wrastlynge. It is also the comely­
nesse of mouynge and gesture, according
to the state or degree of the person, which
sheweth it.
Ci. de ora­
tare primo


Palæstricum, idem.



Palæstricus, a wrasteler.



Palæstricus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to wraste­
lynge.



Palæstrita, he that vseth wrastlynge.



Palam, openly, before men, that all menne
may see it.



Palamedes, a noble greke, whyche sounde
certayne letters of greeke, Also to sette
an arraye in an hooste, and the fourme of
watches, with the watche worde.



Palang&ecedil;, leauers or porters, wherewith
they left and beare tymbre, and suche like
thynges of greatte weight.



Palango, palangare, to beare on leyuars or
porters.



Palangarii, men, whyche do beare on ley­
uers or porters, thynges of great poyse
or weyghte.



Palatiar, & palatual, a Sacrifyce doone at
Rome on the hylle callyd Palatinum.



Palatio, onis, a foundacyon made in a ma­
ryse grounde with pyles of tymber.
Vitruuius.
li.2.


Palantes, they that wander about, and wote
not whither to go.



Palanteum, a citie buylded on the hyll cal­
lyd Palatinus.



Palantia, a citie in Arragonia.



Palatha, a pressed fygge.



Palatim, an aduerbe sygnifienge scattered
and wandrynge here and there.



Palatina officia, offices within a princes pa­
layce or courte.



Palatinus mons, an hylle at Rome.



Palatium, a palaise of an emperour or great
kynge.



Palatus, seu palatum, the roufe of the mouth.



Palea, chaffe or corne, also a gristell, why­
che fallethe downe frome the necke of a
cocke or capon.



Palearium, the Dewelappe of a Rudder
beaste. Also a place, wherein chaffe is
kepte.



Paleatus, made or myxte with chaffe.



Pales, called goddesse of shepeherdes and
of pasture.



Palene, a cytie, soo called of Pallena, the
daughter of Sython, and wife of Cletus. 



Palepaphos, a cytie of Cypres.



Palescamander, a ryuer in Troye.



Palicenus, a fountayne in Sicilia.



Palilia, shepeherdes holydayes kept in the
honour of Pales. 



Palimpsestus, parchemente rased.



Palingenesia, a regeneration or second na­
tyuitie.



Palinodia, a contrarye songe, or retrac­
tynge of that, whiche oone hathe spo­
ken or wryten: Nowe of somme menne
called a recantynge.



Palinodiam canere, to retracte that, why­
che one hath spoken or writen.



Palinurus, was the Mayster of the shyppe,
wherin Aeneas camme into Italye . Al­
soo an Elbowe of the lande of Sycile in­
to the See.






Paliurus, a bryer, whiche beareth a codde,
wherin are thre or foure blacke sedes.



Palla, a womans gowne.



Pallace, a concubyne.



Palladium, the ymage of Pallas. 



Palladius, a mans name, whyche wrote of
husbandrye.



Pallancana, a sharpe oynyon, whyche cau­
seth the eyen to water.



Palladius, a, um, that longeth to Pallas. 



Pallas, antis, the sonne of Euander, somme­
tyme kynge of Latynes. Also a Gyant.



Pallas, adis, called goddesse of battaile, and
also of wysedome.



Pallax, acis, a concubyne, suche as one ke­
peth in stede of his wyfe.



Palleo, lui, lere, to be pale.



Pallescere, idem.



Palliastrium, a course mantell.



Palliat&ecedil; fabulæ, Comedyes or enterludes
made in Grecia, and the personages ther­
in were Grekes, as Togatæ fabul&ecedil;, were
enterludes in Rome, and the personages
Romaynes, soo called bycause the ouer­
moste habyte of Grekes was called Pal­
lium, of the Romaynes Toga.



Palliatus, cladde in a mantell.



Pallio, are, to concele or hyde.



Palliolatim amictus, cladde in a palle.



Palliolatus, idem.



Palliolum, a shorte mantelle.



Pallium, a mantelle, suche as knyghtes of
the garter do weare.



Pallor, oris, a palenesse of colour.



Paluster, ris, tre, & tra, trum, of the fenne.



Palma, the palme of the hande. Also a me­
sure called a handbrede, sometyme an ore
to rowe with. Also a palme tree or daate
tree. sometyme it sygnifyeth vyctorie.



Palmam pr&ecedil;ripere, to take the praise or ho­
nour from an other.



Palmare facinus, an acte worthy the palme
or sygne of vyctorie.



Palmarium, worthye the sygne or token of
vyctorie.



Palmaria spacia, a handbrede space.



Palmata, & palmaris uestis, a garmente of
bawdekyn, whiche the consule dyd weare
in tyme of peace, and the vyctour in tyme
of warre.



Palmes, itis, the small and tender branches,
moste proprely of a vyne.



Palmetum, the place, wherein date trees
do growe.



Palmeus, a, um, of a palme tree.



Palmifer, & palmiger, that beareth palme,
or date trees.



Palmipedalis, a measure, of a foote and a
handebrede.



Palmipedes aues, all byrdes, whyche haue
hole fete, as commonly al waterfoules haue.



Palmipes, splay footed.



Palmyra, a great castelle or fortresse in the
myddell of Syria.



Palmyrena, a countrey in Syrie.



Palmo, are, to bynde togyther: Also to do
any thynge with the palme of the hande.



Palmosus, full of palme trees.



Palmula, a lyttell oore or sculle. also a date.



Palmus, & palmeum, a mesure. If it be pal­
mus maior, it is of fyue fyngers, or a han de
bredth If it be minor, it is but four fingers



Palo, are, to hedge or pale in: also to wander.



Palor, palaris, to go asonder here and there
scattered.



Palpebræ, the heares whiche do growe on
the cheekes.



Palpito, tare, to quake or tremble.



Palpator, toris, & palpo, ponis, a flatterer.



Palpo, & palpor, ari, to fele, also to flatter.



Paludamentum, a cote armure.



Paludatus, cladde in a cote armure.



Palumba, & palumbus, a stocke douue, or
rynge douue.



Palumbarius, a certayne hawke, whiche is
longe and blacke, and flieth the most part
by nyghte.



Palumbes, wodde culuers.



Palus, li, a stake or pooste.



Palus, paludis, a fenne or maryse.



Pamphagi, people in Ethiopia, whiche do
eate of all maner of thynges.



Pamphilia, a region in the lasse Asia.



Pampillum, a charyotte.



Pampilona, a cite in the royalme of Nauer.



Pampinarium, a heape of grene braunches.
It is also the tender braunche, whyche
groweth out of the harde tree.



Pampinarius, a, um, & pampineus, a, um, of
grene braunches.



Pampino, are, to cutte of the small branches
of a vyne.



Pampinus, a vyne leafe, or grene braunche.



Panagron, a greatte sweepe nette, whyche
taketh all maner of fyshe.



Pan, panis, callyd the god of shepardes.



Panax, acis, an herbe, whiche hath a leafe
lyke to the leaues of a fygge tree. Also a
longe stalke mosy, and on the top a knap,
wherein are sweete seedes, with a sharpe
sent: and a hath a yelowe floure, and gro­
weth in dyuers partes of Grecia.



Panarium, a pantry, where bread is kepte.



Panchaia, a region in Arabie.



Pancarpia, a garlande made of dyuers flou­
res, or of all floures that maye be founde.



Pancraciastes, a man experte and excellente
in all feates of actiuitie.






Pancratium, exercise in all feates, as wrast­
lynge, rounnynge, leapynge, castynge of
the barre, and other lyke exercyses of
strengthe.



Pancratius, he that dothe exercyse the said
feates.



Pandana porta, a gate of the citie of Rome,
whiche was fyrste and laste opened, for all
thynges to be brought into the citie.



Pandecta, comprehendynge all thynges: it
is also the volume of the lawe ciuile, called
also the digestes.



Pandiculatio, gapynge.



Pandiculor, aris, to gape as they do, which
come from slepe.



Pando, didi, dere, passum, & pansum, to open



Pando, aui, are, to bowe downe.



Pandocheus, an inholder.



Pandochium, an inne, or commune lodging.



Pandus, a, um, open.



Panegyris, a mart or fayre, or great assembly.



Panegyricus, an open and solemne commen­
dation of princis.



Pang&ecedil;us, an elbowe of Thracia.



Pango, pepegi, & panxi, pangere, to set, to
plante, to ioyne one thyng to an other, to
fasten, to dryue in, to wryte, to singe, to tel.



Panhormus, a citie in Sicile.



Panicum, a sodayne feare, wherby somme­
tyme men be distraught, or oute of theyr
wyttes.



Panicula, that whiche on somme herbes or
trees do hange downe lyke heares, longe
and rounde.



Panicum, a grayne.



Panifex, ficis, a baker.



Panificium, the crafte of bakynge.



Panis, breadde.



Panis nauticus, byskette.



Panis secundarius, raunged bread, or chete
breadde, or crybell breade.



Paniscus, a god of the woddes.



Pantacratiasta, he that fyghteth with han­
des and feete.



Suidas.



Pantathlus, he that contendeth in all maner
of games.



Panneus, a, um, woullen.



Pannicularia, thynges of smalle valure.



Pannicularius, a draper that selleth clothe.



Pannonia, the royalme of Hungary.



Pannonij, Hungariens.



Pannosus, he that weareth pore apparell.



Pannuelium, a handekercher.



Pannus, clothe.



Panomph&ecedil;us, a name of Iupiter, sygnyfy­
enge that he hereth all mens voyces.



Pansa, playne footed.



Panselmos, the full moone.



Pantagia, a ryuer in Sicyle.



Pantasilea, a quene of Amazon.



Pantheon, a temple of all the goddes.



Panthera, a beaste callyd a Panter, whiche
hath spottes of sondry colours.



Pantheron, a nette, wherwith all maner of
foule is taken.



Pantices, a greatte bealye, also the fluxe.



Pantomimus, a dyssarde, whyche can fayn
and countrefeyte euerye mannes gesture.



Panurgia, subtyltie.



Panus, panula, & panulla, a kyrnell in the
share or gryne of a manne, or behynde the
eare. It is also a weauers rolle, whereon
the webbe of cloth is rolled or wounden.



Papare, to calle dad as a chylde dothe.



Papas, a father, as chylderne doo calle
Dadde.



Papauerata uestis, a garment not pure white,
but of the colour of popye.



Papauer, eris, an herbe callyd Popie.



Pape, an interiection of wondrynge, wylle
ye see, a wonderfull thynge.



Pap&ecedil;us, in the tongue of Scithia, sygnyfi­
eth Iupyter. 



Paphlagonia, a regyon in Asia.



Paphos, & Paphia, a cytie in the ylande of
Cypres.



Papia, a cytie in Lumbardy, callyd Pauia.



Papilio, onis, a butterflye.



Papilla, a lyttell wheale or pousshe in the
skynne of a man. Also a cocke in a cun­
dyte, whereout water commeth. More
ouer the nyppell or teate of a womannes
breaste.



Pappa, pappe made with mylke and floure.



Pappo, pappare, to eate.



Pappus, a grandesyre or grandfather. It is
also an herbe called groundswell.



Papula, a whelke.



Papyrus, seu papyrum, is a great rushe, whi­
che groweth in the fennes & marys groun­
des in Aegypt and Syria, tenne cubytes
hygh: wherof the fyrst paper was made,
wheron men dyd write. we haue growing
in our fenny groundes lyke russhes with
blacke knoppes, longe and rounde, whi­
che are called [missing word] Nowe Papyrus
is callyd paper, wherin menne doo vse to
wryte or prynte bokes.



Papyratius, of paper, or of the sayd rushe.



Papyrius, the surname of a noble Romayn.



Par, ris, lyke, equalle, meete, euen, rea­
sonable.



Pares, two lyke one to the other in fourme
or degree.



Parem esse, to be sufficient, to do or sustayne
a thinge.



Paria, payres, two togither of any thinge.



Paria facere, to requyte, to do one thinge for




another, lyke for lyke.



Par referre, idem.



Par pari, to recompence one thinge with
another of equall estimacion.



Par impar, a game that children vsed, called
euen or odde.



Parabilis, le, that which may be sone goten,
or will be sone redy.



Parabola, a comparison, or resemblaunce.



Paracletus, an exhortar, a comfortar, an ad­
uocate.



Paraclytus, a man infamed, yll reported of.



Paradiastole, a dilatinge of a mater by an in­
terpretation.



Paradigma, an example.



Paradisus, Paradise.



Paradoxa, a sentence, contrary to the opi­
nyon of dyuerse.



Paradromis, a galery, or walke.



Parænesis, a precepte contaynynge an ex­
hortation.



Paræneticus, ca, cum, contayninge such pre­
cepte or instruction.



Paragoge, is a figure, whan a letter or syl­
lable, is added to a worde, as Dicier for dici.



Paragraphe, a thynge wryten before a sen­
tence.



Paragraphus, & paragraphum, a paragrafe.



Paralipomenon, left oute, vnspoken, or vn­
writen, which ought to haue bene spoken
or wryten.



Paralleli, lynes in the sphere of the worlde
equally distaunt, whereby the son, whan
he passeth, causeth variacion in houres of
the daye.



Paralysis, a sickenesse called the Palsy.



Paralyticus, he that is taken with the Palsey.



Paranymphus, he that is the mediatour in
matrymony betwene the man and the wo­
man: she whiche is on the womans part is
called Pronuba.



Varro.
de lin. lat.



Parapechium, a lyght cloke.



Parapherna, that whiche is added vnto the
womannes dower, called the ioynture.



Paraphrasis, an imitation of wordes, setting
oute the sence or meanynge of the autour
more playnely.



Paraphrastes, he that doeth not translate
worde by worde, but expresseth the sen­
tence of the autour more openly.



Pararium æs, was double wages, gyuen to
horsmen for hauinge two horsis.



Parasanga, a myle in Persya, contaynynge
fifty furlonges.



Parasceue, a preparacion, also good fryday.



Parasiopesis, a figure in spekinge, whan we
sayne that we will not speke, and yet co­
uertly it is declared what we do meane.



Parasitus, a haunter of other mennes tables
vncalled for, also he which to fill his bely
with meate and drinke, speaketh allway to
the appetyte of hym, with whome he dy­
neth or soupeth.



Parasitaster, he that countrefayteth him that
is called Parasitus. 



Parastat&ecedil;, certayne stones in pylars. Para­
stata also one of the bones in the shanke of
the legge.



Parastates, stones, which do sustayne bothe
sydes of a doore, called Iambes.



Paratragœdio, are, to bragge or crake, to
speke grete or hyghe wordes.



Parc&ecedil;, ladyes of desteny, also it signifieth the
selfe destyny, or disposicion in prolonging
or shortnynge lyfe.



Parco, peperci, parcere, to spare, to forgyue,
or pardone, to let or prohibite, to leue, to
forbeare or absteyne.



Parcere pretio, to spare for cost.



Parcere metu, to put awaye feare.



Vergilius.



Parce, scarcely, nyggardly, nyghly, fayre
and softly.



Parciter, idem.



Parcitas, frugalytie, or moderacyon in ly­
uynge.
No. Mar.


Parcus, a nygarde.



Parcus, ca, cum, nighe, or nygarde, scarce in
expences, sometyme it signifieth seeld.



Parcus comitatu, he that hath a smal trayne.



Parcus opera, an easy warkeman, he that is
more ydell than occupyed.



Pardus, a catte of the mountayne, some take
it for a Panthere.



Pardalus, a byrde of dunne colour, whyche
fleyth in stockes.



Parectata, & Parectatus, he that is newly is­
sued out of a childes yeres, and beginneth
to haue the tokens of a man.
No. Mar.


Parectonia, the mother of Plato, the moost
noble philosopher.



Parens, father, mother, or any other aun­
cetour.



Parentela, auncetry.



Parentalia, festes made at the buryenge of
auncetours.



Parenthesis, is a sentence comprehendyd
within another sentence, without any de­
triment therunto, beinge marked with one
halfe circle at the begynnynge, and ano­
ther at the ende, as in thiswyse. Nihil adeo
principem decet, (quod omnes quidem fa­
tentur) quantum iustitia, prudenti&ecedil;, atque libera­
litati &ecedil;qualiter coniuncta, Nothinge so well
becometh a prince (which all men do con­
fesse) as Iustice equally ioyned with wis­
dome and bounteousnes.



Parento, tare, to celebrate the funeralles of
auncetours or frendes.






Pappl, the floures of thistels, whiche be
lyke fethers.



Pappous, a, um, pertaynynge to my grand­
father.



Paranomasia, a figure in spekinge, where
one worde is lyke to another, but of dy­
uers sygnifications. Nam inceptio est amen­
tium, non amantium, this begynnynge is of
madde men, not of louers.



Paratus, ta, tum, redy.



Paraté, redyly.



Pareo, rui, rere, to appiere, to be seene, to
obeye.



Parergon, some thinge added to, beinge no
part of the matter, as whan a payntour
doeth make an ymage, he doeth adde to
trees, or townes.



Parethonium, a whyte colour that peynters
do laye, whiche is fonde in Egypte.



Paribit, for pariet, she shall bringe forth a
childe.



Parici, iuges assigned for capitall causes, as
murdre or felony that requireth deth.



Paries, etis, a wall of a house.



Parieti loqueris, thou speakest to the walle,
which maye be sayde of him. that will not
eftsones reherce that, whyche he heryth
spoken.



Parietaria, an herbe called Pelitory.



Parietinæ, olde walles.



Parilia, festiuall dayes, which the Romains
kept for preseruation of their cattell.



Parilis, le, equall.



Parilitas, equalytie, symilitude in quantitie
or qualitie.



Pario, peperi, parere, to bringe forth children,
the lyke thinge in beastes, sometyme to
bringe forth generally.



Parius, a, um, of the yle called Parus, frome
whens is brought marbelle stone, called
Parium marmor. 



Parito, tare, to prepare.



Pariter, in lyke wyse, equally, semblably.



Parma, a Targat, which foote men dyd vse.



Parmula, a bucklar.



Parnasides, the nyne muses, or ladyes of
sciences.



Parnassidæ vestes, apparayle belongynge
to maydens.



Parnassus, a mountayne in Grece, hauynge
two toppes, vnder the whyche the nyne
musis dydde inhabyte or dwell.



Paro, are, to prepare, to geate, to apparell.



Paro, onis, a lytell shyppe or hulke.



Parochus, an officer, whiche prouyded for
wood and salt, for ambassadours, also it is
now vsed for a preest, which is a curate, or
parish preest.



Parœcia, a paryshe.



Parodus, a passage.



Parœmia, a prouerbe accommodate to the
mater and tyme.



Parœci, parysshonars, or they, whichedo
dwell within one parishe.



Paropsis, idis, a potage disshe, or potynger.



Paros, an yle.



Parotides, kernelles behynde the eares.



Paroxismus, the fitte in a feuer.



Parrhasia, a countrey in Grecia, called also
Archadia.



Parrhasius, an excellent payntour.



Parricida, murderars of their parentes, be­
trayours of their countray, somtyme mur­
dre generally.



Parricidium, murdre of kynffolke, or traison
to the propre countraye.



Patricidium, Matricidium, murdre of father and mother.



Pars, partis, part.



Partes primas agere, to playe the first part.



Partes prim&ecedil;, the chiefe parte.



Parsimonia, moderate expenses.



Parsi, the pretertence of parco, I haue
spared.



Parthenis, an herbe called Motherwort.



Parthenium, is an herbe whiche hath small
leues lyke to Corian der, & a floure whyte
somewhat yelowe within, and hath a gre­
uouse sauour. Some poticaryes do
take it for the lasse mugwort, but I fynde
not, that it is taken for feuerfue. Celsus
wryteth, that it groweth on walles.
Dioscorid.


Parthenope, the olde name of the citye of
Naples.



Parthia, a countraye in Asia.



Parthi, people of that countraye.



Parthicus, a, um, of the countray of Parthia.



Partiarius, a partinge felowe, or copartner.



Particeps, cipis, he that taketh part.



Participo, are, to gyue part, or take part, to
make another man partner, or of counsayl.



Particula, a portion.



Particularis, re, particuler.



Particulariter, particulerly.



Particulatim, particularly.



Particulones, coheyres, or comperceners,
which haue inheritaunce togither.



Partim, partly, in part, some tyme part. Par­
tim hominum venerunt, part of the men
dyd come.



Partio, onis, a byrth.



Partior, iris, iri, partitum, & partio, ire, to part
to deuyde.
Plaut. Acl.


Parthissus, a ryuer on the north part of Ger­
mania.



Partitio, a particion, or diuision.



Partitudo, for partus, the byrth of a childe.



Partus, ta, tum, goten with labour.






Parturio, iui, & rij, to labour as women do in
trauayle with childe.



Partus, tus, & parti, & partuis, the byrth of a
childe, sometyme the childe selfe.



Parulis, a swellynge of the goomes.



Paruifacio, cere, to set lytle by.



Parui æstimo, idem.



Paruipendo, idem.



Paruitas, the lytelnesse.



Parum, a lytle.



Parumper, a lytle whyle, or tyme, also very
lytle: sometyme quickely.



Paruus, a, um, lytle.



Paruulus, a lytell one.



Salustius



Parum habere, to set lytle by.



Pasalli, pomaunders.



Pascales, shepe or pultry, whych do fede at
large.



Pascha, Easter.



Paschalis, le, pertayninge to Easter.



Pasceolus, a letherbagge.



Pascito, tare, to fede.



Varro.
de re rust.



Pasco, paui, pascere, & Pascito, are, to feede,
to gyue meate to another, to norysshe or
brynge vp, to augmente.



Pascere oculos, to content or playse the eyen
with the beholdinge of a thinge.



Pascor, sceris, pasci, to fede as beastes done.



Pascua & Pascuum, pasture.



Pascuus, a, um, that whych serueth to feede
catell.



Pasiphae, the wyfe of Minos the kynge of
Crete, who hauinge company with a bull,
brought forth the monstre, called Minotau­
rus, whyche was halfe a man and halfe a
bulle.



Passales, be as well shepe as pultry, whiche
fede abrode.



Passer, eris, a sparowe, also a fisshe, called a
playce.



Passerculus, a lytle sparowe.



Passili, a lytell grayne called vatches or
fitches.



Passim, here and there, sometyme it signi­
fieth frome all places, sometyme indiffe­
rently, also ouer all.



Passio, a passion, grief.



Passiuus, a, um, that which signifieth passion,
or causeth passion or grief.



Passiui amatores, they whyche doo loue all
women indifferently.



Passum, licour made of raysons.



Passus, a, um, spred abrode, or open.



Passus, us, a pace, which doth contayne fyue
feete.



Pastillus, vel pastillum, a pasty.



Pastinaca, an herbe called parsnyps, allso a
fishe.



Pastino, are, to delue in a garden: repastino,
vide in R.



Pastinatus, tus, deluinge.



Pastinum, a debill, or settynge sticke.



Pastio, onis, pasturinge, or fedinge of catell.



Pastomis, an instrument, which is set on the
nosethrilles of horsis, that will not be ru­
led, and is called of horsebreakers, Bar­
nacles.



Pastophori, certayne preestis in Egypte.



Pastophorium, the chamber of the Sexten,
or him which kepeth the Temple.



Pastor, oris, a sheparde or herdman.



Pastoralis, le, pertayninge to the shepharde
or herdman.



Pastorius, a, um, idem.



Pastoricius, a, um, of fedynge or grasinge of
catell.



Pastus, a, um, he that hath eaten.



Pastus, tus, meate, fedynge.



Patagium, a cloke of cloth of golde, vsed to
be worne on riche garmentes.



Patagiati, they whyche doo weare ryche
clokes.



Patagiarij, the craftysmen that maketh such
clokes.



Patara, a citie in the countraye of Licia.



Patauium, a citie in Italy called Padua, nigh
vnto Venice.



Patauini, men of that citie.



Patefacio, cere, to make open, to declare, to
disclose.



Patefio, fieri, to be disclosed or discouered.



Patella, a lytle panne or a skillet.



Pateo, tui, tere, to be open.



Pater, tris, a father.



Patera, a broode piece or bolle of golde or
syluer.



Paterfamilias, the good man of the house.



Paterpatratus, to whome it pertaynyd, whan
trues shulde be taken, to receyue the othes
and appoyntement of bothe partes, and
was there in, chief and principall ambas­
sadour.



Pater patrimus, he that is a father, and hath
his father lyuynge.



Paternus, a, um, pertaynynge to a father.



Patesco, scere, to be open.



Pathe, troubles or vexacions of mynde,
passions.



Pathetica oratio, an oration mouing the hea­
rer to indignation or pitie.



Pathmos, an Ile in the se called Aegeum.



Patibulum, a woden lock of a dore, or a barre
wherewith the doore is made fast, alsoo a
place of tourment, a gybbet, galowes, or
crosse.



Patientia, patience.



Patillum, a paire of tongues or other lyke
instrument, wherewith coles are taken vp.






Patina, a dysh wherein meate is caryed.



Patinarium, meate, which is stewed vppon a
chaffynge dysshe.



Patior, pateris, pati, to suffre.



Plautus in
Asinar.



Patitor, suffre thou.



Patræ, rarum, a citie in Achaia.



Patrator, oris, he that doeth a thinge.



Patres conscripti, senatours.



Patria, a countraye.



Patriarcha, a prince or chief man of the fa­
thers. It was also the name of dignytie, of
fyue chief Archebyshoppes, as of Rome,
Antioche, Alexandry, Jerusalem, and Con­
stantinople.



Patriarchatus, the dignitie of a patriarche.



Patricida, he that killeth his father.



Patricidium, the murdre of a mans father.



Plautus in
Casi.



Patrice, nobly, or lyke a noble man.



Patricius, a senatours sonne, or commen of
Senatours.



Patrimonium, goodes commen by inheri­
taunce, patrimony.



Patrinus & Patrimis, he whiche hath his fa­
ther lyuinge.



Patrinus, a, um, of the father, or pertayning
to the father.



Patritus, ta, tum, that which happeneth to
one by his father.



Patrius, a, um, of the countreye.



Patrizo, & Patrisso, are, to be lyke his father.   



Patro, are, to perfourme.



Patrocynor, aris, ari, to defende them, which
be poure, or be falsely accused.



Patroclus, a noble greke, companyon to A­
chilles. 



Patrocinium, defence of men beinge in trou­
ble or suyte.



Patronymicum nomen, a name taken of an
auncetour, as Priamides the children of
Priamus. 



Patronus, he that is aduocate on the defen­
dauntes part.



Patrueles, cosyn germayns, or right cosyns
on the fathers syde.



Patruus, the fathers brother.



Patruus magnus, my fathers vncle.



Patruus maximus, my grandfathers vncle.



Pattagia, a ryuer in Sicile.



Patulico, care, to be open.



Patulus, a, um, wydeopen.



Patulus bos, an oxe or cowe, whose hornes
do stande wyde open.



Paucis, in fewe wordes.



Paucus, ca, cum, fewe.



Paucitas, tatis, fewnesse.



Pauculus, a, um, very fewe.



No. Mar.
Pom. Fest.



Paucies, seldome.



Pauciens, idem.



Pauens, tis, he that feareth for a tyme.



Paueo, ere, to feare.



Pauera, wheate, whyche springeth not well
out of the hose whan it groweth in care.



Pauesco, scere, to be aferde.



Pauicula, a pauynge bytell, wherewith sto­
nes be dryuen into the grounde in the ma­
kinge of a pauement.
Cato de re
rust.


Pauidus, he that allwaye feareth.



Pauidé, fearefully.



Pauimento, are, to make a pauement.



Pauimentum, a pauement, or place paued, a
floore.



Pauio, ire, to stryke.



Pauito, tare, to be sore aferde.



Paulisper, a very lytle whyle.



Paulum, & Paulo, a lytle.



Paulatim, lytle and lytle.



Paulominus, lytle lasse.



Paulo mox, by and by.



Plautus in
Menech.



Paulo prius, a lytle erst.



Paululum, very lytle.



Paululum modo, neuer so lytle.



Terent. in
Heau.



Paululo tum erat contenta, she was than con­
tent with a very lytle.



Pauo, onis, & Pauus, a pecoke.



Pauor, oris, extreme feare.



Pauper, pauperis, a poure man.



Pauper, peris, an adiectif poure.



Pauperies, & Paupertas, tatis, pouertie.



Pauper, ra, rum, poore.



Pauperculus, & paupercula, a poore man, or
poore woman.



Paupero, are, to make poure.



Paupertinus, na, num, poure.



Pausa, a pause, leysour.



Pausias, a noble payntour.



Pauso, are, to pawse.



Pauxillatim, by lytle and lytle.



Pauxillisper, idem.



Pax, pacis, peace, a quiete lybertie.



Paxillus, a lytle stake.



Pax sequestra, a truce betwene two hostis. 

 

¶ P, ANTE E.

PEccatum, a synne, an offence.



Pecco, care, to offende or synne.



Pecorarius, a herdeman, also he that
doeth hyar catell.



Pecorarius, a, um, pertayninge to catell.



Pecorinus, a, um, of rother beastis.



Pecten, inis, a wayuers lowme, also a combe.
it is also the place aboute the pryuy mem­
bres, where heare doeth growe, it is also
the stickes, wherwith a man stryketh doul­
cemers whan he doeth playe on them, also
a fishe, sometyme a harowe.



Pectinatim, in the facion of a combe.



Pectino, to kembe, or to harowe.






Pectitus, ta, tum, kembyd, or harowyd.



Pecto, xui, tere, to kembe, or trymme heare,
to carde woulle, to sette a harpe or other
lyke instrument.



Pectoralis, le, pertayninge to the brest. Fas­
cia pectoralis, a brest kerchef.



Pectorium, a certayne carte sometyme vsed
in Fraunce.



Pectorosus, a, um, grete brestyd.



Pectunculus, a lyttell fyshe, I
suppose it is a cockyll.



Pectus, toris, the brest.



Pectusculum, a lytle brest.



Pecuaria, a store of catell: alsoo places where
they be kept, also multitude of catell, alsoo
reuenues that commeth of catell.



Pecuariam rem facere, to breede catel.



Pecuarius, a breedar of catell.



Pecuarius, a, um, belongynge to catell.



Pecu, indeclinabile. Pecua, in the plurell num­
bre, catell, beastes.



Peculator, & Peculatrix, he and she that stea­
leth a commune treasor.



Peculatus, robbery of the commune treasour,
or of a prince.



Peculiaris, re, propre, or speciall.



Peculiariter, proprely, specially.



Peculio, are, to punysshe by the purse.



Peculiosus, riche, of grete substaunce.



Peculium, substaunce, that rychesse, which
is onely in money and catell.



Peculor, aris, ari, to steale a commune trea­
sour, or any thinge frome a prince.



Pecunia, money, it is taken of the olde Ci­
uilions, for all thynges, whyche we calle
catell.



Pecuniosus, ryche.



Pecus, cudis, seu Pecus, pecoris, all maner of
catell: sometyme the multitude or flocke of
catell, sometyme it is taken onely for shepe
or gotes.



Peda, & Pedatura, the steppe or token of a
mannes foote.



Pedalis, of a foote.



Pedamen, & Pedamentum, a stake or forke,
whereby a vyne, hoppes, or other lyke
thinge is sustayned, or borne vppe.



Pedaneum, idem.



Pedaneus, a, um, of the quantitie of a foote,
in length, or distaunce.



Pedanei iudices, inferior iuges, which went
on foote.



Pedarij, were Senatours, whiche dyd not
shewe their opynions in wordes, but one­
ly meuynge them selfes towardes those
personnes, whiche had raysonned, whose
sentences they dyd approue, lyke as they
do in the parliament house.



Pedatim, where one fote goeth with the o­
ther, foote by foote.



Pedatio, the settynge vp of vynes.



Pedato, sodaynly.



Cato.



Pedatus, footed.



Pedem struere, to take him to his feete, to
runne awaye.



Pedem referre, to retreate or go backe.



Cæsar.



Pedem conferre, to come to a point of a ma­
ter in controuersy.
Cicer. pro
Plan.


Pedepressim, a foote pase, softly.



Pes, pedis, a foote, somtyme it is taken for al
the legge, frome the thyghe to the sole of
the foote.



Pedes, ire, to go on foote.



Pedes, feete in metre, sometyme lyse.



Pedes, ditis, a foote man in batayle.



Pedester, he that goeth on foote, or is on
foote.



Pedetentim, softely and fayre, by lytle and
lytle.



Pedecosus, lousy, or full of lyse.



Pedem ponere, to begynne a mater.



Pedare, to set proppes, or to prop vp a vyne
or tree, that it shal not fall or bowe downe.



Pedem reuocare, to retrayte or recule back.



Pedestris oratio, a numerouse speakynge or
wrytinge in the fourme of a verse, or metre
allthoughe it be not a verse.



Pedicillus, a lytle worme, whyche breedeth
betwene the skynne and the flesshe.



Pediculatus, ta, tum, any thinge whiche hath
a stalke, as the moost part of frute.



Pedicularis morbus, the lousy sickenesse.



Pedio, dire, to stampe with the foote.



Pediolus, a lytle foote.



Pedica, any thinge, wherewith the foote is
tyed, as a fettar, a payre of gyues, or
stockes.



Pedicosus, & Pediculosus, lousy.



Pediculus, a fisshe, the stalke of an apple or
peare, or other frute: also a louse.



Pedissequus, & Pedissequa, a seruaunte, who
foloweth allwaye the master, or mastres.



Peditatus, an hoste of footemen.



Pedo, pepedi, pedere, to farte.



Pedum, a shepecroke.



Peganon, the herbe called Rue, or herbe
grace.



Pegasides, the Musis.



Pegasus, a horse, which was fayned to haue
wynges: it is also a signe or numbre of ster­
res in heuen.



Pegma, matis, a stage, whereon pageantes
be set: or whereon plate & iewels do stand
to be loked on.



Peieratio, periury, a forsweringe.



Peiero, are, to swere falsely.



Peior, peius, warse.



Pelagus, the see.



Pelagicus, ca, cum, of the see.






Pelamis, midis, fisshe called Tuny.



Pelargos, a byrde called a storke.



Pelasgis, a countraye in Grece called Ar­
chadia.



Pelasgi, people whiche came out of Grece,
& inhabited Italy: they be also Arcadiens.



Pelasgicus, ca, cum, of Arcadia.



Pelias, a kynge of Thessalia, vncle to Iason. 



Pelicus, a prince, of whom the people called
Peligni toke their name.



Pelides, the surname of Achilles. 



Peligni, people in Italy, which came out of
Illiria.



Pelion, a hill in Thessalia.



Pella, a citie in Macedonia. alsoo a payle,
whereinto kyne are mylked.



Pellax, acis, he that deceyueth with fayre
wordes.



Pellacia, fayre speche to deceyue.



Pellex, she that is a wedded mannes harlot.



Pellicator, a deceyuer with fayre wordes.



Pellicatus, tus, the acte or lyfe of her, which
companieth with a weddyd man, aduoutry
on her part.



Pellicio, pellexi, cere, to deceyue with fayre
wordes, to moue a man pleasauntly to do a
thynge.



Pellectus, meuyd, tempted.



Pelliceus, cea, ceum, of a skynne or hyde.



Pellicula, the skynne.



Pelliculo, are, to couer with a skynne.



Pellio, onis, a skynnar.



Pellis, a skynne.



Pellitus, cladde in skynnes.



Pello, pepuli, pellere, pulsum, to put oute or
expell.



Pelluceo, cere, to shyne bryght, to shyne
through.



Pellucidus, a, um, very cleere.



Pellucide, clerely.



Pelluo, luere, to wasshe cleane.



Pelluuium, a bason, wherein mens fete are
wasshed.



Peloponnesus, a countraye in Grece, called
nowe Morea: and lyeth betwene the see
called Ionium, and the see called Aegeum.



Pelops, pelopidis, whiche vaynquysshed on
horsbacke in runnynge Oenomaus, father
of Hippodamia, and wedded her.



Peloris, a kynde of shelfisshe.



Pelorus, a hill in Sicile on the see syde.



Pelta, a Targat or buckler, lyke an halfe
moone.



Peltati, they whyche do weare suche buc­
klars.



Peluis, a bason.



Pelusium, a citie in Egypte.



Pom. Fest.



Peminosus, a, um, stinkinge.



Penates, the gentyles called goddis of mans
lyfe: they be somtyme taken for the mooste
secrete partes of the house.



Penarius, & Penarium, a cellar or store
house.



Pendeo, es, pependi, pendere, pensum, to
hange, or be hanged, to depende, somtyme
to be in payne.



Pendere animi, to be troubled in mynde, to
doubte what to do, to cesse frome all other
thinges, and to attende to one thynge, to
be in suspence.



Pendere pœnas, to be punyshed.



Pendo, is, pependi, dere, to ponder or waye,
to consyder, to esteme or value, to paye, to
sustayne or suffre, looke for dependo, suspen­
do, expendo, in their first lettres.



Pendulus, la, lum, that hangeth.



Pené, allmoost.



Penelope, the wyfe of Ulyxes. 



Penelopes telam retexere, signifieth to do &
vndo, to take moche labour in vayne.



Penes, with, or at.



Penes hunc, with him.



Penetrabilis, trabile, that maye perce, or be
perced.



Penetrale, the inner part of the house.



Penetro, are, to perce.



Peneus, a ryuer in Grecia, which dyuydeth
the countrayes of Elis and Achaia.



Penicella, a paynters pencell, wherewith he
paynteth.



Penicillus, peniculum, & penicillum, a payn­
ters pensell.



Peniculamentum, the hemme of a garment,
the skirtes.



Peniculus, siue peniculum, any thinge why­
che serueth to brusshe or wype cleane any
thynge.



Penis, a tayle: also the secrete membre of
a man.



Penitus, ta, tum, tayled, hauynge a tayle, also
penitus inwarde.



Penitus, an aduerbe, vtterly, to the vtter­
moost, farre of.



Penna, a penne, or quyll.



Pennarium, a pennar.



Penniculum, a fether.



Penniger, pennigera, gerum, that which bea­
reth fethars.



Pennula, a lytle fether.



Pensa, that whyche is payed for a thynge
bought, the payement. Pensa, in the plu­
rell numbre, thredes of flax or woull, whan
it is spunne, whyche maye be called yarne.



Pensiculate, wayghtely.



Pensiculo, are, to ponder a thynge.



Pensilis, le, that whych hangeth, or stondeth
on hyghe.



Pensile horreum, a garnard, where corn is kept






Pensilis homo, a man hanged.



Pensi nihil habere, to ponder or consyder no
thynge, not to ponder or consyder any
thynge.
Val. in po.


Pensio, a pencion or yerely rent.



Pensito, tare, to ponder welle a mattier, to
pay money, to make recompence.



Pensitor, a ponderer or wayer. Verborum
pensitatores subtilissimi, The mooste sub­
tyll ponderers of wordes.
Gellius.


Penso, are, to ponder or way a thynge.



Pensor, oris, a wayer.



Pensus, a, um, wayed, examyned, somtyme
it sygnifieth good and wyse.



Pensum, the flaxe, whyche is bounden on
the distaffe, out of the whiche the threde
is drawen. sommetyme it sygnifieth the
threde that is spunne. It is also the exe­
cution or mynystration of an offyce. Also
regarde that one hath to a thynge.
Ci. de ora.


Plautus in
truculen.



Pensilis hortus, a gardeyne made vpon the
roufe of a house, or vpon pyllars.



Pensilis vrbs, a citie standynge on vaultes.



Pentaphillon, seu pentepatalon, an herbe cal­
led cinkefoyle, whiche hath fyue leaues.



Pentapolis, a countray betwene Palestina
and Arabia, wherin were the cities of So­
dom and Gomor, bourned by the venge­
ance of god for synne agaynst nature.



Pentacontarchus, a captayne of fyfty men.



Pentarchus, he that is captayne of fyue men.



Pentateuchus, the volume of the fyue boo­
kes of Moyses, that is to saye, Genesis,
Exodi, Numeri, Leuiticum, Deuterono­
mium.



Pentathlus, he that exercyseth any of these
fyue games, castynge of the ball, or tryn­
dell, runnynge, leapynge, wrastlyng, and
throwynge the darte.



Pentecoste, whytsontyde.



Pentesilea, a queene of Amazon, whyche
was slayne at the syege of Troye.



Pentimimeris, is a parte of a verse, where
a sentence is fynysshed in the fyrste sylla­
ble of the thyrde foote.



Pentorbon, an herbe callyd also peony.



Penula, a Cloke, worne whanne hit ray­
nethe.



Penularium, a cloke bagge.



Penulatus, cloked.



Penuria, extreme necessitie, penurie.



Penus, penoris, & penum, & penu, & penua­
rium, a storehouse. Sometyme stoore or
prouysion of vytayles.



Plautus in
Aulularia.



Penussime, vtterly.



Peonia, an herbe callyd Pyonie, whyche
beareth a redde floure, and great rounde
sede, wherin is meruailous vertue against
the fallyng euylle.



Peplus, uel peplum, a kerchiefe or other
lyke couerynge of the heed.



Peperci, I haue spared, or forborne, or par­
doned.



Pepigi, & pupugi, the preter tence of Pun­
go. Also Pepigi is the preter tence of pan­
go. Pepigit fœdus, He made a league or
alyaunce.



Pepo, onis, a Melon.



Per, sygnifyeth by, ioyned with an nother
worde it sygnyfyeth perfection. Perpul­
chrum, Verye fayre . Pergraue, Veraye
greuouse. Per ætatem, for or by reasone
of his age.



Peptica, medycines, whiche do make good
concoction in a man, that the meate ea­
ten, maye digeste welle. Also salues and
oyntementes, whyche doo make impo­
stumes rype.



Pera, a scryppe or bagge.



Perago, egi, agere, to perfourme, to make
perfyte, to consyder, to drawe or cause to
be drawen with force.



Peragere reum, to accuse one, and to sewe
hym to a condemnation.



Peragro, are, to walke or go about a place.



Peramo, are, to loue well.



Peranno, annare, to contynewe or lyue o­
uer yere.



Perardeo, dere, to bourne out or throughe.



Perareo, ere, to drie vp, to be very drye.



Peraro, rare, to tylle all through.



Perbelle, very well, ryght well.



Perbibo, bibere, to quafte or drynke all out.



Perbitere, for præire, to go before.



Plautus in
Pom. Fest.



Per causam, for a cause.



Percedere, to departe.



Cicer. ibi.



Percello, li, ere, to stryke and ou erthrowe.



Percino, nere, to synge stylle, to contynewe
syngynge.



Perclam, verye priuyly.



Perduaxo, for perdo.



Peredia, a meale, where men eate hungrely.



Percipio, cæpi, cipere, to perceyue, to take,
or receyue.



Percitus, styrred.



Percoarcto, are, to bryng into a lytel roume.



Percolo, ui, ere, to worshyp moche.



Percontor, aris, ari, to serche.



Percudo, di, dere, to breake.



Perculsus, & percussus, stryken.



Percunctor, aris, ari, to inquire, to demande.



Percuro, are, to heale perfytely.



Percurro, rere, to runne apace, to runne by.



Percutio, cussitere, to stryke, or smyte.



Perdite, extremely.



Perditus, ta, tum, loste, perysshed, withoute
recouerie, out of hope.



Perdius, abydynge all the day, or watching




all the day, or he whiche doth any thynge
in the daye tyme.



Perdix, dicis, a partryche.



Perdo, didi, dere, to lose, to slee.



Perduco, duxi, ducere, to bryng to an ende,
to brynge or leade by force.



Perduellio, onis, treason agaynst the king,
or the countrey. Also a traytour.



Perduellis, an ennemye.



Peredo, edi, edere, to eate moche.



Peregre, out of a mannes propre countrey.



Peregre uado, I go out of the countreye,
or on pylgremage. Peregre uenio, I come
out of straunge countrayes, or from pyl­
gremage.



Peregrinor, aris, ari, to go into strange coun­
treys, or on pylgremage.



Peregrinus, a straunger or alyen.



Perendie, the daye nexte after to morowe.



Perendinus dies, idem.



Perennis fluuius, a course of water that co­
meth with rayne, or a brooke that is only
made with rayne.



Perenniter, contynually.



Perennis, ne, perpetuall, euer durynge.



Perennitas, tatis, contynuaunce, longe aby­
dynge.



Perenno, are, to dure or contynue.



Pereo, iui, uel ii, ire, to be loste or consumed,
also to dye.



Pererro, are, to go or ryde al aboute.



Perfacul, the auncient wryters vsed for fa­
cile, lyghtly.



Per fas & nefas, by ryght or wronge, by one
waye and other.



Perfecte, perfitely.



Perfectus, a, um, perfytte, accomplysshed,
optayned.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Perfector, toris, he that bryngeth a thynge
to passe, or to a poynte.



Perfero, tuli, ferre, to brynge in conclusion.
Also to brynge or telle tidinges. somtime
to suffre or endure.



Perficio, cere, to accomplyshe, to brynge to
a poynte, to optayne.



Perfidiosus, a, um, full of disloyaltie.



Perfidiose, disloyally, trayterousely.



Perfido, dere, to truste moche.



Perfidus, false of promyse, he that dothe
any thynge against the trust that is put in
him, disloyall.



Perfidia, falsehode against promyse or trust,
disloyaltie.



Perfidus, very trustye.



Perfines, for perstringas, strayne thou hard.



Pom. Fest.



Perflatus, a great blaste of wynde.



Perflo, are, to blow vehemently or strongly.



Perfluo, xi, fluere, to runne out as water doth
out of a broken vessell.



Perfodio, dere, to bore or perce through, to
stryke through, to dygge through, or to
the bottome or depest of any thynge.



Perfore, to come well to passe.



Perforare, to perce, or to make an hoole
throughe.



Perfortiter, myghtily.



Perfossus, a, um, perced through, stryken or
dygged through.



Perfracte, obstynately.



Perfrigefacio, perfregefacere, to make ve­
ry colde.
Ci. offic.3.


Perfrico, care, to rubbe moche.



Perfricuit faciem, aut frontem, aut os, Is
in a prouerbe as mohe to saye, as he hath
layde aparte shame, or he is shameles, or
without abashement.



Perfricte frontis, withoute shaame or ho­
nestye.



Perfructus est, he hathe taken the fruite or
pleasure of a thynge, he hath vsed or ex­
ercysed a thynge, or hathe lefte the vse or
exercise therof.



Perfruor, perfructus, perfretus, aut perfrui­
tus, perfrui, to take all the profyte or com­
moditie, to take pleasure or recreation in
any thynge.



Perfuga, he that fleeth to the contrary part
in battayle, or forsaketh his capitayne.



Perfugio, gere, to rounne vnto oone for
succour.



Perfugium, a place, wherevnto a manne
runneth to haue succoure, or to be kept
frome daunger: It is also taken for anye
thynge, whereby a manne maye be suc­
coured.



Perfunctorie, passynge ouer lyghtely.



Perfunctorius, a, um, that whyche passethe
lyghtly away, or tarieth not longe.



Perfunctus, he that hath doone diligently
his offyce or duetie.



Perfundo, perfudi, fundere, to poure out, or
droppe out, or stylle oute. Perfunditque ge­
nas lachrimis, The teares dropped downe
on his chekes.
Ouidius.


Perga, a towne in Pamphilia, wherof Di­
ana was called Perg&ecedil;a.



Pergama, orum, the towers of Troy.



Pergamena charta, parchement.



Pergamum, siue Pergamus, a Cytie in A­
sya, the countrey of Galene, the famous
Phisycion.



Perge, go to, passe forthe.



Perge in virum, playe the man, goo to lyke
a man, go to hardily.



Pergin? wylte thou not leaue? wylte thou
not be gone.



Pergrandis, de, very great.



Pergo, perrexi, pergere, to go, to procede,




to endeuour to do a thyng, to continue, to
make haaste, to assaye. Ire perrexi, I ende­
uoured to go. Suspenso gradu placide ire
perrexi, I assayed with a lyght pase to go
softely.
Teren t. in
Phorm.


Pergræcor, aris, ari, to be ryottous, in ea­
tynge, drynkynge, and hauntynge har­
lottes.



Pergraue, very greuousely.



Pergula, a galerye, proprely where it is o­
pen on bothe sydes. It is also the place
in a shyppe, wherein menne doo walke.
Also a vyne raysed in the fourme of an
herber . Sommetyme the companye of
warkemenne, obeyenge to the chyefe
warkeman.



Perhibeo, êre, to say, to gyue, to set a price.
Prætium perhibere.



Perhibere testimonium, to beare wytnesse.



Perhibere uerba, to saye.



Perhorreo, rere, to be soore aferde.



Perhorresco, idem.



Perhumane, & perhumaniter, right gentilly.



Periander, oone of the seuen wyse menne
of Grecia.



Periclimenon, an herbe callyd woodbynde.



Pericles, a noble man of Athenes, in whom
was a naturall eloquence incomparable.



Periclitor, aris, ari, to be in peryl, also to ex­
peryence or proue a thynge.



Periculosus, a, um, daungerous.



Periculum, peryll or daunger. somtyme ex­
perience or profe.



Periculum facere, to proue.



Perhiodus, a clause, a circute in wordes, or
contynuance in speakynge.



Perhiodic&ecedil; febres, feuers, whyche come by
courses or fyttes.



Perillus, was an artifycer, which made a bul
of brasse wherinto (being glowing hotte)
men shuld be put, that in tourmentynge of
them, by theyr crienge, a noyse shulde is­
sue out lyke the mowynge or belowynge
of a bulle, the whiche engine whanne Pe­
rillus hadde gyuen to Phalaris, the cruell
tyraunt, he caused the craftes manne to be
fyrste putte into it, to proue his owne ex­
perience.



Perimo, emi, imere, to kylle.



Peremptus, ta, tum, kylled.



Peridoneus, a, um, very meete.



Periegesis, a compasse or cyrcuyte.



Perii, I am loste or distroyed.



Perii animo, my harte or courage is gone.



Perire mulierem, to loue a womanne fer­
uentely.



Perinde, soo, in lyke wise, euen lyke, verye
moche, euen as, in this facion.



Perinthus, a cytie of Thrace, whiche nowe
is called Heraclia.



Periodicus, ca, cum, that goethe and com­
meth by courses.



Periodica febris, a feuer, whiche commeth
by courses, as tercians and quartanes.



Periœci, companions or dwellers togyther
in one house.



Peripatasma, the hangyng of a house, with
tapisrye or other lyke thynge.



Peripateticus, a philosopher of Aristotels
secte or opinion.



Peripheria, a cyrcumference.



Periphrasis, circumlocution, one word ex­
pressed by many.



Periplorema, a fygure, whanne a part of a
sentence nothynge necessary, is added vn­
to a verse.



Peripneumonia, syckenesse of the lounges
with the coughe.



Peripneumonicus, he whyche hathe that
disease.



Peripsema, matis, the powder or dust that
commeth of fylynge or shauynge of met­
talle or wodde.



Periscelis, idis, sloppes, whyche womenne
were wont to weare.



Perissologia, a superfluous speakynge.



Peristeræ, house culuers or douues.



Peristereon, a culuerhouse.



Peristerotrophium, idem.



Peristrôma, tapesry, or couerlyds of Aras
or Verdure.



Peristylium, a place set about with pyllers.



Perito, tare, to peryshe or be loste.



Perithous, the companyon of Theseus. 



Peritia, cunnynge in any science.



Peritus, cunnynge, perfyte in a science.



Periuro, rare, to sweare vntrewely, to be
periured.
Plautus in
Bacch.


Periuriosus, a manne whiche is often for­
sworne.
Plautus in
truculen.


Periurus, forsworne, periurid.



Periurium, periurie.



Perizoma, matis, a breeche.



Perizonium, a corse or brode gyrth, wher­
with maydens were wont to be gyrte vn­
der their pappes.



Perlego, legere, to rede ouer all.



Perlecebra, a thynge whiche pleasauntlye
draweth a man to fauoure it.



Perlepidus, perlepida, perlepidum, veray
fayre.



Perliberalis, very lyberall.



Perlibro, to waye diligentely.



Colum. 4.



Perligo, gare, to bynde harde or faste.



Perlitus, ta, tum, anoynted harde.



Perloquor, qui, to speake out all to an ende,
to speake perfytely.



Perlucidum, & pellucidum, cleere, that a




manne may see through, as water, glasse,
horne.



Perluo, luere, to washe ouer or all.



Perlustro, strare, to beholde all aboute.



Permadesco, to be moche wette, or to be
made very moyste.



Permadefacio, cere, to make verye moyste,
or to wette moche.



Permagnus, a, um, verye greatte.



Permano, & permanesco, are, & nescere, to 
be disclosed, knowen, or diuulgate.



Plautus.



Permaneo, mansi, nere, to abyde.



Permano, are, to runne all ouer, or to fall in
to, to be declared openly.



Ti. Liuius.



Permanus traditum, that whyche is lefte
from one to an other, or is taught by one
to an other: As the father telleth or lea­
ueth to his sonne, and he to his sonne, and
so contynually by lyne.



Permaturesco, scere, to be through rype.



Permerdo, to defyle ouer all.



Per me, aut te, aut illum, aut aliquid aliud sta­
re, whanne we, or anye other thynge is
the cause, that a thynge is not doone.
Omnia iam parata erant, nisi per eum stetis­
set, Nowe al thynges were redy, if by his
occasyon it had not be lette.
Plinius.


Permessus, aut permessis, sidos, a Ryuer in
Grece, dedicate to the Muses.



Permisceo, permiscui, miscere, to myxte all
togyther.



Permissio, a suffraunce.



Permitto, misi, mittere, to suffre, to yelde,
or delyuer, to thraste in, to throwe downe,
to commytte, to sende forthe, to let downe,
as to lette downe one by a rope, or other
lyke thynge.



Permulceo, cere, to appease, addoulce, or
mytigate a mans displeasure.



Permulti, very many.



Permuto, mutare, to chaunge oone thynge
for an nother.



Permutatio, an exchaunge.



Permutator, he that exchaungeth.



Perna, the pestyll and also the gamm onde
of bakon.



Perniciabilis, pernicialis, & perniciosus, cau­
synge deathe, mortall.



Pernicies, deathe.



Pernicitas, swyftenesse.



Pernitior, tius, wars, more dangerous, more
full of myschiefe.



Pernicissimus, cissima, mum, warste, mooste
daungerouse.



Perniciter, dangerously, myscheuously.



Pernio, onis, a kybe on the heele.



Perniunculus, a lyttell kybe.



Pernix, cis, swyfte, flyghty, sometyme stub­
borne, also deedly.



Pernocto, noctare, to tarye all the nyghte,
to watche, to praye, to reste, to walke, to
stande, to dwelle, to slepe, to lye oute of
his owne house.



Pernosco, scere, to knowe perfectly.



Pernumero, are, to telle oute money.



Pernox, all nyghte.



Pero, onis, a showe of rawe lether, Also a
sacke.



Perogiganus, perogita, he that putteth a
staly on to the mare, to season her.



Peroleo, to sauour or stynke moche.



Peronatus, he that weareth rawe lether
shoen, boteux or cokers lyke a plough man.



Perorior, iris, re, to begyn, spryng, or growe
by the occasion of some thynge.



Quint.



Peroro, are, to speake or raison to an ende,
to reason perfectly, somtyme to moue the
herers to indignation.



Peroratio, the last part of an oration, wher­
in the affectes of the herers are chiefe­
lye styrred.



Perrori, a people of Aethiopia.



Perosus, sa, sum, extremely hated.



Perpaco, care, to sette all thynge in peace.



Perparum, very lyttell.



Perparce, very scarsely, verye nyghely, or
nygardely.



Perpasco, perpaui, parpascere, to feede to
the vttermooste.



Perparuus, a, um, a very lyttell one.



Perpaucus, ca, cum, very fewe.



Perpauxillus, a, um, idem.



Perpauefacio, pauefeci, facere, to make sore
affrayde.



Perpello, perpuli, perpellere, to constrayne,
to moue or induce one to do a thynge.



Perpendicularis, are, that is directly downe
ryghte.



Perpendiculum, a plumlyne, such as masons
and carpenters haue, with leadde at the
ende, whereby they doo proue the euen­
nesse of their squares.



Perpendo, dere, to examin, also to consyder.



Perpense, aduisedly, with a consideration.



Perperam, amysse, ouerthwartely, vnhap­
pily, wrongefully.



Perperi, fooles, idiotes, shrewes, lyers.



Perperitudo, shrewdenes, foolyshenes.



Perpero, are, to marre a thynge.



Perpes, perperis, perpetuall



Perpessus, he that suffreth with moch peyn.



Perpetim, perpetually.



Perpetro, trare, proprely to doo or to com­
mitte an acte good or ylle.



Perpetuo, are, to continue without ceassing.



Perpetuus, petua, petuum, perpetuall euer­
lastynge, contynualle, holl, not in porcy­
ons or dyuyded.






Perpetior, perpeti, to suffre pacientely, to
endure.



Perpeto, perpetere, to aske importunately
without cessynge, to perfourme.



Perpetratio, an acte good or badde.



Perpetuitas, eternitie, an euerlastyng con­
tynuaunce.



Perpetuum, & perpetuo, aduerbes, sygnifi­
enge continually, alway, for euer.



Perplaceo, perplacui, perplacere, to content
very moche.



Perplector, perplecteris, plecti, to bynde or
twyste harde or faste, to meddle so togy­
ther, that a manne can not know what the
thynge meaneth.



Perplexé loqui, to speake nowe one thyng,
nowe an other, that a manne wotteth not
what he meaneth.



Perplexim, idem.



Perplexor, aris, ari, to speake doubtefullye,
as wordes, wherin are two intendemen­
tes. At scio, quo vos pacto soleatis, per­
plexarier, pactum, non pactum est, Non pa­
ctum, pactum, est, quod vobis lubet, Well,
I knowe wel ynough, in what facion you
are wonte to speake, that a manne canne
not telle howe to take you: It was pro­
mysed, It was not promysed, It was not
promysed, It was promysed, euen as hit
lysteth you.
Plautus in
Aulularia.


Perplexabile, a worde spoken, whych hath
twoo dyuers vnderstandynges, or that
whyche is one thynge in herynge, an no­
ther in vnderstandynge.



Perplexabiliter, doubtefullye.



Perplexus, plexa, plexum, perplexed, twy­
sted togyther, or harde to be lowsed, in­
trycate, doubtefull.



Perpluit, perpluere, to rayne in the myddell
of a howse.



Perplus, moche more.



Perpol, an othe, sygnyfyenge by Pollux.
Sommetyme the worde Per, dothe per­
tayne to the wordes folowynge. Per­
pol quam paucos reperias meretricibus fi­
deles euenite amatores, By God thou
fyndeste verye fewe trewe louers hap­
pen to commune womenne. Where per
belongethe to quam paucos, and not
to Pol.
Terent. in
Hecyra.


Perpoto, perpotare, to drynke all day, or to
drynke stylle, or contynually, or vntyl one
be drunke.



Perpotatio, a contynuaunce in drynkynge,
drunkerye.



Perpulcher, perpulchra, perpulchrum, verye
fayre.



Plautus in
Stich.



Perpulchre, verye well done.



Perprurisco, perpruriscere, to haue a greate
ytche, or desyre to clawe or scratche.



Perpurgo, gare, to make all thynge cleane,
or nette.



Perputo, perputare, to declare al. Nunc ope­
ram date, ut ego argumentum hoc uobis
plane perputem, Nowe take ye hede, that
I maye playnly declare al this matter vn­
to you.
Plautus in
Cistel.


Perquam, added to any nowne adiectiue,
augmentethe his power. Perquam do­
ctus, Verye well lerned. Perquam stoli­
dus, very foolyshe.



Perquiro, quisiui, quirere, to make dilygente
serche, to examyne.



Perraro, very selde.



Perrepto, tare, to goo softely, or with mo­
che peyne.



Perrideo, perrisi, perridere, to lawgh har­
tylye.



Perfiso, sere, to scorne, to laugh at one, or
to make an nother to laugh.
Perottus.


Perrogo, gare, to desyre hartily.



Perrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake on son­
der, or in the myddes.



Persa, a manne or woman of the countrey
of Persia.



Persæpe, verye often.



Persancte, veraye deuoutelye, or so­
lempnely.



Perscribo, perscribere, to wryte a thynge
throughe, or to an ende, to regyster or in­
rolle a thynge.



Perscriptio, a deede of a mans owne wry­
tynge.



Perscrutor, scrutari, to serche or inquyre di­
lygentely.



Persefacul, the olde and auncyente writers
vsyd for perfacile, verye lyghtely, or ve­
rye easyly.
Pom. Fest.


Persenex, persenis, verye olde.



Persentisco, scere, to perceyue well.



Persephone, the Surname of Proserpina,
and sygnyfyeth the vertue of seedes in
spryngynge.



Persepolis, a Cytie in the countreye of
Persya.



Persequor, eris, qui, to pursewe, to conty­
nue in that, whiche is begonne, to perse­
cute, to be auenged.



Persero, perseui, perserere, to sowe aboute,
or abrode.



Perseuerantia, a stable abyding in any thing
reasonable.



Perseueranter, contynewe with a sted­
faste mynde.



Perseus, a noble knyghte, whyche dely­
uered a fayre lady callyd Andromeda from 
a whale, and also slewe Medusa, whyche




tourned men into stones. Also it is a signe
amonge the sterres.



Persia, a countreye in the easte parte of the
worlde, where nowe Sophy reigneth.



Persica poma, a fruite callyd peaches.



Persicus, ca, cum, of Persia.



Persideo, dere, to sytte by.



Persisto, stere, to abyde.



Persoluo, uere, to pay truely, to paye all, to
accomplyshe.



Persoluere grates, to gyue thankes.



Persolus, alone, without companye.



Persona, a vysour lyke to a mans face. al­
so person or personage, amonge dyuynes
and late philosophers: somtyme the qua­
litie of a man.



Personatus, a masker, or he that weareth
a visour.



Seneca



Personata fœlicitas, a counterfayte felicitie.



Personata uulnera, hydden woundes.



Personata, an herbe, whyche groweth by
the water syde, hauynge great brode lea­
ues lyke gourdes, but that they be great­
ter & harder: I suppose it to be the herbe,
which in some countrey is called Donye.



Personatus, tus, a maske.



Persono, personare, to sowne oute, or sowne
perfectely.



Plautus in
Milite.



Perspecto, tare, to loke well aboute.



Perspicacitas, tatis, quyckenesse of syghte,
consyderation.



Perspicace, aduysedly, with good consy­
deration.



Perspicaciter, idem.



Ci. de of.I.



Perspicientia, perfyte knowlege.



Perspicue, cleerely, openly.



Perspicax, acis, he that seeth quyckely, and
doth all thynges with consyderation.



Perspiceo, spexi, spicere, to se or vnderstand
playnely.



Perspicuitas, tatis, clerenesse, proprelye in
wordes or sentences, easynesse.



Perspicuus, a, um, clere, playne, easye.



Perspisso, an aduerbe, very late.



Plautus.



Perstino, are, to sette a pryce on a thynge.



Persto, as, stiti, stare, to abyde fyrmely.



Perstrepo, pui, ere, to make a great noyse.



Perstrictores, iugglers.



Perstringo, perstringere, to wrynge harde,
to towche a thynge shortely in speakynge
or wrytynge, to dull or darke with to mo­
che lyght. Perstringere aures, to fylle the
eares with noyse. Perstringere nomen aut
famam, to gyue a man an ylle name.
Horatius.


Persuadeo, persuasi, persuadere, to induce
one to beleue or truste, to aduyse, to styre
vehementely.



Persuasibile, & persuasibiliter, in suche wyse
as it may perswade.



Persuasor, oris, a perswader or inducer to
do a thynge.



Persuastrix, a woman, whiche inducethe or
moueth one to do an acte.
Plautus in
Bacch.


Persuo, ere, to sowe vp all.



Pert&ecedil;deo, dere, & pert&ecedil;descere, to be verye
weerye.



Pertego, tegere, to couer all.



Per tempus, in tyme conuenyent, in season.



Pertendo, dere, to extende.



Pertento, tare, to tempte, to assay or proue
moche.



Pertero, triui, terere, to rubbe or frotte a
thynge.



Perterreo, rui, perterrere, to make aferde.



Perterrefacio, cere, idem.



Pertesus, displeased, annoyed. Sermonis
pertesus, werye of the communication.
Plaut. in
Mostell.


Pertesus ignauiam suam, displeased for his
slouthefulnesse.
Suetonius
in C&ecedil;sar.


Pertexo, texi, texere, to make an ende, to con­
clude, proprely to wayue out, or to weaue
perfectely.



Pertica, a staffe, a cogell, a perche or polle,
wherwith grounde is mette.



Pertimeo, & pertimesco, pertimescere, to
feare moche.



Pertinatia, obstinacye, perseuerance.



Pertinaciter, obstynately.



Pertinatius, more obstynatelye.



Pertinax, acis, obstinate, he that holdith fast.



Pertinatior, pertinacissimus, more and moste
obstynate.



Pertingo, tingere, to touche moche, to ioyn
harde vnto a thynge.



Pertisum, olde writers vsed for pertesum.



Pertolero, rare, to indure to the ende, to su­
stayne valyantely.



Pertondeo, dere, to clyppe or sheare all.



Pertraho, xi, here, to drawe to with force.



Pertranseo, siui, & sii, ire, to passe throughe.



Per transennam inspicere, to loke on a thing
ferre of, or on parte, and not all.



Pertundo, tudi, tundere, to stryke harde, or
breake a thynge in strykynge.



Pertundo, pertusi, pertundere, to beate with
hammers.



Pertineo, nui, nere, to pertayne or belonge,
to be ioyned to.



Perturbo, are, to trouble moche.



Perturbatio, a trouble of mynde.



Perturbate, with trouble of mynde.



Pertusa uasa, vesselles cracked or broken in
somme parte.



Peruade, [explanation is missing]



Peruado, peruasi, uadere, to go ouer all.



Peruagor, ari, to wander aboute.



Peruello, elli, ellere, to plucke, sometyme to
pricke.






Peruenor, ari, to hunt ouer all.



Peruenio, uenire, to come to a place or to an
ende.



Peruersus, a, um, frowarde.



Peruerse, maliciousely, myscheuously, ouer­
thwartly.
Plautus in
Mer ca.


Peruerse vides, thou seest naughtyly.



Peruerto, to make yll, to peruerte, or de­
praue.



Peruestigo, gare, to fynde in sekynge.



Peruestigator, oris, he that seketh or loketh
for a thinge.



Peruicax, cacis, harde ouerthwart, yll to in­
treate, stubbourne, obstinate, sometyme
constaunt.



Noni.



Peruicatia, obstinacy: but sometyme it is v­
sed in a good part, and taken for a perse­
ueraunce and constancy in a good act. Per­
tinacia allwaye in an yll part.



Peruicatior, oris, more obstynate, more stub­
bourne: sometyme more constaunt.



Peruicaciter, obstinatly, stubbournly, con­
stauntly.



Actius in
No. Mar.



Peruico, for Peruicaci.



Peruigil, lis, he that watcheth alsoo diligent
and industriouse.



Peruigilium, moche watche: alsoo watchin­
ges, or vigiles before solemne dayes.



Peruigilo, are, to watche all nyght.



Peruinco, uici, uincere, to surmounte.



Pacuuius in
No. Mar.



Peruitere, the olde wrytars vsed, for perire,
to be lost, to peryshe.



Peruiuo, uixi, uiuere, to lyue longe, or vntyll
the vttermoste. Et si peruiuo vsque ad summam
ætatem, tamen breue spacium est perferun­
di, quæ minitas mihi:  Althoughe I lyue yet
to the vttermooste age, yet is the tyme ly­
tle to suffre all: wherewith thou thret­
teste me.
Plautus in
Cap.


Peruius, uia, uium, that maye be gone in, pe­
netrable.



Peruolo, are, to flee oute, or to the ende.



Peruoco, care, to call them all.



Peruro, usi, urere, to burne all, or euery
where.



Peruolo, peruelle, to desyre.



Perula, a lytell bagge or scrippe.



Perusia, a citie in Italy.



Peruulgatus, ta, tum, commonly vsed or
knowen.



Pes, pedis, a foote, whiche now contayneth
xii. ynches, the olde foote contayned .xvi.
fyngres bredeth.



Pessinus, nuntis, a towne in Phrigia.



Pedes, & Pedibus, put for an aduerbe, signi­
fieth on foote. Pedes agmen circuibat, the
hoste went about on foote. In agmine non
nunquam equo, sæpius pedibus anteibat,
In the hooste, he wente allwaye afore,
sometyme on horsebacke, but moore of­
ten on foote.
Qu. Curti.Suetonius
in Cæs.


Pedibus stipendia facere, to be a foote man
in warres.



Pes, a louse: allsoo a corde, wherewith the
sayle in a shyp is bent.



Pom. Fest.



Pesnas, olde wrytars vsed for pennas.



Pesestas, in olde tyme vsyd for Pestis, Pe­
stilence.



Pom. Fest.



Pessum eo, ire, to go backewarde, to be lost
or destroyed, to be nowght set by.



Pestifer, & Pestiferus, a, um, that which brin­
geth in Pestilence.



Pestilens, tis, pestilent, vnholsome.



Pessulus, a barre or bolt, wherewith doores
or gates be made fast.



Pessum, an aduerbe, which signifieth backe­
warde, downewarde, vnder foote.



Pessundo, dedi, dare, to cast vnder foote, to
put to the warse.



Pestis, Pestilentia, & Pestilitas, a pestilence, a
mortalitie of men.



Petalum, a leafe.



Petasatus, he that weareth a hatte.



Petaso, onis, a flitche of bakon.



Petasus, a hatte, a rounde kouerynge of a
house.



Petaurista, a propre daunser.



Petaurum, a corde, or a staffe, or a bourde, or
other lyke thinge, whereon lyghte perso­
nages do daunce and proue maistryes. it is
also a rouste, where pultry doeth syt in the
nyght.
I ul. pol.


Petesso, sere, to aske or require.



Petigo, tiginis, a tettar that runneth ouer all
a mannes face.



Petilansura, the howse of a whyte horse.



Petilara, thinges that are drye.



Pom. Fest.



Petilus, la, lum, smalle.



Petilius, a floure whyche groweth amonge
brembilles, in the later ende of somer, and
is lyke a wylde rose in coloure, and hath
fyue small leues, the budde of dyuerse co­
lours, hauynge within it yelowe sedes.
Plinius.


Petimen, a sore in the shoulders of beastes,
which I suppose is a sassion.
Pom. Fest.


Petitia, a certayne kynde of appulles.



Petisso, sere, olde wrytars vsed for Peto, to
aske or demaunde.
Perot.


Petitor, toris, he that asketh or demaundeth:
amonge lawyers he is called the demaun­
daunt: also it is a beggar, which asketh all­
mes from doore to doore.



Petoritum, a chariot or wagon.



Petiolus, a lytle foote: also a perche where­
on frutes or onyons be hanged.



Petitio, onis, a petition.



Peto, petij, petere, to aske, to gette or attayn,
to desyre, to laye awayt, to abide, to strike,




to go to a place, to seke. Petere gladio, to
stryke with a sworde. Petere veneno, to
poyson. Petere blandicijs, to flater. Pete­
re tactu, to feele. Petere mutuum, to bo­
rowe: also to remembre. Petere iugulum,
to kill, to folowe. Petere auribus, to heere.
Petere naribus, to smelle. Petere oculis, to
behold. Petere osculis, to kisse. Petere vi,
to inforce. Petere, is also to assayle or make
assault on one.



Petra, a stone.



Pom. Fest.



Petrones, Carles of the countraye: also a
wether shepe.



Petroselinum, an herbe called Persely.



Petulans, tis, wanton dishonest, reprocheful,
prowde, viciouse, redy to do wronge.



Valla in
Rauden.



Petulantia, wantonnesse, viciousnesse, pryde.



Petreus, a, um, of a stone.



Petreleon, an oyle, which naturally runneth
out of a stone.



Petrosus, a, um, stony or full of stones.



Petulanter, wantonly, proudly.



Petus, he that hath one eye lasse than the
other.



Petulcus, wanton.



Pexo, are, to kembe.



Pexæ vestes, Some men in expoundynge
Pliny, do suppose Pexas vestes, to be of su­
che thynge, as is shorne, as fyne woulles
clothe, or veluet.



Pexati, they which do weare suche maner of
cloth, or sylke.



Pezitæ, moussherons, growynge at the roo­
tes of trees.

 

¶ P, ANTE H.

PHæaces, people of the Ile of Corcira.



Phæcasius, a shoo.



Phædra, the wyfe of Theseus, & step­
mother to Hypolytus. 



Phaeton, the sunne.



Phagedæna a, runnyng cancre or pock, whi­
che shortly eateth the flesh vnto the bones.



Phagones, greate eaters.



Phalacron, bolde.



Phalacrocorax, acis, a water crowe, it maye
signifie a coote.



Affranius.



Phalango, gare, to moue or dryue a thynge
vppon rollers.



Phalaris, a cruell tyraunt, which raigned in
the citie of Agrigentum.



Phagus, a beeche tree.



Phagineus, a, um, of beeche.



Phalangæ, staues, whereon men doo carye
packes, playne staues, also leauars, to lifte
thinges that be heuy.



Phalangarij, portars, whyche doo carye
packes.



Phalangium, a spyder.



Phalanx, angis, an hooste of footemen, sette
in suche order, that they maye incountre
with their ennemyes, foote to foote, man
to man, shylde to shylde . It is also the
beame of a balaunce.



Phalanges, are the ioyntes or spaces in the
fyngars: they be also rollers, whereon
shippes or greate pieces of tymber be re­
moued.



Phalarica, an instrument of warre, wherein
wylde fyre is inclosed, that whan it is by
shot fastened to tymber, it burneth all
shortly.



Phaleræ, a traper or bardes for a horse.



Phaleratus, trapyd, or bardyd.



Phalerata dicta, gaye wordes, pleasaunte
speche.
Donat. in
Teren.
Phorm.


Phalerij, a citie in Tuscane.



Phalisti, people in Italy.



Phanaticus, frenetyke, he that hath vayne
vysions.



Phaneta, one of the names of Bacchus. 



Orpheus.



Phanni, fantasyes, which happen to men in
dremes.



Phantasia, fantasy.



Phantasma, matis, a visyon.



Phanum, a temple,



Pharetra, a quyuar for arowes.



Pharetratus, he that beareth a quyuar.



Phariseus, a Pharyze, whych was of a secte
of Iewes, which lyued in a more straygh­
ter fourme than the commun people dyd.



Pharias, phariæ, a serpent, whiche maketh a
furrowe in the grounde with his tayle, as
he creapeth, and so lyfteth hym self vppe.



Pharmaceutice, that part of physike, which
healeth with medicynes.



Pharmacopola, a Potycary.



Pharmacum, a medycyne: sometyme it sig­
nifieth poyson.



Pharos, an Ile in Egypte.



Pharsalia, a countraye in Thessalya, where
the batayle was betwene Iulius Cæsar and
Pompey. 



Phasæ, a worde of Hebrue, which signifieth
a departynge.



Phaseolus, a kynde of poulse corne, I sup­
pose it be that, which is called Tares.



Phasianus, a fesaunt.



Phasis, a greate ryuer in the countraye of
Colchos.



Phasma, aris, an horrible vision or sight.



Pherecydes, a famouse Phylosopher and
wrytar of Tragœdies, which dyed of the
lousy sickenesse.



Pheretra, thinges borne at great feastis or
triumphes, as pageantes or iewels of gold
or siluer, images, and suche lyke thinges.






Pheretrius, Iupiter. 



Pheretrum, a thinge, wheron pageantes are
borne: also deed corpsis.



Phia, the generall name to all plate, whiche
serueth for wyne.



Phiala, a potte or cuppe of golde or siluer,
which serueth for wyne.



Phidias, an excellent warkman, in makinge
great images of golde or yuory.



Phidiacus, ca, cum, of Phidias. 



Phiditia, the soupers, whiche the Lacede­
monians vsed, whyche were openly kepte
with a meruaylouse temperaunce, euery
man bringynge his measurable porcion of
meate and wyne.



Philadelphia, a citie in Asia.



Philagathus, he that loueth goodnesse.



Philanthropos, a louer of mankynde: also gen­
tyll and kynde.



Philargyria, couaytousnesse, auaryce.



Philargyrus, couaytouse.



Philema, a kisse.



Philetes, a kissar.



Philodolus, he that loueth his seruauntes.



Philenus, he that loueth wyne.



Philippei, a certayne coyne of golde.



Philippi, a citie in Thracia.



Philippenses, men of that citie.



Philocalus, a good man, a clenly man, or e­
legaunt.



Philomela, a nightingale: also a fayre may­
den, whyche was defloured by Thereus,
husbonde to her sister, whome poetes do
sayne was transfourmed to a nightingale.



Philologus, a louer of wordes.



Philonicus, a brawler: sometyme a louer of
victory.



Philosophia, philosophy, the loue of fauo­
rynge of wysedome.



Philoginos, he that doteth on women.



Philopæs, he that loueth children.



Philoponus, laboriouse, paynefull.



Philosophaster, he that wolde be lyke a phi­
losopher.



Philosophice, lyke a phylosopher.



Philothesia, a solemne feaste amonge the
Grekes.



Philosophicus, ca, cum, philosophicall.



Philosophor, aris, ari, to study wysedome.



Philosophus, a philosopher.



Philoxenia, hospitalitie.



Philoxenus, he that kepeth good hospita­
lytye.



Philtrum, a drinke charmed, whiche causeth
a man to be madde for loue.



Philura, seu Philyra, smalle thynges han­
gynge downe of trees or herbes, like vnto
heares.



Phyma, matis, a sore on the fynger, whyche
maye be called a whytblowe.



Phlebes, veynes.



Phlebotomia, bloodeletinge.



Phlebotomum, the instrument, wherewith
bloode is leten, a fleme.



Phlegethon, ontis, a ryuer of hell, which all­
waye burneth.



Phlegias, the son of Mars, a kynge in Thes­
saly, and father of Ixion. 



Phlegr&ecedil;, a people in Thessaly.



Phlius, a place in Grecia.



Phlox, a yelowe floure lyke a violet.



Phlegma, matis, flewme.



Phlegmon, onis, & Phlegmone, nes, an in­
flammacion of bloode, which groweth in­
to an impostume.



Phoca, a se calf, it maye be supposed to be a
Seale, whych is fisshe, and breedith on the
lande.



Phocensis, of the countraye called Phocis.



Phocion, a noble counsaylour of Athenes,
whose lyfe is a myrroure to all counsayl­
lours, which let theym rede in the warke
of Plutarchus, intytled the lyues of noble
men.



Phocis, cidis, a countraye in Grece.



Phœbus, the Sunne.



Phœnices, people in Syria.



Phœniceus, a, um, right Crymson.



Phœnicia, a regyon in Syria.



Phœnicopterus, a great byrde, hauing redde
fethers.



Phœnissa, a woman of Phenicia.



Phœnix, nicis, a byrde, whiche lyueth aboue
syx hundred yeres, and finally caryenge
swete spices vppe to a hyghe mountayne,
by the heate of the sunne, and labour of hir
wyngis, kyndleth fyre, whereby she being
all burned, of her axen ryseth another like
byrde: it is also a date tree, or palme, also a
lytell ryuer in Grecia: it was also the bro­
ther of Cadmus, which raygned in Phœ­
nicia.



Pholoe, a mountayne in Archadia, full of
woode.



Phonastus, he that techeth one to pronounce
and moderate his voyce.



Phorbas, a shepeharde that founde Oedip­
pum, after that he was hanged vpp by the
feete.



Phorcus, one of the sonnes of Neptunus,
whyche was taken for a god of the see.



Phoroneus, the mooste auncient kynge of
Grecia.



Phosphorus, the daye sterre.



Phrasis, The propre fourme, or maner of
speache, which in one countraye is often­
tymes dyuerse: as Southerne, Northerne,
Deuenysshe, Kentyshe, Frenche, Picard,




Gascoyne, Walon: some do set the negatife
before the affirmatife, some contrary, some
speache is quicke, some graue, some flou­
ryshynge, some temperate.



Phrene, the mydryfe, whyche dyuideth the
vmbles of a man or beaste, frome the bo­
welles.



Phreneticus, he that is vexed with a frenesy.



Phrenitis, seu Phrenisis, a syckenesse called
frenesy.



Phrine, a famouse harlotte at Athenes.



Phrigia, a countraye in Asia the lasse.



Phrygio, onis, a brawdrour.



Phrynos, a lyzarde.



Phryx, gis, a man of Phrigia.



Phthia, a citie in Thessalia.



Phthiriasis, a syckenesse, in the which lyfe do
growe in suche multitudes, that they de­
uoure the body.



Phthirophagi, people dwelling nyghe to the
greke see, which lyued onely by fisshe.



Phthisicos, he that hath the consumpcion of
the lunges.



Physeter, a great fyshe in the Frenche Oc­
cean see, whycne ryseth lyke to a pylar a­
boue shippes.



Phthisis, a consumption of the body by a di­
stillation frome the heed into the lunges,
whereby the lunges are exulcerate.



Phu, a plante or herbe, which some call Va­
leriane.



Phygeton, a lytle swellyng or botche, harde
and redde, burnynge and prickinge.



Phylira, a tree called also Tylia.



Phyllis, a woman, doughter of Lycurgus,
kynge of Thrace, which hynge her selfe,
despayringe of the commyng of Demoo­
phon, whome she loued, whome poetes
fayne to be turned into an Almonde tree.



Physica, warkes treatynge of the nature of
thinges, or the operacion of nature.



Phisicus, a natur all philosopher.



Physiologus, idem.



Physionomia, seu Phisiognomia, a rule to
knowe a mannes naturall affections by his
vysage or fourme of his membres.



Phyton, one of the names of Apollo. 



Phitonicus, & Phitonica, he or she, whyche
hath a spirite within theym, that gyueth
aunswere of thinges to come.

 

¶ P, ANTE I.

PIabile, for the whych satisfaction maye
be made, and god pleased.



Piacularis, re, that whiche is gyuen or
offred to god for satisfaction.



Piabilis, that which maye be pourged or sa­
tisiyed.



Piacularia auspicia, tokens in sacrifice of some
heuy chaunce to come.



Piaculum, any thinge done for satisfaction of
some greuouse synne: sometyme a greate &
haynouse offence.



Piamen, seu Piamentum, that which was gy­
uen or occupyed aboute satisfaction.



Pica, a byrde called a pye.



Picatus, cata, catum, pytched or rasyd with
pitche.



Picea, a piche tree.



Picenum, a countraye in Italy.



Picens, tis, a man of that countraye.



Picentus, ta, tum, of the countraye of Pi­
cenum.



Piceus, a, um, of pyche.



Pico, care, to dresse with pyche.



Pictatium, a table, pertaynynge to Iuges or
bysshoppes: it is sometyme a playster for
the stomake or heed.



Pictes, a wrastler.



Pictor, toris, a peyntar.



Pictura, an image peynted.



Picturatæ vestes, imbroudred apparayle, or
rather of bawdekyn.



Picturo, are, to make sondry pictures.



Picus, a lytle byrde, which maketh a hole in
trees, wherein he breedeth: it was also the
name of an olde kynge of Latines.



Picunnus, a pye.



No. Mar.



Pieria, a mountayne in Grece, dedicate to
the Musis.



Pie, & Pienter, mercyfully, deuoutely, lo­
uyngly.



Piens, tis, mercyfull,&c.



Pientior, Pientissimus, more and moost mer­
cyfull, most louynge towarde his parentes
of countraye.



Pierides, the Muses.



Pietas, etatis, the reuerend loue towarde a
mannes propre countraye and parentes, of
dyuines it is taken for the loue and honour
due vnto god. Lactantius calleth it iustice,
and deuoute worshyppynge and knowlege
of god.
Lact. lib.5.


Piger, gri, slowe.



Pigere, to be sory.



Pigritia, Pigrities, Pigredo, Pigritas, Pigri­
tudo, slownesse, ydelnesse.



Piget, piguit, pigere, it greueth, it dulleth, it
lyketh or contenteth not. Facti piget, he is
sory for that, that he hath done: sometyme,
I am sory.



Pigmentum, payntinge: also false colour in
speakynge, disseytefull wordes, pleasaunt
lyes.



Pigmentarius, a maker or sellar of payn­
tynge.



Pigne, slouth.



No. Mar.






Pigneratio, a pledgynge or gagynge.



Pigneratitius, a, um, that which is layde in
pledge.



Pignora capere, to take a distresse.



Ci. de ora.



Pignora, is sometyme taken for children.



Pignero, Pignerare, & Pigneror, pignerari, to
laye to pledge or gage, sometyme to take
pledge.



Pignus, noris, a pledge or gage, or pawne.



Pigresco, scere, to be or waxe slowe.



Pigre, slowly.



Pigredo, slouthfulnesse.



Pigrefio, fieri, to be made slowe.



Pigritia, slownesse.



Pigritudo, idem.



Pigror, idem.



Pigro, are, to holde backe, or tary one.



Pila, a mortar, wherein any thinge is beten
with a pestill: also a pilar, a ball, or any
thinge rounde as a ball.



Pilani, they which fyght with dartes.



Pilates, a certayne stone that is whyte.



Pilatim, one pilar by another.



Pilatus, armed with dartes.



Pileatus seruus, a slaue that is solde with his
cap on his heed.



Pilentum, a wagan.



Pileolus, a lytle bonet.



Pileus, a cappe, sometyme lybertie, for as­
moche as bondmen, whan they were in­
fraunchysed, ware copped cappes.



Pilo, are, to begynne to be heary, or growe
in heare.



Pilosus, a, um, heary.



Pilula, a lytell ball: also pilles made for put­
gations.



Pilum, a barbours knyfe or rasour, also a
dart of fyue foote longe and a halfe.



Pilumnus, a man which founde the maner to
dunge lande, and to grynde corne.



Pilus, a heare.



Pilus, idem quod Pilum: it is also a pestell to
braye or breke any thynge withall in a
mortar.



Pinaster, a wylde pyne tree.



Pina, a fysshe that hath twoo grete shelles.



Pinachidia, tables made in bookes.



Pinachtheca, a case or place wherein tables
are put or set.



Pinarij, an auncient house or famyly in Ita­
ly, of the which were the preestes that sa­
crifised to Hercules. 



Pindo, dis, si, sere: to braye or grynde.



Pindus, a mountayne in Thessalia: also a cy­
tye there.



Pinea nux, a pyne apull.



Pinetum, a woode of pynetrees.



Pineus, a, um, of a pyne tree.



Pingo, xi, pingere, to payne.



Pinguedo, & Pinguitudo, inis, fatte or fatte­
nesse.



Pingue, inconuenient, sometyme frutefull,
commodiouse.
Vergilius.


Pingues horti, gardens that brynge forth
good herbes.



Pinguefacio, cere, to make fatte.



Pinguesco, scere, to be fatte.



Pinguiarius, he that loueth that thinge, whi­
che is fatte.



Pinguitudo, fatnesse.



Pinguis, gue, fatte, he that is fatte, corsy, vn­
weldy.



Pingue, grease.



Pinna, a quyll, or penne, the harder part of
a fether.



Pinnæ, imbatelmentes of a walle, a muskle,
which is sounden in muddy waters.



Pinnæ, the fynnes of a fyshe.



Pinnaculum, a pynnacle of a tower.



Pinnula, the ouer part of the eare, a lytle
quyll.



Pinsito, tare, to braye in a mortar.



Pinso, sui, sere, to braye or grynde.



Pinso, are, idem



Pinsor, he that gryndeth in a qwerne: also a
baker.



Pinus, pinus, a pyneappull.



Pio, ij, ere, to honour god.



Plautus.



Pipatio, a clockinge of a henne.



Pinus, seu Pinea, a pyne tree.



Pipare, to clocke lyke a henne.



Piper, eris, peper.



Pipio, iui, ire, to peepe lyke a chicke.



Pipio, onis, a pigeon,



Pipleides, the musis.



Pipleus, an hill in Grecia.



Pipulum, a rebuke.



Plaut.



Pirum, a peare.



Pirata, a rouer or robber on the se, a pyrate.



Piratica, the practise of pirates or robbers
on the see.



Pirrhica, a daunsynge in harneys.



Pisa, a citie in Grece betwene the two moun­
taynes of Olympus and Ossa: also a citie
in Arcadia.



Pisæ, arum, a citie in Italy, called Pise.



Pisani, people of the citie of Pise.



Pisarurus, a ryuer in Italy.



Piaurum, a citie in Italy.



Piscor, caris, ari, to fisshe.



Piscaria, the fysshe markat.



Piscarius, a, um, pertayninge to fysshynge.



Piscarius, a fysshe mongar.



Piscatorius, a, um, pertayninge to a fysher.



Piscator, toris, a fisshar.



Piscatus, tus, & Piscatio, the acte of fisshinge.



Piscina, a fysshe ponde: it is also generally
euery ponde, allthoughe therin be no fish.






Piscinalis, le, pertayninge to fisshe.



Piscinarius, he that nourysheth fysshe.



Pissis, a fysshe.



Pisces, also one of the .xii. sygnes.



Piscosus, a, um, that may be fysshed, or is full
of fysshe.



Pisculentus, idem.



Pisciculus, a lytell fysshe.



Pisei, people of the citie Pisa in Gretia.



Pisidæ, people in Asia.



Pistacia, a certayne kynde of nuttes.



Pisistratus, a noble man of Athenes, whiche
chaunged the commune weale of that cy­
tie from the rule of the people, to the rule
of one gouernour: and therfore he was
called a tyraunt, notwithstandinge that (as
he wrate vnto Solon, which mayntayned
the populer astate) he rulyd by their owne
lawes, and was rightwyse and gentyll vn­
to the people.



Piso, sere, is proprely to braye, for in the old
tyme men vsed to braye or breake corne in
mortars: but after that they had quernes
to grynde with the hande, they vsed Pisere
to grynde, and Pisor for a gryndar.
Varro.


Piso, sonis, the name of a noble famyly or
house in Rome.



Pistillum, a pestell.



Pistor, oris, a baker.



Pistoria, a citie in Italy.



Pistoricus, ca, cum, & Pistorius, a, um, pertay­
nynge to bakynge.



Pistrilla, a mille.



Pistrinum, & Pistrina, a bakehouse, or gryn­
ding house: somtyme it signifieth for payn­
full seruice.



Pistris, a shyppe.



Pistrix, cis, a woman baker: also a monstru­
ouse fysshe in the Indiane see.



Pistura, the craft of bakynge.



Pistus, ta, tum, grounden or brayed.



Pisum, a pease.



Pithacusæ, Iles in the se agaynst Campania.



Pythacua, a certayne tyle, sometyme made
in Spayne, which beinge cast into the wa­
ter, wolde not synke.



Pithagoras, he which first brought vppe the
name of a phylosopher: who was borne in
Samia, and was a beautyfull man, and of
excellent wytte, and therewith of a pure
and cleane lyuynge, absteyninge from the
eatynge of any thinge that lyued: whose
Phylosophy was mysticall and secrete,&
declared by numbres and proporcions.



Pitheta, a Comete or impression in the firma­
ment, which is lyke a tunne, and doeth ap­
piere as it were through a myste.



Plautus in
Milite.



Pithecium, a defourmed or yll fauoured
woman.



Pithonoscomes, a place in Asia, where after
the Idus of August, great flockes of Stor­
kes do assemble togither.



Pitpit, in the olde tunge of Oskes sygnified
quicquid, whatsoeuer.



Pittacus, one of the seuen sages of Grecia,
and was of the cytie of Mytelene.



Pityocampe, a worme which is in a pyneap­
pull tree, whose bytinge is venymouse.



Pitysma, spettyll.



Pitho, the lady and presydent of eloquence
to persuade.



Pitisso, are, to syppe, or drynke lytle.



Pituita, flewme, or rewme, descending from
the heed: alsoo the pyppe, whiche chy­
kens haue.



Pituitosus, flewmatike.



Pitylisma, matis, an exercise, where a man
goeth fast on his toes, and moueth his ar­
mes forewarde and backwarde.



Pitylisso, are, to exercyse in that fourme.



Pityusa, an Ile, called also Myletus.



Pius, a, um, religiouse, deuoute, pitiouse, gen­
tyll, chaste: he that loueth his parentes or
countraye.



Pix, picis, Pytche.



Pix liquida, Tarre.

 

¶ P, ANTE L.

PLacabilis, easy to be pleased.



Placabiliter, thankefully, contentfully.



Placator, toris, a pacyfyer of debate.



Placæ, plates of golde or siluer.



Placendus, da, dum, that whyche ought to
content.



Placenta, a tarte.



Placentia, a citie in Liguria.



Placentini, people of the citie of Placentia.



Placeo, cui, cere, to please, to lyke, to glory.



Placidé, quietly, paciently, peasybly.



Placidus, da, dum, gentyll, meeke, pacient.



Placita, studyes or exercises. Ipse placita ma­
iorum colebat habitu seuæro: in a sage
garment, haunted the studyes of the aun­
cient fathers.
Cor. Taci.
lib.14.


Placitum, a firme consent in an opinyon, an
ordinaunce.



Placitus, ta, tum, that whyche lyketh or con­
tenteth.



Placo, care, to pacyfye, to appease.



Pladarotes, a disease, whereby the eye lyd­
des waxe feble, and wyll vneth be pluc­
ked vppe.



Plaga, a wounde, also a nett to take beastis,
sometyme the armyng cordes: also a great
space in the erthe, called a Cooste: alsoo a
shete for a bedde: moreouer a great space
on the erthe, called also Clima.






Plagæ & plagulæ, blankettes.



Plagiaria lex, a lawe made agaynst theym,
whiche were called Plagiarij, whyche for
theyr offence were whypped.



Plagiarius, he that whyppeth men. Alsoo
he that byeth a man for a slaue, knowinge
hym to be free. Alsoo he that intyseth a
mans seruant to go from his master: also a
stealer of bokes.



Plagiger, he that is borne to be whypped.



Plagiosus, a schoole mayster, whyche is
a greatte beater.



Plagium, the offence, for the whiche oone
is whypped.



Plagosus, fulle of strypes, or he that bea­
teth moche.



Planaratrum, the culter of a ploughe.



Plancæ, plankes.



Planci, they whyche be splaye footed.



Planctus, tus, waylynge, sorowynge.



Plancus, a noble man of Rome.



Plane, truely.



Planeta, a planette.



Plango, xi, gere, to wepe or wayle, tostrike
or hytte.



Catullus.



Plangor, plangoris, a noyse made with
the mouthe, as in lawghynge, or wee­
pynge.



Planidus, playne.



Planidior, more playne.



Planities, a playne or leuell grounde.



Planior, playner, euenner.



Diomedes



Planipes, he that gothe withoute showes.
Also a player in an enterlude.



Planta, the foote with the toes. Somme­
tyme onely the soole of the foote. Alsoo
a plant or tre newely sette: sometyme an
herbe that groweth lowe.



Plantago, ginis, an herbe callyd Plantayne.



Plantaria, settes or plantes, or the places,
where plantes be sette.



Plantaris, re, pertaynynge to the foote.



Plantarius, a, um, mete or redy to sette.



Plantiger&ecedil; arbores, trees whyche brynge
forthe settes.



Planto, tare, to sette or plante.



Planula, a playne, a ioyners instrument.



Planum facere, to declare or expounde.



Plaut. in
milite & in
persa.



Planus, na, num, playne, euen, cleare, ap­
paraunt.



Planus, ni, a deceyuour or mocker, Also a
Iugglar, whyche makethe thynges to
seeme in apparaunce, where in deede
noo suche thynge is: As water to come
into the howse, or trees to growe, or mo­
ney of leaues or stones.



Plasma, plasmatis, the warke of a potter,
or of hym, whyche worketh in erthe.
Also a playster.



Plasmo, are, to make pottes, or any other
thynge of erthe.



Plastes, a warker of ymages or other lyke
thynge in erthe.



Plastice, the crafte of warkynge in erthe.



Platanus, a plane tree.



Platanetum, a place where plane trees doo
growe.



Platanodes, a promontory or hyll in Italy.



Platanonis, ne, of plane tree.



Platêa, a high waye or strete, Also a court
in great places. Moreouer a see gull.



Plateæ, a cytie in Bœotia, not farre from
Thebes.



Plateenses, people of the citie of Platee
in Greece.



Plato, tonis, the Prynce and chiefe of all
philosophers, as welle in wysedome and
counnynge, as in good lyuynge and e­
loquence.



Plaudi, they whyche haue great hangynge
eares.



Plaudo, plausi, plaudere, to reioyce with
countenaunce



Plausibilis, plausibile, that whiche the peo­
ple doeth receyue with ioye, and clapping
of their handes.



Plautus, a wryter of comedies.



Plaustrum, seu plostrum, a carte.



Plausus, sus, a reioycynge with voyce and
gesture, clapping of handes togither for ioy



Plebecula, the poore people.



Plebeius, a, um, of the people.



Plebeius, plebeius, one of the comminaltie,
not beinge a gentylman.
Plautus in
penulo.


Plebeus, idem.



Plebicola, a fauourer of the comminaltie.



Plebiscitum, a lawe, whiche sometyme was
made by the onely consent of the common
people of Rome, without the autoritie of
the Senate.



Plebs, bis, seu plebes, plebei, the commune
people.



Plecto, plexi, plectere, to punishe, to stryke.



Plectrum, an instrument, wherwith menne
played on the harpe or doulcymers, for
hurtynge of their fyngers. Also a spurre
sette on a fyghtynge cocke, whan he lac­
ked naturall spurres.



Pleiades, the seuen sterres, whyche mary­
nours do vse in tryenge of costes.



Plemmyrium, a citie in Sicilia.



Plene, largely, abundantly.



Plenilunium, full moone.



Plenitudo, dinis, fulnesse.



Plenus, na, num, fulle.



Plerus, plera, plerum, of old tyme was vsid
for more . Plera pars, the more parte.



Pom. Fest.



Pl&ecedil;rique, pler&ecedil;que, pleraque, many, a great sorte.






Plerusque, pleraque, plerunque, the more parte of
any thynge.



Plerique, sygnifyeth some.



Terent. in
Hecyra. in
Andria.



Plerique omnes, for the more part.



Plerunque, oftentymes, sometyme.



Pleonasmos, a fygure, wherin is superflui­
tie of wordes.



Plethrum, a measure of lande, contaynyng
a hundred fete.



Pleuritis, tidis, & pleuresis, a sycknes in the
syde, callyd the Pleurisye.



Pleuriticus, euritica, he or she, whiche hath
the Pleuresy.



Pleuitas, vnnobilitie, basenesse of bloudde.



Cato in
No. Mar.



Plexus, a, um, wounden or bounden.



Plico, caui, uel plicui, care, to folde.



Plicatilis, le, that whiche may be folden.



Plinius, the name of two noble lerned men,
the one wrate the moost excellent warke,
callyd the hystorie of Nature, the other
wrate eloquente Epistles, and an oration
to Traiane in his commendation, whiche
oration is called Panegyricus. There is
also a warke of the practise of phisy ke in
the name of Plinius, but whither it were
of the fyrste Plinie or no, it is not verye
certayne.



Plocum, a smalle reede.



Plodo, si, dere, to make noyse with handes
or feete.



Ploro, are, to weepe.



Ploratus, tus, weepynge.



Cato.



Plorabundus, he that weepeth moche.



Plostrum, for plaustrum, a wayne or cart.



Plostrarius, a, um, that whiche belongethe
to a wayne or carte.



Plostellum, a lyttell wayne.



Plota, a lampray.



Ploti, they whiche haue playne feete with­
out holownes in the soles of the feete.



Ploxinum, a coffer or cheste.



Plumo, mare, to be in fethers. Also to en­
browder.
Vopiscus.


Pluma, a fether.



Plumarius, ria, rium, of fethers, a warker
with fethers.



Plumatilis, le, made of fethers.



Plumbago, aginis, a vayne of mettalle or
oore, wherin is bothe syluer and leade, it
is also an herbe, whiche hath leaues lyke
sorrell, and a great rote and rough.



Plumbea ira, wrathe whyche longe conty­
neweth.
Plautus in
Penulo.


Plumbatura, sowlder.



Plumbata, a pellette of leadde.



Plumbatio, sowlderynge.



Plumbarius, a plummer or worker in leade.



Plumbat&ecedil;, balles or clubbes of leade, wher­
with men faught.



Plumbeus, plumbea, beum, of the colour of
leadde, leedye.



Plumbeus homo, a lumpyshe man withoute
courage or spirite.



Plumbo, are, to leadde, to sowlder or ioyn
mettalle.



Plumbum, leadde.



Plumesco, scere, to be or waxe penned.



Plumeus, a, um, of fethers.



Plumiger, that beareth fethers.



Plumo, are, to be fetherid, or haue fethers.



Plumula, a lyttell fether or plume.



Pluo, plui, pluere, to rayne.



Plura, many. Pluria, idem.



Plurifarius, a, um, of dyuers facions.



Plurifariam, many wayes, in many places.



Plurimifacio, cere, to sette moche by.



Plurimum, very moche.



Ci. in Ver.



Plurimus, very moche, many, longe.



Plurisfacio, cere, to make more of.



Plus, more. Pluris uendo, I selle for more
or deerer.



Plusculus, a, um, a lyttell more.



Plutealis, le, that whiche is sette in a table
or case.



Plutealia sigilla, smalle Images in tables
or cases.



Pluteum, a space or distaunce, whereby the
lower pyllers were dyuided frome the
higher in the fronte or foreparte.



Pluteus, an engyne of warre, to conuaye
men to the scalynge of walles, kepynge
theym frome ordynaunce. Also hutches
or greatte coffers, or other lyke places,
wherin bokes, tables, or suche thynges
are kepte.



Pluto, tonis, callyd god of helle.



Pluuia, rayne.



Pluuialis, pluuiatilis, & pluuius, a, um, rayny,
or of rayne.



Pluuia aqua, rayne water.



Plyssima, auncient writers vsed for pluri­
ma, very many.

 

¶ P, ANTE N.

PNeuma, atis, spirite or wynd or breth.



Pneumaticus, ca, cum, wherein wynde
or breathe is vsed.



Pneumonici, they whiche be sycke of the
longes.

 

¶ P ANTE O.

POcillator, pocillatoris, He that bryn­
geth cuppes to the table, or a cuppe
bearer.



Pocillum, a lyttell cuppe.






Poculum, a cuppe. sometyme a draught.



Podagricus, & podagrosus, sa, sum, fulle of
goute.



Podagra, the goute, peyne in the feete.



Podalirius, one of the sonnes of Esculapi­
us a greatte surgeon.



Podaris, a longe gowne to the feete.



Poderis, a straite garment of lynnen cloth:
It maye nowe be callyd the Albe, whiche
priestes doo weare whan they saye masse.



Podex, dicis, the arse.



Podia, the corde, wherwith the sayle is
spredde.



Podium, a place made without a walle, for
men to stande and beholde thynges, Also
a stage, wheron is set candelles or bokes.



Poëma, matis, & poësis, a poetes warke.



Pœna, peyne, tourment, execution.



Pœnalis, le, penall, peynefull.



Pœnam pendere, to suffre punyshement.



Pœnas petere, to be aduenged, to punishe.



Salustius
in Iugurt.



Pœnas reddere, to be punyshed.



Pœnas luere, idem.



Pœnio, auncient writers vsed for punio.



Pœnitens, tis, penitent, repentant.



Pœnitendus, da, dum, to be asshamed of, to
be lyttell estemed.



Pœnitentia, repentance, penaunce.



Perottus.



Pœniteor, I am in payne, I am greued.



Pœnitudo, repentaunce.



Pœniturus, to be sorye.



Pœnula, a cloke.



Pœon, a man, whom Homer calleth
excel­
lently lerned in phisike.



Pœonia, an herbe callid Pyonie. Also a re­
gion or countrey in Macedonia.



Pœnicus, pœnica, cum, of Affrike.



Pœninsula, a place, whyche for the more
parte is inclosed with water.



Pœnitet, tuit, têre, to repent, to forthynke, to
be sorie for a thynge.



Pœnus, a manne of the cytie of Carthage.



Poeta, a poete.



Pœticus, ca, cum, poeticall.



Pœtor, aris, ari, to exercyse poetrie.



Poetria, & poetris, idis, a woman poete.



Pogonia, a blasing sterre, with a long beam
afore lyke a berde.



Pol, an aduerbe of swearynge, as it were
by Pollux. 



Polenta, was barley ordered in this forme.
They stepyd barley in water one night,
and dryed it, and the next day they fried
it, and than grounde it, And soo kepte it
longe, whyche theyr slaues and pultrye
dydde eate.



Polentarius, a, um, pertaynynge to barleye
grounde, as is aforesayde.



Polite, freshely, gayly, klenly.



Politia, ciuilitie, politike gouernance.



Politicus, politica, liticum, ciuile or pertay­
nynge to a citie.



Politiones, they whyche are dylygente in
husbandrye.



Politius, more cleane or trymme.



Pollen, linis, wheate floure.



Pollens, tis, puissaunt.



Polliceor, polliceri, & polliceo, pollicere, 
to promyse.



Pollicitatio, a promesse.



Pollinaria cribra, a rangynge syue, where­
with the floure is syfted from the branne,
it may be called also a boulter.



Pollinarius, pollinaria, narium, pertaynyng
to flowre.



Pollit for pila ludit.



Polimenta, the stones of boore pigges.



Polio, poliui, polire, to polyshe, to garnyshe
or decke.



Politus, polita, politum, polysshed, decked,
trymmed.



Polities, cleanlynesse.



Pollentia, power, also a citie.



Polleo, êre, to may, to haue power, to shine.



Pollex, licis, a thumbe of the hande, It is
also an ynche, whiche is a fynger bredth, 
and the third parte of a fynger.



Pollicaris, re, of a thumbe.



Pollincere, to minister aboute funerals. also
to boulte meale.



Pollinctor, toris, the administratour or offi­
cer in ordaynyng of funeralles.



Pollinctura, the ministration of funeralles.



Pollintor, toris, a baker that syfteth meale.



Pollis, linis, & pollen, inis, meale.



Pollubrum, a bason.



Polluceo, cere, to mynyster sacrifyce, spe­
cially to Hercules. 



Pollucibilis cœna, a costely supper.



Pollucibiliter, costely, gorgiousely.



Polluctum, a costely supper.



Polluo, luere, to pollute or defyle.



Pollutus, ta, tum, polluted, defyled.



Pom. Fest.



Polus, the pole. There be imagyned to be
twoo certayne poyntes in heuen, as hit
were the endes of an axe tree, where aboute
heuen is meuyd, the oone is in the
Northe, and is callydde Polus arcticus,
The other in the Southe, callydde Polus
antarcticus. 



Pollux, lucis, was brother to Castor, bothe
being borne at one bourdeyn, whych Po­
etes doo sayne to come of one egge, layd
or brought forthe by a woman, called Le­
da, with whom Iupiter companied in like­
nes of a swanne.



Polyarna, he that hath many lambes.






Polybotes, a gyaunte, whome Neptunus
slewe.



Polycarpus, he that hath many flowres.



Polycrates, a tyraunt, whyche was soo for­
tunate, that he neuer suffered any aduer­
sytie, or griefe. wherfore he at the laste
dredynge the chaunge of the fauoure of
fortune, hauynge a rynge with a stone of
an excellent valewe, dydde caste the same
rynge into the see, to the intente that he
wolde suffre somme displeasure, and soo
satisfie fortune: but a fysshe deuourynge
the rynge, was the same daye taken of a
fyssher, and gyuen to the kynge, for the
greatnesse of the fysshe, whyche beynge
opened, there was the sayde ryng founde
and brought to the kynge: wherat as wel
he, as all other aboute hym meruayled.
Sone after the same kyng was oppressed
by his people, and hanged.



Polydamas, a Troyane, oone of theym,
whyche betrayed the cytie with Eneas
and Anthenor. 



Polygonum, an herbe, whyche is also cal­
lyd Sanguinaria, and hath leaues lyke to
Rewe, but it runneth on the grounde as
grasse, the iuyce therof put into the nose,
stoppeth bledynge. It is supposed to be
swynes grasse, or knotte grasse.



Polyhistor, oris, he that knoweth moche, or
of many thynges done.



Polilogus, he that hath many wordes.



Polymitus, mita, tum, of twyne or twysted
thredes.



Polymita, a garment made of twisted threde
or sylke.



Polymnia, one of the Muses, which word
sygnifieth moche memorie.



Polymorphus, of many formes or facions.



Polymyxos, a candelstycke, whiche bereth
many lyghtes.



Polyphagus, a greatte eater.



Polyphemus, was a gyaunt, that had oone
eye in his foreheed, whiche was put oute
by Ulyxes. 



Polypodium, an herbe lyke to ferne, gro­
wynge on trees.



Polyposus, he that hath a soore in the nose.



Polypus, a fyshe, hauyng many feete, whi­
che chaungeth his coloure often: Also a
piece of fleshe, growyng in the ouermost
parte of the nose, whiche causeth a styn­
kynge ayre out of the nose.



Polyrizon, that whiche hath many rootes.



Polysyntheton, a fygure, where manye ar­
tycles comme into a sentence, as Ille tra­
hebat, Hic vociferabatur, He drewe, and he
cried out.



Polytes, one of kynge Priamus sonnes.



Polytrichon, an herbe callyd Maydenheer.



Polyxena, the daughter of kynge Priamus
whom cruell Pirrhus slewe on the tombe
of Achilles. 



Pomarium, an orcharde, sometyme a place
wherin fruites be kepte.



Pomeridianus, & stmeridianus, a, um, any
thynge done after noone.



Pomiferus, a, um, bearynge appuls.



Pomilius, & pumilio, onis, a lyttelle perso­
nage, a dwarfe.



Pomœrium, the grounde without the wal­
les of the citie, whiche moughte neyther
be ploughed, nor inhabyted, the territory.



Pompa, a pompe, or solemne syght.



Pompeius, the name of a noble Romayne.



Pompeianus, of Pompeius parte, or a fa­
uourer of Pompeius. 



Pomum, the generall name of all fruites.
It is moste vsed for an appull.



Ponderitas, hefte, poyse.



Pondero, raui, rare, to waye, to ponder, to
consyder, to esteme.



Pondo, a pounde weight, sommetyme .xii.
pounde. It was amonge the Romaynes
the pounde of moneye, as Mina, & mna,
was in Athenes, whyche was of the va­
lue of a hundred old poyse grotes, wher­
of. viii. went to an ounce: so that in those
grotes after our rate, it contayned a pound
and a marke of newe grotes tenne to the
ounce .ii. pounde and fyue grotes.



Pondus, deris, weight. sometyme it signifi­
eth numbre, also auctoritie.
Varro.


Ponderosus, a, um, wayghty.



Ponere spem, to hope.



Pone, after, or behynde.



Plautus in
capt.



Pone eum esse victum, Putte the case that
he be vanquyshed.



Pono, posui, ponere, to putte, to set, to cesse,
to buylde, to laye a parte.



Pons, pontis, a brydge.



Pontica nux, a kynde of fylberdes, whiche
came from the countreye called Pontus
in Asia.



Ponticum, is a taste, whiche hath no sente
to be discerned.



Ponticulus, a lyttell brydge.



Pontifex, ficis, an archebyshoppe.



Pontificatus, tus, the dignitie of a bysshop.



Pontificius, a, um, of a byshoppe.



Pontones, whyry botes.



Pontus, the see, whyche is from the great
fenne, callydde Mæotis, vnto Tenedum,
It is sommetyme vsyd for all the see. It
is also a prouynce in Asie the lesse.



Popa, fatte, greace.



Popana, fatte oyntementes.



Popanum, a cake of breadde.






Popellus, the lyttell or poore people.



Popina, a tauerne or vyttaylynge howse,
where meate is eaten out of due tyme.



Popinatio, ryotte.



Popinalis, le, pertaynynge to ryot, or pla­
ces of ryotte.



Popinor, aris, ari, to eate oute of due tyme,
to be ryottous.



Popiniones, haunters of tauernes.



Poples, poplitis, the hamme of a mans legge
behynde the knee.



Poppisma, matis, the noyse made with the
mouthe and the hande, in ryding, or wan­
ton dalyaunce.



Populabundus, wastynge the countreye, or
he that gothe in forragynge or robbynge
of countreyes.



Popularis, re, pertayning to the people, ac­
cepted or fauoured of the people. Also it
sygnifyeth a familiar frende, or as we vse
to call countrey man.



Populariter, & populare, homely, lyke the
people.



Populatus, ta, tum, wasted, distroyd.



Populeus, a, um, of a popler tre.



Popularitas, the coniunction or amytie of
people of one countrey. also affabilitie, hu­
manitie, towarde the people.



Laberies in
No. Mar.



Populatia, boyes playes.



Populatim, of al the peple. also euerich one.



Populatio, a wastynge of the countreye, a
fourragynge.



Populator, a forrageour or waster of coun­
treyes.



Populifugia, was a daye in the moneth of
Iune, at the whiche daye by reason of a
rumour, the people fledde.



Populor, aris, to wast or distroy a countrey.



Populosus, a, um, full of people, populous.



Populus, people. Also a poplar tree.



Porca, a sowe, a rydge of lande, a balke.



Porcarius, a, um, of a swyne.



Porcarius, a swyneherde.



Porceo, cere, to prohibyte.



Pom. Fest.



Porcetra, a yonge sowe, or yelte.



Porcinus, na, num, of a hogge.



Porculatio, bryngynge vppe of swyne.



Porculator, a fatter of swyne.



Porcus, a hogge.



Porcellus, a pygge.



Porculus, a shoote, a porcatte.



Porcus troianus, a hogge roosted with ma­
nye other beastes and fowles within his
bealye.



Porgam, vsed of the auncyent wryters for
porrigam, I wyll delyuer or take to one.



Pori, poores in the bodye, out of the whi­
che issueth sweate.



Porphyretes, a redde marble.



Porphyreticus, ca, cum, of redde marble.



Porphyriacus, ca, cum, of purple colour.



Porphyrio, a byrde, whiche drinketh as yf
he dyd byte the water, he hath longe red
legges and bylle.



Porraceus, a, um, of the coloure of leeke
blades.



Porrectus, ta, tum, stretched.



Porrecte, streyght out.



Porriginosus, a, um, lyke to lekes.



Porrigo, porrexi, rigere, to sprede oute, to
offre, to ouerthrowe.



Porrigo, ginis, skales whiche do falle from
a mannes heed or berde, lyke branne.



Porro, surely. also longe before, farreof, af­
ter, in tyme commynge, beyonde, forsoth.



Porrum, porri, in the plurell numbre lecke.



Porraceus, a, um, of a leeke.



Porsena, the name of a kynge, that besy­
ged Rome.



Porta, a yate.



Portendo, dere, to sygnifie before a thynge
happeneth.



Portentiferus, a, um, that whiche signifieth
strange or monstruous thinges comming.



Portentificus, ca, cum, idem.



Portentosus, a, um, monstruouse, sygnifieng
some thynge to come.



Portentum, a thynge monstruous or verye
seldome sene, whiche may sygnifie somme
what to come.



Porticus, cus, a porche.



Portio, a porcion. portiuncula, a litle porcion.



Portiusculus, the pylate of a shyppe, why­
che ruleth the maryners.



Portitor, oris, the customer of a hauen. Also
a porter, that dothe beare thynges that
be bought, whither as the byer wyll haue
hym. Also he that beareth men fro the ha­
uen to the shyppe.



Porto, tare, to beare, to brynge.



Portorium, the frayte payde for passage or
caryage of merchaundyse.



Portulaca, an herbe callyd Purselan.



Salustius
in iugur.



Portuosus, full of hauens.



Portus, tus, an hauen.



Posca, a sawce made with vyneygre and
water.



Poscinumius, mia, um, that whiche requy­
reth money.



Posco, poposci, poscere, to aske, to requyre,
to prouoke, to assayle.



Pos, a brydge.



Varro.



Positio, a settyng of a thyng.



Positura, idem.



Positus, ta, tum, putte or sette.



Positura, & positus, tus, a setting or putting.



Possessio, onis, possession.






Possessor, oris, he that hath the possession,
the owner.



Possideo, sedi, sidere, to possede.



Possum, potui, posse, to maye.



C&ecedil;sar.



Post, after, afterwarde, behynde.



Postea, afterwarde.



Postergo, are, to leaue behynd, to cast back.



Posteritas, tatis, the worlde to come.



Posterius, later, slower, vyler.



Posterus, ra, rum, that whiche commeth af­
ter. Postera dies, the day after. Posteri pe­
des, the hynder fete.



Post fero, to sette after or behynde, to set
lesse by. Post habere, idem.



Posthac, from hensforthe.



Posthumus, ma, a chylde borne after that
the father is deade.



Posthumus, ma, mum, folowing, or to come.



Posticum, & posticus, a backe doore.



Postica, all that is behynde vs. lyke as An­
tica is all that is before vs. It is also a line
whiche diuideth the feldes from the easte
to the weste.



Postilena, a crouper.



Postis, a poste.



Postlimineum redire, is whan any man hap­
peth to go from vs to oure ennemies, and
after retourneth home.



Postmitto, tere, to leaue behinde, to forget.



Postmodum, afterwarde.



Postquam, after. 



Postremo, at the laste.
This entry displays on the same line as the previous entry.


Postridie, the day after to morowe, to day
folowyng the day before expressed.



Postomis, a braake, wherewith a horses
mouthe is broken, and is made to beare
his heed easyly.



Postulo, are, to require, to demande a thing
whiche is dewe to the asker. Also to ac­
cuse or sewe oone in the lawe, or to com­
playne on one. sometyme to desyre.



Pli. in epis.



Postulatio, a supplication made to a prince.



Potens, tis, myghty, puissant, hable.



Potentia, power, puissance, habilite, gret rule.



Potenter, myghtily, puissantly.



Cæs. lib.1.
belli galli.



Potentatus, tus, power.



Potestas, tatis, power, auctoritie, counsayle,
and reason.



Potestatem sui facere, to suffre men to come
to hym, or to speake with hym.



Potiono, are, to gyue a medicyne.



Potior, potius, better.



Potior, potitus sum, potiri, to haue in posses­
syon, to optayne, to take pleasure of.



Potestur, for potest, he maye.



Potis sum, I maye, potis est, it is possyble.



Potitius, Hercules prieste.



Potito, tare, to vse to drynke.



Poto, tare, to drynke: Also to gyue drynke
to one.



Potorium, a cuppe.



Potus, ta, tum, that which hath drunke, and
that whiche is dronken.



Potus, tus, drynke.

 

¶ P, ANTE, R.

PRæ, before, in regarde, or in compa­
ryson, for. Præ studio, of study. Præut, sygny­
fieth than. Modestior nunc quidem est de
uerbis, pr&ecedil;ut dudum fuit, He is more softe
or gentyll of wordes, than he was wonte
to be, or than he was late.



Præbitere, to passe by, or passe forthe in ior­
ney. sometyme perire, to lese, to cast away.
Plautus.
Pom. Fest.


Præbeo, bui, bere, to gyue, to shewe.



Præbia, orum, thynges gyuen to sicke men.



Pr&ecedil;caluus, balde before.



Præcarus, ra, rum, very deere.



Præcedo, cessi, dere, to goo before.



Præcello, lui, lere, to excelle.



Præcentio, that whiche is songen or playde
at the beginning of a songe or balade.



Præcentor, toris, he that first singeth. it may
be taken for the chaunter in a quyre.



Præsultor, toris, he that leadeth the daunse.



Præceps, pitis, a high place stepe downe.



Præceps homo, he that is to hastye in his
busynesse, and doth thynges vnaduisedly.



Præceps, heedlynge.



Præceptum, a precepte, a rule gyuen, a com­
maundement.



Præcidanea porca, a swine, which the Pay­
nims dydde sacrifice before they dyd cut
downe their corne.



Præcidaneus, a, um, that which is fyrst kylled.



Cice. in A­
chad. quest



Præcido, dere, to speake or tell precisely, or
certainly, to strike, to cut of, to beate, to
denye styffely . Plane sine ulla exceptione
præcidit, Truely he styffly denied it with­
out exception.
Ci. ad At.
lib. 8.


Præcino, nui, nere, to synge before or fyrst,
also to tell a thynge before it hapneth.



Pr&ecedil;cipio, cœpi, cipere, to preuent or take first,
to forsee: also to commaunde.



Præcipitium, a downe right place or steppe,
whiche maye not be gone on.



Præcipito, tare, to throwe downe heedling.



Præcipitanter, heedlynge, vnaduysedly.



Præcipuus, a, um, chiefe, speciall, principall.



Præcipue, chiefly, specially, principally.



Præcise, precisely, determinately.



Præcisum, harde, intractable, cutted, verye
shorte, Qui præcisis conclusionibus obscu­
ri, Salustium atque Thucydidem superant, The
whyche beinge harde to be vnderstand in
their cutted sentences, doo excede both
Saluste and Thucydides. 
Quintilia.
lib.9.





Pr&ecedil;clamo, are, to crye before.



Pr&ecedil;clare, very excellently, very nobly.



Pr&ecedil;clarus, very noble: sometyme it signifieth
goode.



Pr&ecedil;cognitus, ta, tum, knowen before.



Præco, conis, a cryar, a publysshar of
thynges.



Pr&ecedil;conium, a solemne cry: sometyme it sig­
nifieth prayse or glory.



Pr&ecedil;coquor, queris, qui, to be sone rype.



Pr&ecedil;cordia, the skynne, whiche dyuideth the
ouer part of the body from the nether: it
is also taken for the place vnder the ryb­
bes: sometyme al the numbles, as the hart,
the splene, the lunges, and lyuer.



Pr&ecedil;cox, cocis, & Pr&ecedil;coquus, a, um, sone rype
or tymely rype.



Pr&ecedil;da, a proye, a thynge goten or taken in
warres.



Qu. Curti.



Pr&ecedil;dabundus, goynge on foragynge in the
tyme of warre.



Prædaceus, a, um, of a proye.



Pr&ecedil;datiuus, idem.



Pr&ecedil;dator, a seekar for a proye.



Salustius



Pr&ecedil;dator ex socijs, a robber of his company.



Pr&ecedil;densus, a, um, very thicke.



Prædestino, are, to purpose before.



Prædiator, toris, a man of lawe expert in ac­
tions reall, or maters concerning landes.



Prædiatorius, a, um, pertayninge to landes.



Prædicatio, a publysshynge, or open decla­
ration.



Prædico, care, to publysshe, to tell a thynge
openly, to prayse.



Prædico, xi, dicere, to tell before.



Prædiolum, a lytle manour.



Prædisco, didici, discere, to vnderstande be­
fore.



Præditus, ta, tum, adourned: also Pr&ecedil;ditus mœ­
rore, replenyshed with heuynesse: Pr&ecedil;ditus
lachrymis, wasshed with teares, or full of
teares.



Prædium, a manour.



Prædonulus, a lytle robber.



Cato.



Prædo, donis, a robber of countrayes.



Prædor, aris, ari, to robbe a countraye, or to
take prayes.



Prædotiunt, they chiefly desyre.



Pom. Fest.



Præduro, are, to be harder than it was wont.



Præeo, iui, ire, to go before.



Præfacio, feci, facere, to set more by.



Præfanda, not honeste to be spoken or re­
herced.



Præfari, to speake or saye before.



Præfatio, onis, a preface.



Præfectus pr&ecedil;torij, was with Emperours the
principall officer in his court: as nowe in
Fraunce the great master.



Præfero, tuli, ferre, to preferre.



Præfericulum, a great bason, which was ca­
ryed before hym that dyd sacrifice.
Pom. Fest.


Præfestino, are, to make to moche haste.



Præfica, a woman, which is hyred to lament
at the buryenge of men or women.



Præficio, fæci, ficere, to put in auctoritie, or
to gyue rule.



Præfectura, an auctoritie or rule.



Præfectus, a rular.



Præfigo, xi, gere, to shut afore



Præfinio, niui, ire, to determyne before, to
assigne or appoynte.



Præfinitus, ta, tum, prefixed.



Præfoco, care, to strangle, or choke.



Præfractus, cta, ctum, harde and vnflexible,
whyche wyll rather breke than bowe: also
that which was before broken.



Præfracte, obstinately.



Præfrigidus, da, dum, very colde.



Præfulcio, cire, to fortifye.



Plautus in
Pseudolo.



Præfulgeo, fulsi, gere, to shyne moche.



Præfurnium, the mouth of an ouen or four­
nayse.



Prægelidus, da, dum, excedynge colde.



Prægigno, nere, to begyn, to brynge in first.
Nolebam ex me morem pr&ecedil;gigni malum, I
wolde not that an yll custome shoulde be
brought vp by me.



Prægestio, ire, to reioyce moche.



Prægnans, tis, a woman with childe.



Prægrandis, de, very greate.



Prægrauatio, a great griefe.



Prægredior, gredi, to go before.



Prægrauo, are, to greue moche.



Pr&ecedil;hendo, di, dere, to take . Manum pr&ecedil;hen­
dere, to take by the hande.
Cic. in Pis. 
& ad Atti.


Ti. Liuius.



Pr&ecedil;hensatio, a solicitinge or laboringe for
the attayninge of some greate office.



Pr&ecedil;henso, are, to imbrace or set honde on
one, to solicite.



Præiacio, præieci, præiacere, to cast before a
thinge.



Colum. 9.



Præiacio, cui, cere, to lye before.



Præire iuramentum, to ministre or gyue an
othe.



Præiuditium, a thinge which being ones de­
cyded and determyned, maketh a rule or
example to men that do folowe, to discusse
semblably in a lyke mater. As those which
we do cal rulyd cases or maters in the law,
which be as examples to iuges.



Præiudico, to iuge before: sometyme to con­
demne, also to let.



Præiuro, rare, to sweare before other.



Præiuratio, the othe that is taken by hym
that first sweareth.



Præiurator, toris: he whiche firste taketh an
othe, as the fore man of a Iury, or the first
witnesse, or any other, after whome other




men do sweare, accordynge to the othe gy­
uen vnto him.



Prælabor, beris, bi, to fall first.



Præliaris, are, pertayninge to batayle.



Præliator, toris, a warriour.



Prælicenter, very wantonly.



Prælior, aris, ari, to fyght in batayle.



Cato



Præliganeum vinum, a pr&ecedil;ligando, which I
suppose to be so called, eyther bycause it
is fyrst tunned or put into vesselles, or els
bycause it is put into a sacke, which is fast
knytte afore.



Præligo, gare, to bynde afore.



Prælium, batayle also the fyght in batayle:
sometyme the acte of generation.



Prælongus, a, um, very longe.



Præloquium, the begynninge of a commu­
nication, or thinge spoken, as that which in
rhetorike is named exordium. 



Præloquor, queris, qui, to speake or telle
before.



Præluceo, cere, to beare lyght before one, as
a torche or candel: also to gyue more light
than another.



Prælucere alijs virtute, to shyne in vertues
before other.



Præludium, a proheme, or that which Mu­
sicians and Mynstrelles doo playe at the
begynnynge, er they come to the songe,
which they purpose to playe.



Præludo, si, dere, to playe before.



Prælum, a presse.



Prælumbo, are, to pourge or wasshe cleane
afore.



Præmando, daui to sende before.



Præmanibus, redy at hande.



Plaut in
Mostell.



Pr&ecedil;mature, to soone, or before the iust tyme.
Pr&ecedil;mature vita careo, I dye afore my
tyme.



Præmeditor, taris, tari, to aduyse before a
man do a thinge.



Pr&ecedil; me fero, pr&ecedil; me tuli, pr&ecedil; me ferre, to de­
clare by deede, worde, or gesture. Præ te
fers iracundiam, thou shewyste thy selfe to
be angry: also to confesse: also to haue be­
fore him a thynge (as it were) in remem­
braunce.



Præmercor, caris, cari, to dye aforehande.



Præmessum, a sacrifyce or offrynge to Ce­
res, of the eares of corne that was fyrste
repyd.



Pr&ecedil;metium, the fyrst croppe.



Pr&ecedil;miatores, theues which steale by nyght,
as we mought saye, whyche commytte
burglary.



Pr&ecedil;miator, is a rewardar.



Pr&ecedil;mineo, nui, ere, to be better than another
or excel aboue another in astate or vertue.



Præmior, aris, ari, to gyue rewardes.



Præmiosus, ryche of money.



Præmissio, a sendinge afore.



Pr&ecedil;mitto, misi, tere, to sende afore.



Pr&ecedil;mium, a rewarde, gyuen to hym which
hath done any notable and laudable thing.



Pr&ecedil;moderor, aris, ari, to playe before on all
instrument.
Gellius.


Pr&ecedil;modum, aboue measure.



Pr&ecedil;molestia, feare of a thinge to come.



Ci. Tus. 4.



Pr&ecedil;mollis, le, very tender or delicate.



Pr&ecedil;moneo, nui, nere, to forewarne.



Pr&ecedil;monstrator, toris, he that telleth or she­
weth a thynge before that it happeneth.
Terent. in
Heau.


Pr&ecedil;monstro, are, to shewe before.



Pr&ecedil;mordeo, dere, to byte or rebuke before.



Pr&ecedil;morior, riris, ri, to dye er the tyme come.



Pr&ecedil;munio, iui, ire, to prepare.



Pr&ecedil;narro, rare, to tell before.



Pr&ecedil;nato, tare, to swymme afore.



Pr&ecedil;neste, a citie in Italy.



Pr&ecedil;nestini, people of the citie of Preneste in
Italy.



Prænestinus, a, um, of Preneste.



Pr&ecedil;nomen, the firste name: as Marcus,
Quintus, Lucius: and as we now haue the
name at baptysme.



Pr&ecedil;nosco, noui, noscere, to knowe afore.



Pr&ecedil;noto, tare, to make annotations or in­
scriptions.



Pr&ecedil;nuncio, are, to shewe afore.



Pr&ecedil;nuncius, the first messenger, he that fyrst
b yngeth tydinges.



Pr&ecedil;occupatio, a fygure in Rhetorike, whan
we will saye that we will not tell a thinge,
and yet therby couertly we wil declare the
matter, or make it suspected.



Pr&ecedil;occupo, pare, to take or possede a thinge
by preuencion.



Pr&ecedil;opto, tare, rather to desire.



Pr&ecedil;ordinatio, the fyrst ordinaunce.



Pr&ecedil;ordinator, he that made the fyrst ordy­
naunce.



Pr&ecedil;ordino, are, to ordayne afore.



Pr&ecedil;parcus, ca, cum, very scarce or nygarde.



Pr&ecedil;paro, are, to prepare, to make redy.



Pr&ecedil;pedimentum, a let before.



Præpedio, diui, to let moche.



Præpendo, dere, to hange afore.



Præpes, pr&ecedil;petis, swyft.



Pr&ecedil;petes aues, were the byrdes, which she­
wed them selfes first to the diuinours cal­
led Augures, whereby they supposed to
knowe what shulde ensue.



Pr&ecedil;peto, tere, to begynne first.



Pr&ecedil;pilatus, ta, tum, hedded with yron, as a
Iauelyn or dart: also sharp afore lyke the
heed of a dart, thoughe it hath none yron:
as the hornes of a lopster, wherewith he




swymmeth.



Præpinguis, very fat.



Præpondero, are, to waye more, to be more
worth.



Præpolleo, lere, to excede other.



Præpono, sui, ponere, to put or set before.



Præpositus, ta, tum, set or aduaunced aboue
other, set in autoritie.



Præpositus, ti, he that is in autoritie, or chief
in any office.



Præpotens, very puissant or mighty.



Præpoto, tare, to drynke afore, to brynge
good lucke in drinkinge.



Præposterus, ra, rum, ouerthwart, oute of
ordre.



Salustius
in Iug.



Præposteri homines, they that do that thing
last, whiche they shulde haue done first.



Præpostere fieri, to be done against all good
ordre. As whan the seruaunt commaun­
deth his master, the peple their rulars, or
a foole a wyse man.



Præproperus, ra, rum, very quicke or hasty.



Præputium, the skynne which couereth the
heed of a mans priuey membre.



Præripio, pui, pere, to preuent, to catche.



Prærideo, dere, to lawghe before.



Prærisor, oris, he that laugheth afore one.



Prærodo, si, dere, to gnawe or eate very
moche.



Prærogata beneficia, benefytes afore em­
ployed.



Prærogo, gare, to employe or gyue afore.



Prærogatiua, & prærogatiuum, a preroga­
tife, where one is preferred afore another.



Prærumpo, pere, to breake asonder.



Præruptus, ta, tum, all to broken. it is some­
tyme taken, where a hyll is broken by the
sydes, and harde to go on.



Prærupta loca, places broken here & there,
that no man maye passe.



Præsagio, gire, & pr&ecedil;sagior, to perceyue or
knowe a thinge before that it happen.



Præsagus, a pronosticatour, or perceyuer of
thinges er they happe.



Præsagium, & pr&ecedil;sagatio, amonge the aun­
cient writars, a perceyuing of a thinge be­
fore that it happeneth, sometyme a con­
iecture.



Præscientia, an vnderstandinge and perfyte
knowlege of all that shall happen.



Præscius, he that knoweth perfytely thin­
ges er they happen.



Præscio, scire, to knowe afore.



Præscribo, psi, bere, to assigne, to note or inti­
tle, to put, to laye before, to telle before, to
appoint or determyne.



Præscriptio, & præscriptum, a rule, a lawe, an
ordre, a fourme.



Præscriptum, a precepte, a fourme, a rule.



Præseco, care, to cut before, sometyme to cut
on sonder.



Præsegmina, the parynges of a mannes
nayles.



Præsens, tis, present. In pr&ecedil;sentia, & in pr&ecedil;­
sentiarum, at this present tyme.



Præsentius, better.



Præsentissimus, a, um, the best, the surest.



Præsentissimum venenum, the greatest and
moost feruent poyson: also stronge.



Pr&ecedil;sens animus, a stronge or good courage,
also fauorable. Deum præsentem habet, he
hath god fauorable vnto hym.



Præsentaneum remedium, a short or sodayne
remedy.



Præsentia, presence.



Præsentio, & Pr&ecedil;sentisco, cere, to fele or per­
ceyue before.



Præsento, tare, to haue redy.



Præsepe, & pr&ecedil;sepium, & presepes, a stable, a
stall, a shepehouse.



Præsepio, pire, to hedge afore a thinge.



Præsertim, specially.



Præseruatio, a preseruation.



Præseruare, to preserue.



Præses, sidis, he that hath autoritie in a pro­
uince next vnder the prince: sometyme it
signifieth a defendour, alsoo sure. Locum
pr&ecedil;sidem, a sure place.
Plautus in
Casina.


Præsideo, dere, to be in more autoritye, or of
a more dignitie: also to haue authoritye or
rule.



Præsideratio, tempest, whiche commeth at
the begynnynge of wynter, sooner than it
is loked for, or is accustomed to happen.



Præsidero, are, where tempest commeth ve­
ry soone, and before the tyme accustomed.



Præsicco, care, to drye afore.



Præsidiarius, a, um, that which is ordayned
to be ayde to another thinge.



Præsidium, a garyson of men with a capy­
tayne, set by the chief capitayne, to defend
a fortresse: sometyme it is taken generally
for all maner of ayde or defence: also for a
fortification of a thinge.



Præsilio, silire, to lepe before, to sterte oute.



Præstito, tere, to stande or be set afore.



Præspeculator, ari, to loke afore.



Præspicio, spexi, spicere, to see afore.



Præstabilis, le, excellent.



Pr&ecedil;stabilius, bettar.



Præstantia, excellency.



Præstat, it is bettar.



Pr&ecedil;stans, tis, excellent.



Pr&ecedil;stanter, excellently.



Pr&ecedil;stare culpam, to take the blame on hym.



Pr&ecedil;stare officium, to do his deuoyre.



Cicer. Te.



Pr&ecedil;stare iusiurandum, to take an othe.



Pr&ecedil;stega, a place open afore, and keuered




behynde lyke a porche, where men do syt
for recreacion after their busynesse.



Præster, a venymouse serpent, of whome he
that is stryken, dyeth for thurst.



Præstigiator, toris, a iuggler.



Præstes, titis, of the auncient wrytars called
a prelate.
Pom. Fest.


Pr&ecedil;stigium, a iugglynge caste, an inchaunt­
ment, a delusyon.



Præstino, are, to prepare in byenge a thinge.



Præstituo, ere, to determine before, to pre­
scribe or appoynt before, what shal be done.
Istam enim culpam, quam vereris, ego præ­
stabo, for the blame, which thou fearest, I
will take vppon me.
Ci. de ora.


Præsto, stiti, stare, to be better than another
thinge, wherewith it is comparyd, to ex­
cell: also to vndertake, to waraunt, some­
tyme to graunte, also to do, to be benefici­
all, to beware, to exchue, to feare, to do or
perfourme, to gyue, to exhibite, to repre­
sent or shewe, to lende, to assigne or ap­
poynt, to do a thinge.
Ci ad Q.
fratrem


Præsto, an aduerbe, redy, at hande. Pr&ecedil;sto
sis, helpe me. Pr&ecedil;sto esse, to appiere, as men
do in places of iugementes.



Præstolor, aris, ari, to tary, to be at hande, or
redy to do seruice.



Præstringo, xi, gere, to bynde fast, to shut, to
dasell the eyen, to touche quickly, or short­
ly, to shaue, to greue somewhat.



Præstruo, struxi, struere, to ordayne firste, to
buylde.



Præsul, lis, a prelate.



Præsulatus, tus, the dignitie of a prelate.



Præsulto, are, to leape or daunse afore.



Præsultor, præsultoris, he that leadeth a
daunse.



Pr&ecedil;sum, fui, pr&ecedil;esse, to be afore or aboue an
other, to be of more dignitye, to be in au­
torytye.



Præesse negotio, to be chief in the busynesse.



Præsumere animo, to coniecte.



Præsumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take fyrste, to
preuente.



Præsumptio, a takinge or receyuynge be­
fore: it is also that, which is called preoc­
cupation, whan we declare first what our
aduersary will saye, or what is the iuges
opynyon: and against that we do argue, to
dissolue it with reason.



Pr&ecedil;suo, ere, to sowe afore.



Præsurgo, gere, to ryse afore or first.



Prætego, gere, to hyde or couer chiefly.



Pr&ecedil;tendo, ere, to laye for a thing er it come:
also to cary or beare afore, also to shew or
pretende, to allege, to set a thinge aboute
for an inclosure. Pr&ecedil;tendere sepem, to make
a hedge aboute.



Pr&ecedil;tento, tare, to tempte or assaye afore.



Prætenue, very sklenderly.



Præterduco, cere, to leade afore, to leade
forth.



Prætergredior, di, to passe by, to go beyond.



Præteritus, ta, tum, passyd.



Præteriti, deed, departed, decessyd: also they
which in suynge for an office, dyd suffre re­
pulse, or were put backe.



Præter propter, for an other cause than that
which is reherced.



Præter, except, also besyde, ouer and aboue,
before. Præter oculos, before the eyen, A­
gainst or contrary. Pr&ecedil;ter morem, againste
the custome or facion. Præter spem, vnlo­
ked for. Præter opinionem, otherwyse than
I thought. Præter cætera, more than the o­
ther. Præter æquum, against raison.



Præterbito, tare, to go by.



Præterea, moreouer, besyde, none els. Mihi
credis præterea nemini, Thou beleuest me,
and none els. also it signifieth afterwarde.



Prætereo, iui, ire, to go ouer or passe, to leue
oute a thynge, which shulde be spoken of.



Prætermitto, misi, tere, to leue vntouched, to
forgete, to leue oute.



Prætermissio, forgetynge, or leuinge out of
a thynge.



Præterquam, but onely, otherwyse than,
moreouer.



Præterquem quod, but.



Præterueho, here, to carye throughe.



Præteruolo, are, to passe throughe quickly.



Prætexo, ui, ere, to make or ordayne firste, to
couer or hyde.



Prætexta, a longe garment myxte with pur­
ple silke, whiche was the vesture of noble
mennes sonnes, vntyll they came vnto .xvii
yeres of age: and therfore suche children
were called Prætextati, but they had alsoo
aboute their neckes, a lytell round iewell
of golde, facyoned like a hart, wherin was
inclosed some thinge of great vertue.



Prætexta, was also the robe of astate, whi­
che the kynge of Romaynes, or the other
chief officers dyd weare, whan they sate
in their maiestie.



Prætexta com&ecedil;dia, an enterlude, wherin are
personages of highe dignitie.



Prætextatus, ta, tum, dishonest, or vnclene in
speche or actes. Festus taketh it in the con­
trary sence.
Suetonius
Gellius.
Macro.


Prætextum, a pretence or coloure.



Pr&ecedil;tiamitatores, officers which went before
the prelates called Flamines, proclayming
openly, that all men shulde ceasse of theyr
warke, bycause it was not lefull to those
prelates to beholde any man warkynge.



Prætimeo, ere, to be sore aferde.






Pr&ecedil;tingo, gere, to touche afore.



Pr&ecedil;tondeo, to sheere or klyppe, or rounde
before.



Pr&ecedil;toritius, a, um, for Pr&ecedil;torius.



Pr&ecedil;torium ius, lawe made by the Pr&ecedil;tor. 



Pr&ecedil;tor, toris, a chief capitayne in warres, in
a citie or contraye.



Pr&ecedil;tor is he, whiche hath autoritye to sit in
iugemente, and to gyue sentence in causis.



Pr&ecedil;torianus, he that is attendant to him that
is Pr&ecedil;tor. 



Pr&ecedil;torium, the house or pauylyon of hym
that is Pr&ecedil;tor. it is alsoo a princes palayce
or manoure: it is somtyme the place, where
iugementes are gyuen, sometyme the coun­
sayle, wherevnto Prætores are assembled.



Pr&ecedil;torius, he that hath bene Pr&ecedil;tor. 



Pr&ecedil;torius, a, um, belonginge to the office of
Pr&ecedil;tor. 



Pr&ecedil;tura, the dignitie and ministration, of him
that is Pr&ecedil;tor. 



Pr&ecedil;ualeo, lere, to preuayle, to be better or of
more value.



Præualidus, a, dum, very stronge or myghty,
sometyme very greate.



Pr&ecedil;uaricatio, is a collusion: alsoo it is where
one toucheth a thing lytely, which ought
to be inculked with a more playn declara­
cyon, or els repeted, as makynge moche
to the purpose.



Pr&ecedil;uaricor, aris, ari, to swarue from truthe,
to go out of the right waye, to leue vnsayd
that, which shulde be spoken, to touche a
thinge shortely in spekynge, to warke by
collusion, in suffringe his aduersary to op­
tayne, to hurte another person.



Pr&ecedil;uaricator, toris, he that leueth the ryght
waye, or speketh not that whych ought to
be spoken: also he that in spekinge for him
selfe aydeth the cause of his aduersary, or
doeth any thinge by collusion.



Pr&ecedil;ueho, here, to brynge first.



Pr&ecedil;lo, are, to couer or hyde afore.



Pr&ecedil;uello, lere, to pull or plucke afore.



Præuenio, nire, to come before or preuent.



Ti. Liuius.
de bell. pu.



Pr&ecedil;uentio, a preuention.



Pr&ecedil;uideo, dere, to foresee, to beware.



Ci. de Di.



Præuius, he that leadeth the waye.



Præuerto, uertere, to set more by, or to care
more for. Nec me vxorem præuortisse di­
cant, præ repub. Nor let them not saye, that
I set more by my wyfe, than by the weale
publyke. Also to tourne or set a syde. Neque
pr&ecedil;ripio pulpamentum, neque præuorto pocu­
lum, Nor I take awaye thy meate, nor set
or tourne asyde thy drynke.
Plautus in
Amphi.Plautus in
milite.


Præuertor, deponens, idem quod pr&ecedil;uerto:
also to go afore . Inde illico pr&ecedil;uertor do­
mum, from thense I went home afore. al­
so to be tourned furth. Foreis enim clausit,
ne pr&ecedil;uorteretur foras, he hath shyt fast the
doore, leest he shulde be turned forth. Also
to do any thinge firste or before any other
thinge. Præuorti hoc certum est rebus alijs
omnibus, Surely this shall be done before
any other thinge.
Plautus in
capt.Plautus in
Amph.


Præuertere serio, to turne it to ernest. Si quid
dictum est per iocum, non &ecedil;quum est id te se­
rio pr&ecedil;uortier, If any thinge be spoken in
iape, it is not rayson to tourne it to er­
neste.
Plautus in
amph.


Pr&ecedil;uerti pigritiæ, to be taken with slouth. Ca­
ue pigritiæ pr&ecedil;uortier, beware that thou be
not taken with slouthe.
Plautus in
Merc.


Pr&ecedil;uersus, a, um, that which is done or sped
first, or before any other.



Pr&ecedil;uersum fulgur, lyghtenynge whyche is
not knowen, whyther it be by daye or by
nyghte.
Pom. Fest.


Præuolo, are, to flee before.



Pragmaticus, a practiser in the lawe.



Pragma in greke, is in latyne negociatio, an
acte or busynesse: alsoo an exercise of mar­
chaundyse.



Pragmatica sanctio, a determination of pra­
ctisians of the lawe.



Prandeo, prandi, & pransus sum, prandere, to
dyne.



Prandiculum, a brekefast.



Prandiolum, a lyter dynar.



Prandium, a dynar.



Pransito, tare, to dyne or eate often.



Pransor, oris, he that is at dynar, or he that
is boden to dynar.



Prasinus, na, num, greene lyke leekis.



Prasius, a greene stone.



Prasoides, a stone of the coloure of leekes.



Pratensis, se, of the medowes.



Pratense fœnum, medowe haye.



Pratulum, a lytle medowe.



Praue, shrewedly, noughtyly, vnhappely, o­
uerthwartly.



Prauitas, shrewdenesse, vnhappynesse, ouer­
thwartnesse.



Pratum, medowe.



Prauus, a, um, croked.



Praxiteles, an excellent caruar in stone.



Precarius, a, um, that whiche is borowed, at
the wyll of the lender, that which is occu­
pyed, at another mans pleasure.



Precario, by desyre at another mans will.



Preces, prayer.



Precium, pryce, value.



Preciosus, a, um, deere, preciouse.



Precor, aris, ari, to praye.



Prehendo, prehendi, dere, to take. Et manum
prehendi, & osculum detuli tibi, I toke you
by the hande, and also gaue you a kysse.






Premo, pressi, premere, to presse: sometyme
to vexe, to dygge, to prese on, to thruste, to
destroye, to thrust downe, to constrayne,
to restrayne.



Vergilius.



Premere dolorem, to hyde heuynesse or so­
rowe. Premit alto corde dolorem, he hyd
his sorowe in the secrete parte of his
harte.



Varro.



Premere, to dryue or put oute.



Premere, to shyt or close. Pressique oculos, ac
vulnera laui, I closed his eyes, and was­
shed his woundes.
Verg.


Premere, to cut awaye. Et ruris opaci, false
premes vmbram, and with a sythe thou
shalt cut awaye the shadowe of the darke
feldes.
Ver geo. 1


Premere, to trede doune. Veluti qui sentibus
anguem, pressit humini tens, lyke as he,
which thrastyng his fote to the grounde,
tredeth doune the snake, that lyeth in the
brembles.
Ver gili. 2.


Premere testimonio, to conuicte a man by
witnesse.



Presa porca, a swyne which was offred in sa­
crifice to Ceres, in satisfaction for a hole
housholde, for as moche as a part of that
sacrifice was made in the presence of the
corps, which than was to be buryed.



Pressatus, ta, tum, oppressed, charged troden
downe.



Pres, predis, he that vndertaketh, if any in­
commoditie do happen, that he shall make
sufficient recompence: it is also he that is
bounden for suche money as is borowyd
of a commune treasure or stocke.
Cor Nep.
As. pedian.


Presbiter, biteri, an auncient, or father in
yeres or dygnytye. It is vsed for a preest.



Presso, are, to presse or thrust togither.



Pressus, ssa, ssum, subtyll, compacte, heuy,
pressed.



Pressus, ssus, & pressura, pressinge, also op­
pression.



Pretiosus, a, um, preciouse, deere, of grete e­
stimacion.



Pretiosior, pretiosius, more preciouse or
deere.



Pretium, the pryce or value: alsoo the re­
warde: sometyme peryll or daunger. Pre­
tio emptas meo, bought with my peryll or
daunger.
Terent. in
prol. Hec.


Pri, of olde tyme was vsed for Præ.



Priamus, the noble kynge of Troye, whose
history is to no man vnknowen.



Priapismus, a sickenesse, wherein the pryuy
membre of a man allway standeth, without
hauinge any appetite to lechery.



Priapus, an ydolle, vnto whome the Pay­
nymes, commytted their gardynes to
kepe.



Pridem, late.



Pridianus, a, um, that which is done the daye
before.



Pridie, the daye before.



Primas tenere, to haue the preeminence, to
be chief, to holde the bettar part.



Primas dare, to esteme aboue other.



Primæuus, a, um, the elder.



Primarius, a, um, chief.



Primas, atis, in chief autoritie.



Primanus Tribunus, he that assigned tribute
to the first legion.



Prima lux, the sprynge of daye.



Prima vespera, the euenynge.



Ci. de ora.



Primæ, the chief prayses. Cui primæ sine con
trouersia deferebantur, to whome the chief
prayses were gyuen withoute any contro­
uersye.



Primitus, first.



Primetium, sacrifice of the eares of corne,
which were first gathered after that they
were repyd.



Primores, the toppes of any thynge. 
Digitulis primoribus, with the fingar toppes.
Labiis primoribus, with the fore part of the
lyppes.
Primoribus labris gustare, to touche a thing
skantely, to smater of a thinge, and not to
knowe it substancially or perfitely.
Plautus.


Primicerius, chief ruler.



Primigenus, gena, genum, fyrste borne or
growen.



Primigenius, a, um, that commeth naturally
of it selfe, and is vnmixt.



Primigenia, the tytle of the eldest childe in
inheritaunce.



Primipara, she that hath her fyrst childe.



Primipes, he that in batayle fyghteth fyrste
with a sworde, and after chaungynge his
fourme of fyghtynge, vseth a Iauelyne or
darte.



Primipilaris, is he that fyghteth nexte to
the standarde. It is mooste proprely the
Capytayne of a companye in the fowe­
warde.



Primitium, the principall or chief.



Primipilus, a capytayne of a company in the
forewarde or vauntgarde, whiche hadde
vnder hym fower hundred Souldiours.
Vegets.2.


Primiter, & Primitus, first.



Primitiæ, the first frutes.



Primitius, a, um, the fyrst or foremoost.



Primitiuus, a, um, that whiche hath none o­
ther begynnynge.



Primesius, a stake, whereto a cabell or rope
of a shyppe is tyed.



Primo, an aduerbe, signifyeth fyrst.



Primodum, for Primo.



Primogenia verba, wordes whyche be not




diryuyed from any other.



Primogenitus, ta, tum, fyrste begotten.



Primordium, the fyrste begynnynge.



Primores the fyrste, the chiefe. Primores
uiri aut feminæ, Noble men or womenne,
or gentyll men and gentyll women.



Primulus, the diminutiue of Primus.



Primum, an aduerbe, whyche sygnifyethe
fyrste, er euer.



Primus, a, um, fyrste, beste, the chiefe. Pri­
mo quoque tempore, atte the fyrste tyme.
Prima quaque occasione, at the fyrste occa­
syon that shall happen.



Princeps, cipis, a prince, the fyrste or chief.



Principalis, le, principall, also pertaynynge
to a prynce.



Principaliter, pryncipallye.



Principio, an aduerbe, fyrste, or at the be­
gynnynge.



Liuius
Terent.
Suetonius



Principia, the place in a Campe, where as
are pyghte the pauilions of the heed ca­
pitaynes: but the more propre sygnifica­
tion therof is, that it is the seconde warde
in battayle, where in olde tyme were the
princis and noble men. Also it was taken
for the order of ray of noble men.



Principior, piari, to begynne.



Principor, pari, to rule.



Principium, the begynnynge.



Prior, the fyrste.



Priora tempora, the olde tyme.



Priscus, a, um, auncient, or of the old time.



Pristinus, na, num, that whyche was many
yeres passed. Sometyme it sygnifyeth the
fyrste, auncient.



Pristis, a fysh, of wonderful length, & sclen­
der, whyche cuttethe the wawes, as he
swymmeth.



Priuatus, he that is in none auctorytie or
dygnitie.



Priuatus, ta, tum, that is proprely a mannes
owne, that whyche pertayneth to oone
man or fewe, also particular. Sometyme
it signifieth depriued.



Priuatim, & priuate, priuyly, aparte.



Priuernum, a towne in Campania.



Priuignus, na, the chylde by an nother hus­
bande, or other wyfe, whiche is deed, son
or doughter in law to the husband or wife.



Priuilegium, a lawe concernynge pryuate
persones also a priuate or speciall lawe.



Priuo, are, to take awaye, to depriue.



Prius, an aduerbe, sygnifyeth before. 



Priusquam, before that.



Priuus, ua, uum, pryuate, synguler, euerye
mans owne or propre.



Pro, for, before. Pro rostris, at the barre or
place of pleding. Pro tribunali, in the place
of iugement. also after or accordyng. Pro
Platonis sententia, accordynge to the sen­
tence of Plato. Pro opere, in the warke.
Pro merito, accordynge to his deseruing.
Pro curia, before the courte. Pro uirili, to
my power.
Salust. in
Iugurt.


Prô sancte Iupiter, O blessed Iupiter.  



Vide com.



Prô deum atque hominum fidem, O the faith
of god and man.



Proauus, my greatte grandfather.



Proauia, my great grandame.



Probabile, that whiche may be proued.



Probatica piscina, a ponde, where sheepe
are wasshed.



Probatio, a proufe.



Probatus, ta, tum, proued.



Probe, honestely, well, wysely.



Probiter, idem.



Vide com.



Probus, a vertuous man, a good man.



Probitas, goodnes.



Problema, tis, a sentence purposed, hauing
a demaunde therto annexed.



Probo, are, to proue, to prayse, to approue.



Proboscis, dis, a longe snowte, as an Oly­
phant or swyne hath.



Probro, are, to reproche or rebuke.



Probrosus, a, um, reprochefull.



Probrum, a reprocheful act. Also a reproch
or rebuke, an infamie.



Procax, procacis, a malaperte in askynge, or
desyrynge, shameles, wanton in crauing,
yll tounged.



Procacitas, malapertnes, or wantonnesse in
askynge or crauynge.



Procare, to wowe, to craue, to be ym­
portunate.



Procapis, a progenie, whyche commeth of
one heade.



Procaciter, malapertely, wantonly, with­
out shame.



Procalo, are, to calle one to.



Procatum, & procitum, void, or of none effect.



Procedo, cessi, cedere, to go forthe, to pro­
cede, to prosper.



Procella, a storme.



Proceleumaticus, a foote in meter of foure
feete shorte.



Procello, ere, to streeke, to turn vp so downe



Procellosus, a, um, stormye.



Procensu, the company or felowshyppe of
yonge men in the cytie, as we beholde in
London the Bachelers togyther, whan
the Mayre taketh his othe.



Proceres, the heed men of a towne.



Procerus, a, um, longe, talle.



Proceritas, lengthe, talnesse.



Proceriter, an aduerbe, whyche sygnifyeth
longe, or of lengthe.



Proceritus, rita, tum, incensed or prouoked
with an yll spiryte, madde or woode.






Plautus in
Penulo.



Proceriti lapides, vengeable.



Procerto, surely.



Procet, for prouocet, let hym prouoke, let
hym appeale.



Processus, us, processe or successe.



Procestrium, a galerye to goo frome oone
chambre to an other. Also the ouermoste
parte of the walles within the imbattyl­
mentes, where men maye go: some doo
calle it a trenche before the campe, in de­
fence therof from artyllery.



Prochyta, an Ile in the see, in the gulfe or
rode of Puteolis, a citie in Campania.



Procidentia ani, whan the bone of the fun­
dement appereth oute.



Procido, dere, to fall downe prostrate.



Perottus.



Procieo, ere, to prouoke or cal from far of.



Procincta classis, a nauy preparid redy to fight



Procinctus, tus, the prouysyon before that
any thynge is done.



Procingo, xi, gere, to prepare, to make redy.



Procinctus, ta, tum, redy, prepared.



Procino, cinui, nere, to pronounce in singing,
to synge out.



Procio, ciui, ire, to aske.



Procito, tare, to prouoke.



Proclamo, are, to crie out, to proclayme.



Procliue, redily, easily in doinge.



Procliuis, ue, redy to falle, inclyned. Alsoo
redy or easy to be done.



Procliuitas, tatis, inclynation to euyll.



Proclus, a noble phylosopher of the secte
of Plato. 



Proco, & procor, ari, to aske malapertely.
Also to dalye with wanton language, to
eye or beholde a woman wantonly.



Proconsul, lis, he that was sent with an ex­
tra ordinarie power of Consul into a pro­
uynce of the Romayns.



Procrastinatio, a delaye.



Procrastino, nare, to prolonge the tyme, to
deferre.



Procreo, are, to bygette chylderne.



Procreatus, ta, tum, begotten.



Procubitor, toris, he that kepethe watche
and warde without the campe.



Procubo, bare, to watche.



Procudo, dere, to stryke or beate a thynge,
to make it lesse or thynner.



Qu. Curti.



Procul, farre of, from farre.



Ti. Liuius.



Procul urbem, farre from the cytie.



Procul muros, farre from the walles.



Proculco, care, to treade downe.



Proculdubio, out of doubte, doubtlesse.



Perot tus.



Proculeio, ere, to extende, to promyse.



Proculiunt, old writers vsed for promittunt,
they promyse.
Pom. Fest.


Proculus, he that is borne whan his father
is farre out of the countrey.



Procumbo, cubui, cumbere, to lye flatte or
prostrate, to come narowe togyther.



Procuro, rare, to do or solicite an other man­
nes busynesse, to inserche dylygentely, to
helpe or sustayne, or succour.



Procuratorius, ia, um, pertaynyng to a pro­
ctour or factour.



Procurator, toris, a proctour, a factour.



Procuratio, mynystration of thynges con­
cernynge an other man.



Procurro, rere, to runne farre, or beyonde.



Procuruus, ua, um, very croked.



Procus, a wower, to haue a womanne in
mariage, but moste proprely where there
be two, whyche woweth euery oone for
hym selfe.



Procyon, a sterre called the Doggesterre,
whyche appereth in the canycular days.



Prodeo, diui, uel dij, to goo forthe or oute of
a house, to come before one.



Prodigium, a thynge seldome seene, whi­
che sygnifyeth, that somme thynge shall
happen veraye good or veraye ylle, as
blasynge sterres, fyres, or fygures in
the fyrmamente, thynges monstruouse
or agaynste nature.



Prodigo, digere, to lasshe oute moneye in
vayne, or in thynges not necessary. som­
tyme to signifye somme straunge thynge
to happen.



Prodigus, prodigall, wastefull, an outragi­
ous expender.



Prodo, didi, dere, to forsake, to differre, or
putte of, to caste forthe, to putte oute or
farre of, to shewe or disclose. also to differ,
to spreade, to betraye.



Prodere memoriæ, to leue in remembrance.
Also to wryte.



Prodire obuiam, to go agaynst one, or to go
to mete with one, whiche is commynge.



Prodire in publicum, to goo abrode, to go
in the stretes.



Prodico, dixi dicere, to speke more or prate.
Quamobrem excutiemus omnes istorum
delitias, omnes ineptias, si prodixerint,
Wherfore we wyll set forthe al these men­
nes pleasures and fantasyes, if they wylle
prate any more.
Cicer. pro
Cælio.


Prodigalitas, prodygalytie, or outragyouse
expenses.



Prodige, excessyuely, outragiously, prodi­
gally, wastefully.



Prodigialis, digiale, that whyche pertay­
neth to the procuryng of strange tokens
or sygnes.



Prodigiator, he that by straunge tokens or
sygnes, tellethe before what shall after­
warde happen.



Prodigiosus, sa, sum, that whyche makethe




straunge signes or tokens.



Prodigitas, prodygalitie.



Prodimentum, a treason or betrayenge.



Prodinunt, for prodiunt, vsed of Ennius, to
issue or come forthe.



Prodius, further in.



Proditio, treason.



Proditor, toris, a traytour.



Terent. in
Heaut.



Prodere uitam to put his lyfe in daunger.



Prodromus, he that rounneth before, as a
lackey, or he that bryngethe tydynges of
ones commynge. Prodromi, be also ster­
res in heuen, the whyche doo ryse in the
Northe easte. viii. dayes afore the canicu­
lar dayes.



Produco, duxi, ducere, to prolonge, to bryng
forthe, to consume or spende . Producere
aliquem falsa spe, to holde or kepe one in
a fooles paradyse, to put forewarde: also
to folowe.
Vergilius.


Productilis, le, that whiche is made out at
length with beatynge.



Producere, to sette forthe to hyre. Audien­
tem dicto mater produxisti filiam, Thou
beinge hir mother, and she being obedient
vnto the, thou haste sette hyr to hyre.
Plautus in
Asinar.


Producere filios, to begette chylderne.



Productio, the makynge of a thynge longe.



Producte, an aduerbe, signifieth longe.



Productus, ta, tum, made longe or sette out
at lengthe. also brought or put out.



Pro&ecedil;difico, care, to buylde.



Pro&ecedil;dificatum, that whiche being a priuate
place, is made commune or publyke.



Profanatum templum, the churche suspen­
dyd, where any horrible cryme is therin
commytted.



Profano, are, to conuerte thynges beynge
halowed to a temporall vse.



Profanus, na, num, that whiche is not halo­
wed, temporall, men vnlerned, and that do
hate lerned men. Also that whiche is ioy­
ned or annexed vnto the temple.
Varro.


Profari, to pronounce, to speake abrode.



Ci. de bel­
lo ciuili.



Profectio, a passage or settynge forthe to­
warde a vyage, a departynge frome the
place, where a man is.



Profecto, in very dede, for sothe.



Pli. in epis.



Profectum facere, to profyte or goo forthe,
proprely in study and lernynge.



Profectus sum, the pretertence of profici­
scor, I wente.



Profectus, tus, profyte.



Profero, tuli, ferre, to brynge forthe, to shew
forthe, to pronounce, to inlarge, or dy­
late, or make greatter, to prolonge.
Plautus in
Casina.


Profere dolum, to put a disceit in experience.



Profere gradum, to make hast in going.



Profesti dies, warkedays.



Proficio, ficere, to profyte, to procede.



Ci. de sene­
ctute, & de
amicitia.



Proficiscor, cisci, to go and to come.



Profiteor, to promyse openly, to tell frank­
ly or boldly. Also to tell or declare, howe
moche a man hath of money, cattal, corne,
or any other thynge. Also to speake or a­
uaunt. Also to discouer or confesse a thing.
Also to rede openly a lesson.
Plautus in
capt.Ci. de ami.


Professio, an open confession, an open re­
dynge or lecture.



Professor, oris, a reder in open scholes.



Profligo, gare, to ouerthrowe, to dryue a­
waye, to brynge to distruction, to putte
to flyghte.



Profligatus, ta, tum, ouerthrowen, dryuen
away, put to flyght, distroyed. somtyme
it signifieth finished, brought to a poynte.



Profligo, gis, gere, to stryue moche.



Proflubeo, ui, ere, to runne out.



Profluens, tis, a ryuer: being a participle, it
signifieth flowynge.



Profluo, xi, ere, to runne out of a thynge, to
runne from farre.



Profluuium, a flyxe or laske.



Profluus, a, um, that whiche floweth.



Profore, to profite. Qu&ecedil; nocuere sequar, fu­
giam qu&ecedil; profore credam, That whyche
hath done harme wyl I folowe: & eschew
wyll I those thynges, whyche I beleue
shulde profyte me.
Moratius.


Profugio, gere, to flye farre.



Profugium, a place, whereto a man flyethe
for succour.



Profugus, he that gothe farre oute of his
owne countrey.



Profunda auaritia, insaciable auaryce. Pro­
funda cupido, insaciable couetyse. Profun­
da libido, insacyable lecherye.
Salust. in
Iugurt.


Profunditas, depenesse.



Profundo, fudi, fundere, to poore out large­
ly, to spende excedyngely.



Profundus, da, dum, depe, sometyme hyghe.



Profusus, excedynge lyberall.



Progener, ri, the husbande of my dowgh­
ters dowghter, or sonnes dowghter.



Progenies, progenie, succession in bloode.



Progigno, nere, to gette a chylde.



Prognare, openly.



Prognariter, hardyly.



Vestus



Prognatus, ta, tum, begotten.



Prognosis, prescience, or knowledge afore
that a thynge happeneth.
Plautus in
Penulo.


Prognosticon, a pronostication.



Progredior, grederis, gressus sum, gredi, to
go forthe.



Progressus, sa, sum, passed ouer.



Progressus, us, a marchynge forthe, or pas­
synge forthe.



Progressio, the same.






Progymnasma, an assay or prose in exercise.



Prohibeo, bui, bêre, to prohibite, to forbyd,
to tourne awaye.



Proiecta, the ouer partes of a howse, which
do leane outwar de from the neither part,
as they be nowe in some townes toward
the stretes: some men do cal them garrettis.



Proiecta audatia, foole hardynesse.



Proiectare aliquem probris, to rebuke one.



Proiectitius, a, um, a chylde caste forthe and
nouryshed of a straunger.



Proiectura, a penthowse to conuaye rayne
from the walles.



Proiectus puer, a chylde whiche is layde a­
brode in the strete, no man knowyng who
is the father or mother.



Proiectus, proiecta, iectum, throwen or cast
out afarre.



Proiectus ad audendum, foolehardy.



Proijcio, ieci, ijcere, to throwe or cast, to set
forth, to leaue, to extende or holde oute a
thynge at length.



Proin, therfore.



Salustius
in Iugurt.



Proinde, therfore, wherfore, lyke as.



Prolabor, beris, bi, to slyde or slyppe forth.



Prolambo, bere, to lycke.



Prolatio, an extendynge forthe. Also pro­
nouncyng, or pronunciation, sommetyme
bringynge forthe or shewyng of a thynge.



Prolatare, to deferre or putte of, vntylle a
longer tyme.



Prolatus, ta, tum, set forthe, brought forthe.



Prolectibilis, le, that which tickleth or ple­
santly moueth one.



Prolepsis, a fygure in speakyng, where we
doo preuente, to dissolue by reason that,
whyche we thynke to be in the opinion of
our aduersary, or of the iudge.



Proles, issue or fruite of a mannes bodye.
Also of a beaste.



Proletarii, amonge the Romains were they
whiche for pouertie were not able to goo
to the warres: and therfore they were
lefte at home to gette chylderne.



Prolibo, are, to tast, or to sacrifice afore.



Prolicio, prolexi, olicere, to induce or drawe.
Eius amor cupidam huc me per tenebras pro­
licit, The loue of hym hathe drawen me
hyther in the darke, beynge desyrous of
his company.
Plautus in
Curcul.


Prolixe, lyberally, abundantly, at length.



Prolixo, lixare, to make a thynge sharpe in
lengthe. Quare magnopere mouendus pu­
tator est, ut prolixet aciem ferramenti, & quan­
tum possit, nouaculæ similem reddat, Wher­
fore the cutter of the vyne oughte to be
warned, that he make sharpe in lengthe
the pointe of the instrument, and as moch
as he may, that he make it lyke to a raser.
Colum 5.


Prolixus, a, um, longe, large, sometyme su­
perfluous.



Prolixitas, & prolixitudo, length, largenes.



Prolocutio, the fyrste speche or fyrst entree
into communication.



Plautus.



Prologium, idem.



Prologus, a prologue.



Prolongo, are, to prolonge, to deferre.



Proloquium, the begynnynge of an oration
or sentence.



Festus.



Proloquor, queris, qui, to speake at length,
to telle a longe tale. Also to speke before,
to speake that whyche we thynke, to de­
clare our opynyon.



Proludo, dere, to flourysshe, as musytians
doo, before they come to the principalle
mattier: and as fence men doo with the
sworde or the two handstaffe.



Prolugeo, xi, gere, to mourne longer than
hath ben accustomed.



Proluo, ere, to wasshe moche, to drowne or
surrounde.



Proluuies, the fylthe or ordure, whyche is
washed of any thynge.



Proluuium, idem. Also prodigalitie.



Promellere, to promote or sette forth suite
in the lawe.



Promercalia, thynges set forth to be solde,
specially that whiche is solde by retaylle.
Promercale aurum, golde solde in suche
wyse, that besydes the iuste value, so mo­
che golde remayneth to the seller, as may
serue to his propre vse, as our nobles and
royalles solde beyonde the see at a great­
ter price than they be valewed at here in
this royalme.



Promercor, caris, cari, to bie thynges good
cheape, to the intent to sell them deere, to
bye at the fyrst hand, to sel them at retail.



Promereo, rui, rere, to deserue.



Promereor, reri, idem, Also to bynde oone
by his actes to do for hym. Also to helpe,
to profytte.



Promereri de aliquo, to doo a man a good
tourne.



Promerens, tis, he that dothe pleasure or
seruyce. Promerenti optime hoccine pretij
redditur? He that hathe done verye good
seruyce, shall he haue this rewarde for
his laboure?
Plautus in
Asinar.


Promeritum, deserte.



Promeneruat, olde writers vsed for monet,
he exhorteth or warneth.



Prometheus, he that fyrst found and taught
astronomie in Assiria, and also the craft to
make ymages of erthe.



Promico, are, to extend or set out at length.



Prominenter, at lengthe.



Prominentia, the extendynge or settynge




out at lengthe.



Promineo, nui, nere, to appiere farre of.



Festus.



Promiscam, olde wryters dyd vse for pro­
miscue.



Promisceo, cui, scere, to mengle togyther.



Promiscue, one with an other, myxte.



Promiscuus, scua, scuum, confused, myngled
one with an nother.



Promissa barba, a longe berde.



Promisse, longe, in lengthe.



Promissio, a promyse.



Promissor, he that promyseth.



Promissum, a promyse.



Promitto, misi, mittere, to promyse, to lette
growe in lengthe. Also to thretten.
Vide comp.


Promo, prompsi, mere, to speake out, to tel,
to take out of a coffer or other lyke thyng.



Promontorium, a mountayne or high place
of a londe or countrey, whyche lyeth as
it were an elbowe into the see warde.



Promptaria cella, a prison from whens men
be brought to be whipped or hanged.



Promptarius, a, um, that frome whens any
thynge is brought or taken.



Promptarium, & promptuarium, a stoore­
howse.



Prompte, promptly, redylye.



Promptior, more prompte or redy.



Promptitudo, promptnesse.



Plautus in
Bacch.& in
Pseudolo.



Prompto, tare, to brynge often forthe.



Promptus, ta, tum, prompte, redye to doo a
thyng without tarieng. also redy. Promp­
tum ingenium, A redye wytte. Res est in
promptu, The thynge is redy. also many­
feste. In promptu res est, The thynge is
manyfeste.



Promulco nauis agitur, the shyppe is dra­
wen with a bote.



Promulgator, & promulgatrix, he or she that
dothe publyshe a thynge.



Promulgo, gare, to publyshe.



Promulgatio, a publycation.



Promulsis, idis, Mede, made with water
and hony.



Promurale, a countermure, one wall with­
out an nother.



Promus, he that hath the kepynge of the
stoorehouse or drie larder.



Pronepos, potis, & proneptis, my sonnes or
daughters sonne or daughter.



Prone, redyly.



Pronis, olde writers vsed for prona, pro­
strate or on the grounde.



Pronomen, a pronowne.



Pronuba, she that attendeth on the bryde,
and is housewyfe durynge the feaste.



Pronubo, nupsi, pronubere, to haue a rule in
weddinges or ioynynge of couples.



Pronubus, he that leadeth the bryde home
to her husbandes house, and hath the sur­
ueyenge of the house, durynge the tyme
of the solemnisation.



Pronubus, he that dothe celebrate the so­
lemnitie in mariage. it may be nowe taken
for the prieste, whiche dothe mynister the
solemne wordes of matrimonye.



Pronunciatio, a pronunciation or vtterance
of speeche.



Pronuntiatum, a statute.



Plautus in
Trin.



Pronuntio, are, to pronounce, to declare o­
penly, to gyue sentence, to saye.



Pronuper, longe agone.



Pronurus, the wyfe of my sonnes sonne, or
daughters sonne.



Pronus, redy, inclyned, slowpinge downe,
nygh hande.



Proœmium, a proheme or begynnynge of
a mattier.



Propago, gare, to sprede as a tree dothe on
the toppe, to make to spreade, to sende
farre of.



Propagatio, a spreadynge.



Propages, a longe rewe.



Propago, ginis, an olde vyne spred in ma­
ny braunches. Sometyme it sygnifyeth
kynde or generation.



Propalam, openly, clerely in the syghte of
all menne.



Propalo, lare, to telle abroode, to growe
in lengthe.



Propatruus, my gret grandfathers brother.



Propatulum, wyde open.



Prope, nygh, almooste.



Propediem, nowe euery day, shortly.



Propello, propuli, pellere, to dryue or putte
awaye, farre of.



Propemodum, almoste.



Propendêre, to hange vp. Propêndere, to
examyne or consyder farre of.



Propensus, inclyned.



Propere, quyckely, hastily.



Properatim, quyckely.



Properanter, & properiter, idem.



Properantia, & properatio, an approchyng.



Catullus.



Properitas, the same amonge olde writers.



Properus, a, um, quycke, sodayne.



Propero, rare, to go quyckely or hastely, to
say or do any thynge quyckely or hastely.



Propetro, trare, to commande that a thyng
be doone.
Festus.


Prophasis, an excuse.



Prophetis, & prophetissa, a womanne pro­
phete.



Propheto, tare, to prophesye, to syng pray­
ses to god: somtyme it signifieth to prea­
che or interprete.



Propheta, a prophete, he that telleth thyn­
ges, whiche shall happen.






Prophetia, a prophecye.



Propilo, are, to make sharpe byfore.



Propina, a place by the commune baynes,
where after baynynge menne toke theyr
refection.



Propino, propinare, to drynke to an nother
manne, to quafte, to brynge to, Somme­
tyme to gyue. Propino tibi salutem, I
salute the.



Propinator, a cuppe bearer.



Propinquus, a neyghbour. Also a kynnes­
man, of alyaunce.



Propinquitas, affynitie, alyaunce.



Propinque, nyghe.



Propinquior, quius, nerer.



Propitiabilis, le, that whiche is sone bowed
or inclyned to desyres.



Propitialis, idem.



Propitiatio, sacrifyce to appease or pacy­
fye goddis displeasure.



Propitium, sommetyme sygnyfyeth veray
deuoute or louynge.



No. Mar.



Propitij, peasyble men, or man soone ap­
peased or satisfied.



Propius, nerrer, or nerre.



Proplastice, ces, the crafte to make moul­
des, in the whiche any thynge is caste or
fourmed.



Propingeon, the place in a bayne or hotte
house, in the whyche fyre inclosed, sen­
deth forth heate.



Propitiatorium, a table sette on the arke of
the olde testament.



Propitio, & propitior, ari, to appease, or to
make mercyfull, or fauourable.



Propitius, pitia, tium, appeased, fauourable,
mercyfulle.



Propior, nerer.



Propola, he that sellyth any thynge at re­
tayle, specyally vyttayle, a hukster.



Propolis, a subburbes of a towne. It is al­
so that whyche bees doo make at the en­
trie of the hyue, wherby colde and other
annoyaunce is defended.



Propono, proposui, ponere, to purpose, to
be aduysed, to promyse a pryce or reward
for any notable acte, to sette out e to the
shewe.



Propontis, a see betwene Grece and Asie.



Proportio, a proporcyon.



Propositio, a matter pourposed to be dys­
puted or reasoned. It is also that, wher­
by we shewe generallye, whereof we
wyll speake.



Propositum, a purpose.



Propr&ecedil;tor, toris, he that was in the steede
of Prætor, or Mayre.



Proprie, proprely.



Lucretius.



Propritim, idem.



Proprietarius, a, um, whervnto the propre­
tie of a thynge belongeth.



Proprietas, propretie.



Proprius, propria, prium, propre.



Propter, for. Sommetyme nyghe. Alsoo
at or in.



Propterea, therfore.



Proptosis, a dysease, where the eyen me­
uyd with inflammation, doo falle oute of
their places.



Propudium, shame, dishonestie. Alsoo the
moste abomynable vse of lecherye, in an
inconuenient fourme.



Propugnaculum, a fortresse, a strong hold.



Propugnator, toris, a defendour.



Propugno, are, to fyght farre of, to fyghte
valyauntly, to defende.



Propulsator, he that resysteth a thynge, or
dryueth any thynge away.



Propulso, are, to put of, to dryue away.



Propyleum, a porche.



Proqu&ecedil;stor, toris, he that exercyseth the
offyce of Questor in his absence.



Prora, the foreparte of a shyppe.



Prorepo, prorepsi, prorepere, to creepe
further.



Proreta, he that hath the rule of the fore­
shyppe or decke.



Prorideo, ridere, to laugh afarre of.



Proripio, pui, pere, to withdrawe or depart.
ioyned with me or se, Domum se ex curia
proripuit, He departed or withdrew hym
homewarde from the courte.



Prorito, tare, to prouoke.



Prorogatio, a prolongynge or delayenge.



Prorogo, gare, to prolonge.



Prorsus, & prorsum, vtterly, alway, in any
wyse, strayght towarde a place, surely.



Prorsi, lymyttes in boundynge of landes
directed into the easte.



Prorumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake forthe,
to sende forthe with vyolence, to leape or
go out of a place with vyolence, to brast out



Proruo, ruere, to dryue downe, or beate
downe.



Prosa, prose, that whiche is not meter.



Prosapia, a progenye, a dyscente of blode,
a petygree.



Proscenia, the place, wherein enterludes
were played by the personages.



Proscindo, pro scidi, proscindere, to cutte
out or vnder, to infame, to rebuke shame­
fullye.



Proscribo, scripsi, scribere, to sell openly, to
proclayme any thynge to be solde, to ba­
nysshe, to condemne.



Proscriptio, a condemnation, an attayndre



Proscriptus, condemned, attaynted.



Proseco, care, to cut a sonder.






Prosecta, bowelles cut in sacrifice.



Proseda, a strumpette or commune harlot.



Prosedanum, a disease, which happeneth to
Rammes at blysomynge tyme.



Proselytus, a straunger borne.



Prosemino, are, to sowe furth.



Prosequium, an affection.



Prosequor, qui, to folowe after, to pursue.
Prosequor amore, I loue. Prosequor odio,
I hate. Prosequor honore, I honoure. Pro­
sequor verbis, I chafe him with wordes.
Prosequor officijs, I shewe to hym great
kyndnesse, I do him many pleasures. Pro­
sequi præmio, to rewarde.


Proserpere, to creape or slyde furth lyke a
sepent.



Proserpina, the wyfe of Pluto. 



Proseuche, a prayer to God: alsoo a beg­
gynge.
Iuuen.
No. Mar.


Proseucha, a beggar.



Prosferari, to be optayned.



Prosicium, that whiche is cut of frome any
thinge, and cast awaye.



Prosilio, lij, lire, to leape furth.



Pli. in epis.
110.



Prosocer, ceri, the father of my wyfes fa­
ther.



Prositum, olde wrytars vsed for propositum
purposed.



Prosodia, the craft of accentinge.



Prosonomasia, the lykenesse of one worde
or name to another: as locus and lucus, ora­
tor, and arator.



Prosopopœia, where as personages are sup­
posed or fayned to speke, as one man to an
other: a man to a beaste: one beaste to an o­
ther &c.



Prospectus, ctus, a syght farre of, a pro­
specte.



Prospecte, aduysedly.



Prospecto, spectare, to beholde, proprely
farre of.



Prospere, prosperously.



Prosperiter, idem.



Prosperitas, prosperitie.



Prospica, & Prospicus, he that beholdeth a
thinge farre of.



Prospices, for prospice, beholde.



Festus.



Prospiro, are, to fetche breth or wynde.



Prosper, & prosperus, prosperi, prospero, that
which geueth felycitye. Felix, he that re­
ceyueth it.



Prospicientia, prouydence, circumspection.



Prospicio, spexi, spicere, to see farre, to fore­
see, to prouyde, to beware.



Prospicuus, circumspect.



Prostasis, preeminence.



Prosthesis, an addicion of a lettre: as gnatus,
for natus.



Prosterno, straui, sternere, to ouerthrowe, or
to vaynquysshe in batayle.



Prostibulum, a commune brothelhouse: also
a commune harlot.



Prostibula, idem.



Prostituo, tuere, to be a commune harlot.
Prostituere pudicitiam, to be commune to al
men or women in the acte of lechery.



Prosto, tare, to stande ferre of, or afore: also
to stande to be solde or hyred.



Prosubigo, gere, to dygge deepe.



Prosum, fui, desse, to be profitable.



Prosumia, a lytle barke.



Prosumirium, a place withoute the walles of
Rome, where the bysshoppes of the gen­
tyles made their diuinations, or toke their
significations of thinges to come.



Prosupero, are, to excede, or haue more
than ynoughe.



Protasis, a proposicion.



Donatus.



Protego, texi, tegere, to defende.



Protectio, a defence.



Protector, toris, a defendour.



Protentus, ta, tum, stretched oute.



Protela, lare, to differre, or tracte the tyme,
to put oute, to dryue awaye, to vexe.



Protendo, dere, to set forth, or put forth, to
stretche forthe.



Protermino, to incroche.



Protero, triui, terere, to trede downe.



Proterreo, rere, to make aferde farre of.



Proteruia, wantonnesse: it was also a sacri­
fice, wherein the maner was, that as moch
as was left vneaten, shulde be consumed
with fyre.



Proteruiam fecit, he hath consumed all that
is lefte.



Proteruio, ire, to playe the wanton.



Proterue, proudely, immoderatly, shameful­
ly. Quis est, qui tam proterue, foribus facit
iniuriam:  who is he, that so proudely rap­
peth at the doore? Ecce autem to quoque pro­
terue iracundus es, Lo and thou also arte
shamefully angry.
Plautus in
Ruden.


Proteruiter, idem.



Proteruitas, tatis, pryde, foly.



Proteus, the sonne of Oceanus, a iugglar,
whyche coulde shewe hym selfe in sondry
fourmes.



Protestor, staris, stari, to declare manyfestly
what shulde be exchued and not done.



Protestator, he that manifestly declareth
what is to be exchued and not done.



Protestatio, a protestation.



Protina, for protinus, furthwith.



Proteruus, a, um, wanton, malaperte, shame­
lesse, and (as I mought saye) knauysshe,
or lewde.



Protinus, afarre of. Also forthewith, with­
out taryenge.






Prothymia, promptitude: also gentyll enter
taynement. Proh Di immortales quot ego
voluptates fero, quot risiones, quot iocos,
quot suauia, saltationes, blanditias, prothy­
mias? O lorde god, howe many pleasures
haue I, what lawghingis, what pastymes,
what bassinges, daunsinges, daliaunces, &
swete entertaynementes?
Plautus in
Styc.


Prothyrum, a porche at the vtter doore of a
house.



Protipon opus, an image or fourme, wherof
mouldes are made, in the whiche thinges
be cast of metall or erthe.



Protogenes, of the first kynred or famyly: it
was also the name of an excellent paynter.



Protocollum, that whiche is firste made or
writen, which requireth correction.



Protogenus, the first childe.



Protogenia, the daughter of Deucalion and
Pirrha. 



Protologia, a preface.



Protollo, lere, to prolonge.



Protomartyr, the first martyr.



Protomedicus, the chief phisicion aboute a
Prince.



Protomysta, the chief preest, or deane.



Protonotarius, a protonotary, or chief scribe
or Secretary.



Protopages, & Protopagus, firste made or
wrought, or late made.



Protoplastes, & Protoplastus, first fourmed
so was Adam called.



Protos, Proton, first.



Prototocos, a woman late bringynge forth
her first childe.



Prototomus, the stalke which is first cut.



Prototypus, & prototypon, the first exemple,
or paterne.



Protraho, traxi, trahere, to differre or pro­
longe.



Protrepticus, a boke to instructe one, a do­
ctrinall.



Protrimenta, meate mynced small.



Proueho, uexi, uehere, to brynge or cary fur­
ther.



Prouectus &ecedil;tate, aged.



Prouectum ingenium, a longe proued wytte:
also to promote, aduaunce.



Prouectus ad dignitatem, promoted or ad­
uaunced to honour.



Prouectus &ecedil;tate, runne farre in yeres.



Prouectus, ta, tum, promoted.



Prouectus, aged.



Prouenio, ire, to come forth: alsoo to growe
or increase, to happen or chaunce. Nimis
prouentum est nequiter, It is vngraciously
chaunced.
Plautus in
Menech.


Prouentus, tus, reuenues, yerely profytes.



Prouerbe, diligently.



Prouerbium, a prouerbe.



Prouide, circumspectely.



Prouideo, dere, to prouyde, to foresee, to
beware.



Prouidentia, prouidence, foresight: somtyme
it is vsed for god.
Cice. &
Quint.


Prouidus, prouident, circumspect.



Prouinci&ecedil;, were countrayes, which the Ro­
mans gate farre frome Rome, where on­
ly their officers did rule. Prouincia is som­
tyme taken for the rule or autoritye of an
officer: also an office, alsoo for a countraye
or royaulme.



Prouincialis, he that dwelleth in a prouince.



Prouinciatim, frome countray to countray,
or one countraye with another.



Prouiso, prouisere, to see or beholde, to goo
to see.



Prouidens, uidentis, foreseynge, prouident.



Prouidentior, dentissimus, more prouident,
moost prouident or circumspect.



Prouocator, he that prouoketh one, or he
that appeleth, the appellant.



Prouoco, care, to call from a farre, to stere,
to inuite, to prouoke, to exhorte, also to ap­
pele to an hygher iuge.



Prouocatio, an appele to an hygher court.



Prouolo, are, to flye awaye, or beyonde, also
to runne frome aferre.



Prouoluo, uere, to rolle or tumble a greate
stone or other lyke thinge: sometyme to
lye downe prostrate.



Prout, for Sicut, as.



Proxeneta, a brokar.



Festus



Prox, of olde wrytars was taken for Proba
vox, a good voyce or noyse.



Proximo, proximare, to approche or drawe
nyghe.



Proximurium, a place withoute the walles,
ioyninge to the cytie, where bysshoppes
dyd assemble in their conuocations.



Proxime, next.



Cato.



Proximi, for proximo: die proximi, the next
daye.



Proximitas, nyghenesse, neyghbourhede.



Proximior, more nere.



Proximus, a, um, nexte.



Prouulgo, aui, are, to publysshe, or declare
openly to the people.



Prudenter, wysely.



Prudens, prudentis, wyse, prudente, kno­
wynge.



Prudentia, wysedome in desiringe and ex­
chuynge of thynges.



Prugnum, olde wrytars vsed for Pronum,
prone or apte.



Pruina, frost.



Pruna, a burnynge cole.



Prunioli, smalle mussherons.






Pruinosus, a, um, frosty.



Prunetum, an orcharde sette with damsyne
trees, or plumme trees.



Prunus, a damsyne tree or plumme tree.



Prunum, a damsyne, prune, plumme, slo, or
bullase.



Prurio, rij, rire, to yche.



Pruritus, tus, ychinge.



Prurigo, ginis, ychinge with a delectation,
as in the sterynge of lechery.



Prusias, a kynge of Bythinia, vnto whome
Hanniball fledde after that he was banys­
shed frome Carthage.



Prymnesius, a post or stake, where vnto the
cabull of a shyp is tyed.



Prymnos, a nymphe or mayden of the see,
one of the dawghters of Oceanus. 



Prytaneium, a counsayle house.



Prytaneia, a counsayle assembled of great of­
ficers and iuges.



Prytanis, the president or chief of the coun­
sayle.

 

¶ P, ANTE S.

PSallo, li, lere, to synge.



Psalmodia, a dyuerse or mixt songe.



Psalmus, a songe proprely to god, or
of God.



Psalterium, an instrument lyke to a harp, al­
so the Psalmes called the Psalter.



Psaltes, a syngynge man.



Psaltrix, tricis, & Psaltria, a syngynge wo­
man.



Psecas, adis, a drop.



Psegma, the pouldre or dust, which cometh
of the fylynge of brasse.



Psellus, the name of an olde writar, whiche
wrote of diete.



Psephisma, atis, a decree.



Psephopecta, an auditour or caster of ac­
compte.



Pseudoadelphus, a counterfayt brother.



Pseudoangelus, a false messager.



Pseudolus, a false seruaunt.



Pseudo martyr, a false wytnesse.



Pseudopropheta, a false prophete.



Pseudothyrum, a faulse posterne.



Pseudo, false or countrefait: and euery other
nowne ioyned therewith, is thereby made
false or countrefayt: as Pseudopropheta, a
false or countrefayt Prophete.



Psilotrum, an oynement to take awaye
heares.



Psimmithium, that which we do call Ceruse
or whyte ledde.



Psitta, a fysshe, whyche we call a playce.



Psittacus, a popyniay.



Psycolutres, he that delyteth to bathe in
colde water.



Psycomantium, a place where Nigroman­
cers do call vp spirites.



Psora, scabbydnesse.



Psylli, people in Libia, whose bodyes are
venyme to serpentes: and they also do cure
the styngynge and poysonynge of serpen­
tes by soukynge the place, whyche is ve­
nymed.

 

¶ P, ANTE T.

PTe, a syllable ioyned oftentymes to
the ablatyue case, as meapte, tuapte,
suapte, myne owne, thyne owne, his
owne.



Pteris, ferne.



Pteromata, greate arches ouer the roofes
made lyke wynges.



Pterigium, a lytle skynne, whyche groweth
frome the corner of the eye, and keuereth
the syght: it is alsoo a grief vnder the fore
part of the nayle, whan the flesh goeth from 
the nayle with payne.



Ptetna, the lower part of a sayle.



Ptisana, the water wherin barly is soden, al­
so barly husked, or excorticat, also frumenty
made of barly.



Ptyas, adis, an adder hauynge the coloure
greene, drawynge towarde the colour of 
golde.
Pli.28.


Ptynge, a rauenouse byrde, whyche taketh
his praye by nyghte: and sometyme fygh­
teth with the Egle so valiantly, that in crab­
bynge togither, they fall both doune to the
grounde, and are taken by Shepehardes.



Ptysis, is spettyll: it is alsoo an exulceration
or soore in the lunges, with a consump­
cyon of all the bodye, and spettynge of
bloode.



Ptisanarium, a morter, wherein barley is
brayed.



Ptochotrophia, an hospitall for beggars, a
spyttell house.



Ptolomeus, the name of kynges of Egypte.



Ptosis, ruyne, also the case of a nowne.



Ptolemais, maidis, the name of a citie.

 

¶ P, ANTE V.

PVbens, he that is betwene a yonge
man and a boye, of the age of .xiiii.
yeres.



Puberesco, scere, to growe as a childe doeth
towarde mannes state.



Pubeo, es, & Pubesco, ere, to begyn to haue
a bearde benethe: sometyme to sprynge, as
herbes done.



Puber, beris, & Pubes, beris, a yonge mosy




bearde, whyche spryngeth in the nether
partes of a man at .xiiii. yeres of age: of a
woman at yonger yeres, wherfore a man
or woman at those yeres is called Pubes:
sometyme youth, or a multitude of yonge
men: also the priuy partes of the body: also
beynge an adiectif, it signifieth yonge or
tender.



Pubertas, the yonge age of men and women,
whan they begynne to be apte vnto gene­
racion: it is also the first commynge forthe
of heares aboute the pryuey membres.



Publicani, were they whyche toke in ferme
of the people of Rome the rentes and re­
uenues due to the cytie at a rent certayne.



Publica sacra, sacrifice done for the people.
Publica fides, a saulfe condute, a generall
lycence.



Publicanus, a fermour.



Publice, & Publicitus, openly in the face of
the worlde. Sumptus publice dati, his ex­
penses borne of the citie or towne.



Publicola, a fauorar of the people: the shi­
che name was gyuen to Valerius, whiche
was one of the first consules of Rome.



Publico, care, to publysshe, to manifeste, to
make openly knowen.



Publicum consilium, the commune coun­
sayle.



Publicus, ca, cum, commune, but more pro­
prely, publike, that is to saye, pertaynynge
to euery state of the people ioyntly and se­
uerally: See the true definicion therof in
my booke called the Gouernour.



Publipor, poris, Publius boye, or seruaunt.



Publius, the name of a Romane.



Pucinum vinum, wyne growynge nyghe to
the gulfe of Venice.



Pudefio, fis, fieri, to be asshamed.



Pudenda, the pryuy membres.



Pudens, tis, shamefast.



Pudenter, with shamefastnesse, basshefully.



Pudeo, dui, dere, to be asshamed.



Pudet, pudebat, puduit, puditum est, to be as­
shamed.



Pudibunde, shamefastly.



Pudibundus, da, dum, shamefast.



Pudice chastly, honestly.



Salustius
in Cat.



Pudicitia, chastytye, clennesse of lyuynge.



Pudicitiam habere, to be violated in the acte of
lechery.



Cicer. pro
Flac.



Puditum, asshamed. Nonne esset puditum, si
hanc causam agerent seuere? had it not bene
a shame, yf that they had pursyud that ma­
ter rigorously?



Pudicus, ca, cum, chaste.



Pudor, doris, a moderacion that letteth the
mynde, that it do not any thinge wantonly,
or dishonestly, shamefastnesse, to saye or do
any thinge dishonest.



Puella, a wenche, in Cambrige shyre they cal
her a modder.



Puellaris, re, childisshe.



Puellascere, to waxe yonge agayne, to be
maydenly.



Puellus, a lytle childe, a babe.



Puer, a chylde, a boye: also a seruaunt.



Puerilis, puerile, of a chylde, chyldysshe, or
boyisshe.



Puerilitas, a chyldes acte, chyldysshenesse,
boyishenesse.



Pueritia, chyldehode.



Puerpera, a woman that lyeth in of chylde.



Puerperium, the tyme of a womanne to tra­
uayle of chylde, sometyme the chylde, also
the byrth.



Pugil, a champyon.



Pugillaris, & Pugillare, pluraliter Pugillares,
a payre of tables to wryte in.



Pugillatorius follis, a ball fylled onely with
wynde, which is stryken with a mans fiste,
and not with the palme.



Pugiunculus, a short daggar.



Pugillatus, wrastlynge with colars.



Pugillus, a handfull in gatheringe of herbes
or other lyke thynge.



Pugio, onis, a daggar.



Pugna, batayle, the acte of lechery: also an
assault, a disceyte.



Pugnaciter, valyauntly in batayle.



Pugnator toris, a fightar.



Pugnax, nacis, a great fightar.



Pugnatior, & Pugnacissimus, more or moost
fightinge.



Pugnicula, a skyrmysshe.



Pugnitariola, idem.



Festus.



Pugnitus, in batayle.



No Mar.



Pugno, are, to fyght.



Pugnus, a fyst.



Vide comp.



Pulcher, chra, chrum, fayre, stronge, good,
talle.



Pulcherrime, moost beautyfully.



Pulcherrimus, a, um, fayrest.



Pulchralis, le, fayre.



Ennius



Pulchre, an aduerbe, signifyeth fayre, beau­
tyfully, well fauoredly: somtyme valiaunt­
ly, also wysely: sometyme it is put for val­
de. Ac dum accubabam, quam videbar mihi
esse pulchre sobrius, And whan I layde me
downe, I thoughte my selfe to be very
sobre.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Pulchellus, a fayre lytle one.



Pulchellus puer, a fayre lytle boye.



Ci. ad At.1



Pulchrior, oris, & Pulchrius, fayrer.



Pulchritas, beautye.



Pulchresco, scere, to be fayre.



Pulchritudo, dinis, beaultye, talnesse of per­
sonage.






Pulegium, an herbe callyd Peny royall.



Pulex, licis, a flee.



Pulicinus, a, um, of a flee.



Pulicosus, a, um, full of flees.



Pullarius, the keper of chykens.



Pullarus, a wesyll or Stote, whiche kylleth
chyckens.



Pullaster, a yonge chycken.



Pullatio, hatchynge of chyckens.



Pullatus, a mourner. Somtyme a manne in
poore apparayle, somtyme rude, vnlernid.



Pullesco, scere, to sprynge or burgen.



Pullicenus, a newe hatched chycken.



Pullicies, a bryngynge forthe or hatchynge
of chyckens. also the folynge of coltes.



Pulligo, ginis, blackenesse.



Pullinus, na, num, of a colte. Pullini dentes,
coltes tethe, whiche be fyrste caste.



Pullulatio, a spryngynge forthe of a thinge
in growynge.



Pullulasco, scere, to bourgen.



Pullulo, lare, to sprynge, to come vp yonge.



Pullus, yonge, tender, in all kynde lyuinge.
also a colte or fole, also a chycken.



Pullus, a, um, russette, sometyme blacke, but
rather puke color, betwene russet & black.



Pulmentarium, potage made with fleshe or
fyshe, as forced gruell, or coleyse.



Pulmentum, gruelle.



Pulmo, the lunges or lyghtes.



Pulmonarius, he that is disesid in the lunges.



Pulmonaria, an herbe callyd Lungworte.



Pulmonia, be certayne apples, whyche be
called in some place a hundred shyllingis.



Pulpa, a lyttell synewe lyke to a vayne.



Pulpamentum, a delycate dyshe or meate.



Pulpitum, a hault pace or pulpyte.



Puls, a meate made of meale, water, hony,
cheese, and egges. It maye be taken for
potage.



Pulsatiles uen&ecedil;, the poulses of a manne or
womanne.



Pulsatus, ta, tum, striken as a harpe or other
instrument is, whyche hath strynges.



Pulsim, as a thynge were stryken.



Pulso, are, to beate, to stryke, to hurte, to
play on a harpe, or other lyke instrument,
Pulsare hostium, to knocke at the doore.



Pulsus, the wreste of the arme, wherto the
hand is ioyned: but it is more proprely the
poulse or stroke that the arteries or bea­
tyng vaines do make, wherby the strength
or debilitie of the syckenes is knowen in
touchynge them.



Pultarius, a potage dyshe.



Pulto, tare, to beate at a doore.



Pulticula, a lyttell potage.



Pultiphagi, & pultiphagonides, greatte ea­
ters of potage.



Puluero, rare, to lay with doust, to be dusty.



Pulueresco, scere, to be tourned in to poul­
der or duste.



Puluerius, a, um, of poulder or duste.



Puluerulentus, ta, tum, full of duste.



Pulueratio, a layenge of fyne erthe aboute
vynes.
Seruius.


Puluinar, a bolstar of a bedde. also a bedde
whyche was wont to be made in temples,
as it were for the goddis. It is taken som­
tyme for a temple. also a tabernacle, wher­
in an ymage standeth.



Puluinatus, ta, tum, softe as a pyllowe.



Puluinus, a pyllowe, somtyme a fetherbed,
also a cusshyn, also a bedde of herbes in a
gardeyne, also grauelle, also an engyne,
wherewith shyppes are broughte into
the docke.



Puluis, ueris, powlder, duste.



Puluisculus, fyne pouder or duste.



Pumex, micis, a pomeyse to make parche­
mente smoothe, also to take cleane oute
spottes or letters.



Pumico, care, to pomeyse.



Pumicosus, a, um, lyke a pomeyse.



Pumigatio, pomeysynge or polyshynge.



Pumigatus, ta, tum, pomaysed, or polysshed.



Pumilis, lyttell in stature.



Pumilio, onis, & pumillus, a dwarfe, or any
thynge lyttell in stature.



Punctim, foynynge.



Punctus, seu punctum, a poynte or tytle.



Punctus temporis, a moment, the leest part
of tyme.



Pungo, pupugi, pungere, to prycke.



Punicus, a, um, of Affrica.



Vide comp.



Punicus, aut puniceus color, redde.



Punicum malum, a pomegranate.



Punio, iui, ire, to punyshe.



Punitio, punyshement.



Pupa, a yonge wenche, a gyrle, a modder.
it is also a poppette, lyke a gyrle.



Pupilla, the balle or apple of the eye.



Pupillaris ætas, the noneage of hym that is
in warde.



Pupillus, he that is in warde, or within age
not able in yeres to occupye his propre
lande. Also he that hath no father alyue.



Puppes, & puppis, the foreparte or decke of
the shyppe.



Pupus, a yonge chylde, a baby. also a pop­
pette or ymage lyke a chylde.



Pupugi, the pretertence of pungo, I haue
pricked or pounched.



Pure, purely. Puriter, idem.



Purgamen, seu purgamentum, fylthe, why­
che cometh of any thyng that is clensed.



Purgatio, a purgation or purgyng.



Purgo, gare, to make cleane, to purge. also




to excuse.



Vide comp.



Purifico, to puryfye, or make pure.



Purificatio, a purifyenge.



Purime, old wrytars vsed for purissime, most
purely.



Puritas, tatis, purenes, cleannesse.



Puro, rare, to make pure.



Purpura, a Purple, whiche is a shell fysshe,
wherof purple colour commeth. somtime
it signifieth a garment of purple.



Purpurarius, a, um, pertaynynge to purple
colour.



Purpurasco, scere, to be of a purple colour.



Purpurissum, idem quod purpurissa.



Purpureus, a, um, of purple colour.



Purpuratus, apparayled in purple.



Purpurati, be the noble men of a Royalme,
callyd peeres.



Purpurissa, redde payntynge, wherewith
harlottes doo paynt their vysages.



Purpurisso, are, to paynte the visage ruddy.



Purulentus, lenta, lentum, full of matter, or
corruption.



Purus, ra, rum, cleane, pure, fyne.



Pus, puris, matter, whyche commeth oute
of a soore.



Pusillanimis, faynt harted, feble couraged.



Pusillanimitas, faynt courage, cowardyse.



Pusillanimiter, cowardly.



Pusillus, a, um, lyttell.



Pusio, a boye.



Pustula, a pusshe or lyttell wheale.



Pusul&ecedil;, blystars, which do ryse on bred whan
it is baken.



Pusum & Pusam, olde wrytars vsed for Pu­
erum & Puellam, a boye and a gyrle.



Pustulatum argentum, roughe syluer whan
it is newe molten.



Putamen, minis, the shale of a nutte, or pa­
rynge of an apple or peare.



Puteal, the seate of a great offycer, also the
couerynge of a welle.



Putealis, & puteanus, a, um, of a welle.



Puteanus, a, um, of a pytte or well.



Puteana aqua, well water.



Putearius, he that diggeth a pytte or well.



Puteo, tui, têre, to stynke.



Puteoli, a cytie in Campania.



Puteus, a welle.



Plautus.



Puticuli, places where the commune people
was buryed.



Putidus, da, dum, stynkynge, vnsauery, vn­
pleasaunt.



Putilatum aurum, pure or fyne golde.



Putisco, scere, to stynke.



Putitius, a foole.



Vide comp.



Puto, taui, tare, to cutte of or plucke awaye,
that, which is superfluous, proprely from
trees. Also to suppose, to consyder, to dis­
cusse, to gather, or conferre, to esteme, to
iuge. Putare rationem, to make accompt.



Putor, toris, stenche.



Putrefacio, to make a stynke.



Putreo, triui, trere, to waxe leane, to be re­
solued into stynkynge matter.



Putresco, scere, to putrifye.



Vide comp.



Putris, tre, corrupte, rotten.



Putridus, da, dum, idem.



Putredo, dinis, corruption.



Putulentum, stynkynge.



Putus, ta, tum, pure, tryed, fyne.



Purum putum, fyned.

 

¶ P, ANTE Y.

PYcnostylon, a house or place buylded,
where pylars stande thicke togither.



Pycta & Pyctes, a wrastler with a coler



Pyctatium, a table, wherein the names of
Iuges were wryten.



Pygargus, a beaste lyke to a falowe deere: it
is also a byrde lyke to a hawke, hauynge a
whyte tayle, I suppose hym to be that,
which we call a ryngetayle.



Pygmachia, wrastlynge with colars.



Pygmachus, a wrastler.



Pygmæi, people betweene Inde and Ca­
thay, which are but one cubyte longe.



Pympleides, the musis.



Pyr, fyre.



Pyra, a bonfyre, wherin deed bodyes were
burned.



Pyralis, a fly, which commeth of the fyre,&
as longe as he is therin, he lyueth: & whan
he is farre frome it, he dyeth incontinent.



Pyragmon, one of the names of Vulcanus. 



Pyrama, a certayne rosen.



Pyramus, a yonge man, whyche slewe hym
self for the loue of a mayden called Thisbe:
it is also a ryuer in Cilicia.



Pyramis, midis, a great thynge of stone or
other matter, whiche is brode beneth, and
vpwarde is smalle and sharpe on the top.



Pyratium, a kynde of Sydar, callyd Pery.



Pyrausta, a worme lyuynge in the fyre, It
is also a kynde of spyders, whiche hur­
teth hony combes.



Pyrenei montes, Mountaynes, whiche do
dyuyde Fraunce from Spayne.



Pyretrum, & pyretra, an herbe callid Pelitory.



Pyretus, a burnynge feuer.



Pyræus, an haue at Athenes.



Pyrgobaris, a howse buylded lyke a towar.



Pyrgoteles, was a cunnyng grauer in stones.



Pyrgus, in latyne a towar: also a boxe, oute
of the which men do cast dyse, whan they
playe: it is also a certayn company of hors­
men in batayle.







Pyrgus, a boxe, oute of the whyche dyse
are throwen.



Pyriasis, a certayne playster to asswage the
burnynge of a feuer.



Pyrim, a lytell kernell.



Pyrites, euery stone, out of the whych fire
may be striken.



Pyrobola, a smythes hammer, wherewith
he beateth on hotte yron.



Pyroboli, arowes or dartes, whiche sende
forthe fyre, whanne they be shotte or
caste, and do burne the thynge that they
doo touche.



Pyrobolarij, they whyche doo shoote su­
che dartes.



Pyrocorax, a crowe with a redde bylle. I
suppose it to be of the kynd, wherof cor­
nyshe chowghes are.



Pyrodes, he that fyrste strake fyre out of a
flynte. also a stone of fyry colour.



Pyromantia, a dyuynation by fyre.



Pyrrhicha, & pyrrhiches, a fourme of dan­
synge, with moche mouynge of the bo­
dye and gesture, lyke to them whiche do
fyght in battayle.



Pyrrhicarij, they that daunce in the fourme
of daunsynge, called Pyrrhica. 



Pyrrhichius, a foote in meter of two shorte
syllables.



Pyrrhus, in latyne Flauius, siue Rufus, he 
that hath a ruddy or fyrye vysage, by the
whyche name the sonne of Achilles was
calledde, and a kynge of Epyre was soo
callyd, whyche dydde make warre to the
Romaynes.



Pyrum, a peare.



Pyrus, a peare tree.



Pythagoras, an excellente Phylosopher,
whose Phylosophye was in mystycalle
sentences, and alsoo in the Scyence of
noumbers.



Pythagoricus, he that was of the secte of
Pythagoras. Pythagorista, idem.



Pythius, one of the names of Apollo. 



Pythia, thiorum, playes made in the honor
of Apollo. 



Python, a Dragon, whyche was slayne by
Apollo. 



Pythopolis, a cytie in Asye, in that parte,
whyche is callyd Mysia.



Pytisma, matis, a spyrtynge oute of smalle
spyttelle.



Pyxacantha, & Pyxacanthos, a Berbe­
rye tree.



Pyxis, idis, a boxe.



Pyxidicula, a lyttell boxe, proprely wherin
medycines are putte.



Pyxidatus, pyxidata, pyxidatum, made
lyke a boxe.


 




Q##sp##V##sp##A, whyche way, by
what place.



Quadantenus, vnto what
parte.



Quadi, people of Bo­
eme, or Boemia, whi­
ch dyd eate the fleshe
of horses and wolfes.



Quadra, a trencher, wheron meate is cut:
sometyme a lofe of breadde cutte square.



Quadragenarius, naria, narium, of fourtye
yeres olde.



Quadragenus, a, um, fourtye. Quadragena
scuta, forty crownes.



Quadragesima, Lente.



Quadragesimus, a, um, the fourtyth.



Quadragies, fortye tymes.



Quadraginta, fortye.



Quadrangulum, a fygure, hauynge fowre
corners.



Quadrangulus, a, um, foure cornerde.



Quadrans, tis, a certayne coyne, whyche
we may call a ferthynge: all be it propre­
ly it is the quarterne of a pounde weight.
Also it is the somme in accompte where
the receyte and the expenses do accorde.



Quadrantal, a fygure square lyke to a dyse.
Also a certayn mesure, contaynyng .xlviii.
measures, callyd Sextarii.



Quadrantaria, a harlotte that wyll compa­
ny with a man for a ferthynge.



Quadrata statura, a meane or competente
stature.



Quadratura, a square.



Quadratus, ta, tum, foure square.



Quadricornium, hauynge foure hornes.



Quadriduanus, a, um, of foure dayes con­
tynuaunce.



Quadriennis, foure yeres olde.



Quadriformiter, in a square.



Quadrigati, certayne coyne, hauynge in
them the prynte of a charyotte.



Quadrilinguis, he that speaketh fowre son­
drye languages.



Quadrinatus, a chyld of foure yeres old.



Quadrilibris, bre, that whyche dothe waye
foure poundes.



Quadringentenus, a, um, the four hundreth.



Quadringentesimus, idem.



Quadringenties, foure hundred tymes.



Quadringentuplus, a, um, foure hundred ti­
mes so moche.



Quadripartito, in foure partes.



Quadriduum, foure dayes.



Quadriennium, foure yeres.



Quadrifariam, on foure partes.



Quadrifidus, da, dum, that whyche may be
slytte in foure partes.



Quadriformis, me, that is of foure dyuers




fourmes or facyons.



Quadriga, a carte drawen with foure hor­
ses. somtyme a carte horse.



Quadrigarius, a carter.



Quadriiugi, foure beastes yoked togyther.



Quadrilaterus, ra, rum, with foure sydes.



Quadrimembris, of foure partes.



Quadrimus, & quadrimulus, a child of four
yere olde.



Quadringenta, & quadringenti, foure
hundred.



Quadrinoctium, foure nyghtes.



Quadripartitor, tiri, to diuyde in foure.



Quadriremis, a shyppe with foure rewes
of oores, or with foure toppes.



Quadrisyllabum, of foure syllables.



Quadriuium, where as foure wayes doo
meete.



Quadro, are, to brynge in square, to con­
sente or agree.



Quadrum, a fygure foure square.



Quadrupedantia, & quadrupedia, foure fo­
ted beastes.



Quadrupedo, dare, to go on foure fete.



Quadrupliciter, foure maner of wayes.



Quadruplico, care, to couble foure tymes,
or to make a thynge foure tymes as mo­
che as it was.



Quadrurbs, a cytie, vnto the whyche doo
come, or are broughte all the people, be­
inge lefte in foure cities, by the whyche
name the citie of Athenes was callyd of
Actius the poete.
Festus


Quadrus, a, um, square.



Quadrupes, quadrupedis, a beaste hauynge
foure feete.



Quadruplatores, were they, which for ac­
cusynge of other, hadde the fourth parte
of the goodes of theym, that were con­
dempned.



Quadruplex, fowre double.



Quadruplo, & quadruplor, arei to appeache
a man for to haue parte of his goodes.



Quadruplum, foure tymes as moche.



Plautus in
capt.



Quæ, the whyche woman or other female
kynde.



Ci. in Ver.



Quæ malum, what a myschiefe.



Ti. Liuius



Quæcunque, all that, what soo euer.



Quærceus, a, um, of oke.



Quercicus, ca, cum, idem.



Quercus, cus, an oke.



Quercerus, ra, rum, colde, with a shakynge,
as in a feuer.



Quæritabundus, studyous or dilygente in
seekynge.



Quærere liberos, to gette chylderne.



Quærneus, & quernus, querna, num, of an
oke.



Vide com.



Quæro, qu&ecedil;siui, qu&ecedil;rere, to demaunde, to
aske, to get, to serche, to examyne.



Quærquetum, & quercetum, a groue of okes.



Quærito, ritare, to seeke, serche, or inquyre
dylygently.



Quæsitor, a iustyce or commyssyoner to in­
quire of crymes, defaultes, or abuses a­
gaynste the lawe.
As. pedian.


Quæsitio, an inquirie, an exaination, a serch.



Quæso, siui, sere, to beseche.



Quæsticulus, a lyttell gayne.



Quæstio, a questyon.



Questiuncula, a smalle or lyght question.



Quæstionarius, an examynour.



Quæstor, toris, the treasourer of the com­
mune Treasourye, a Treasourer of the
warres, a Lyeuetenaunt to the chyef ca­
pytayne in warres. Alsoo a Iustyce
by Commyssyon of Oyer and Deter­
myner.



Quæstores Parricidij, Iustyces to inquere,
of treason, or murder. We maye calle the
coroners by that name.



Quæstores urbani, were as the chaumber­
laynes of London be nowe.



Quæstores ærarij, Offycers of the Re­
ceypte, as the Chaumberers and tellers
be nowe.



Quæstorius, quæstoria, storium, pertaynyng
to the receypte.



Quæstorium, was suche a place as the es­
chequer is.



Quæstor ærarij, a generall receyuour: but
it seemethe to be suche an offycer, as the
eschetour is nowe in Englande.



Quæstorius, torij, he that hadde bene in the
offyce of Questor. 



Quæstorius, a, um, that pertayneth to the
offyce of Qu&ecedil;stor. Vir quæstorius, a man,
whiche hath ben in that offyce.



Quæstuariæ artes, craftes, wherby men do
gayne money.



Quæstuosus, a, um, of moche gayne, study­
ous of greatte lucre.



Quæstura, the offyce of Quæstor. 



Quæstus, tus, gayne, wynnynge.



Qualibet, where it lyketh the.



Qualisqualis, what so euer.



Qualiscunque, suche as it was.



Qualiter, in the facyon or fourme.



Qualis, le, what, of what qualitie.



Qualitates, qualytyes, as fowle, fayre,
wyse, foolysshe, stronge, weake, dyly­
gente, slowe.&c.



Quallus, a baskette, oute of the whyche
wyne runneth, whan it is pressed: Alsoo
a baskette or hamper, in the whyche wo­
menne doo putte their spyndelles, their
bottomes of threede, and suche lyke
thynges.






Quam, thanne, Sommetyme after that.
Sommetyme byfore that. Pridie quam
occideretur, The day before that he was
slayne. Quam bene, howe well ? Quam
fortiter, howe valyauntly. Also it is of­
ten ioyned with the superlatiue degree,
to make it more vehemente: as, Quam­
paucissimi, As few as may be. Quam do­
ctissimus, excellentely lerned. Somtyme
it importeth as moche as veraye. Cum
quo quam familiarissime uixerat, With
whom he lyued very familyarly. Alsoo
it sygnfyeth as. Duplo accepti quam per­
diderat, He receyued dowble as moche
as he loste.



Quamlibet, quantumuis, quantumlibet, what
soo euer.



Quammox, as soone, sodaynely.



Quamobrem? wherfore? for what cause?
what to doo?



Quam pene, almooste, hit lackydde but a
lyttelle.



Quamplures, howe manye, verye manye,
a greatte sorte.



Quamplurimus, quamplurima, quamplurimum,
very moche.



Quampridem, longe before.



Quamprimum, very shortely or soone.



Quamuis, & quanquam, althoughe. some­
tyme for Quantumuis.



Quandiu, as longe, durynge the tyme.



Quando, whan. also sens that.



Plautus in
Amphi.



Quandogentium, whan.



Quandudum, howe late sens, howe longe
agoo ?



Quanquam, all be it, all though.



Quandoque, sometyme.



Quandoquidem, for as moche as.



Quanti, for howe moche, of what pryce or
valewe.



Quantillus, & quantulus, a, um, howe lyttell
or smalle.



Quantillum, howe lyttell.



Quantitas, quantitie.



Quanto, howe moche.



Quantisper, howe longe.



Quantus, quanta, quantum, howe moche,
whyche is referred to noumbre, weight,
and measure.



Quantum, howe moche, as to, as concer­
nynge. Quantum intelligo, as farre as I
vnderstande. Quantum suspicor, as farre
as I suppose. Also, accordynge as. Id de
imperatore Romano, quantum euentus po­
stea pr&ecedil;dictum patuit Iudæi ad se trahentes,
rebellarunt, The Iewes gatherynge that
of the Emperoure, accordynge as the
thynge, whyche was afore shewed of that
whyche shoulde happen, appered after­
warde, made rebellyon.



Quantum potes, in al spede that thou mayste.



Quantuscunque, howe moche, or howe ma­
ny soo euer it be.



Quantuslibet, idem.



Quantusquantus, idem.



Quanuis, all be it, all though.



Quanuis, for ualde.



Quapropter, wherfore.



Quaquauersus, & quaquauersum, on eue­
rye syde.



Quaqua, on euery syde.



Quare, wherfore.



Plautus in
Epid.



Quarto, & quartum, the fowrthe tyme.
All be hit proprelye Quarto sygnifyethe
the fourthe in order, as Quarto Consul,
he that hadde three in the offyce afore
hym. Quartum Consul, he that hath ben
the fourthe tyme Consul.



Quartana, a feuer quartayne.



Quartanarius, he that hathe a quartayne
Feeuer.



Quartarius, a Mulettour or keper of mu­
les, whiche taketh but the fourthe parte
of the wages or gayne.



Quartusdecimus, the fouretenthe.



Quartus, ta, tum, the fourthe.



Quasi, Lyke as. Amas me quasi filium,
Thou louest me, as yf I were thy sonne.
Alsoo, as who saythe, as thowghe. Tu
obiicis, quod uxorem repudiauerim, qua­
si tu idem non feceris, Thou imbraydest
me, that I haue forsaken my wife, as who
saythe, thou haste not doone soo to.



Quasillum, a lyttell hamper.



Quassabundus, he that shaketh or moueth
his heade.



Plautus.



Quasso, are, to shake moche or often, alsoo
to breake.



Quassus, & quassatus, quassata, satum, sha­
ken, braste.



Quatefacio, cere, to make or cause to shake
or moue.



Quatenus, howe moche, to the intent. also
for as moche, also howe.



Quater, foure tymes.



Quaterdecies, fouretene tymes.



Quatergemini, foure chylderne atte oone
bourdeyne.



Quaternarius numerus, the numbre of foure.



Quaternio, quaternionis, a quayre as in a
booke, a leafe beynge folded into fowre
partes.



Quaterni, foure.



Quaternus, a, um, the fourthe.



Quaternum denum, the foure tenthe.



Quatinus, a coniunction, whyche sygnify­
eth for, for as moche.



Quatio, quassi, quatere, to shaake a thynge. 




also to vexe, to caste out.
Vide com.


Quatriduum, fowre dayes, the spaace of
foure dayes.



Quatuor, foure.



Quartus, ta, tum, the fourthe.



Quadruplus, quadrupla, quadruplum, foure
dowble.



Quæ, for &, sygnyfyeth and. Also that is
to saye.



Quearah, a measure of the Iewes, contai­
nyng two ounces and. ii. drammes.



Quentia, olde wryters vsyd for potentia,
puissaunce, power.



Queis, for quibus.



Queiscum, for cum quibus, with whome.



Quemadmodum, lyke as.



Queo quis, quiui, quire, I maye.



Quercus, cus, vel ci, an oke.



Querceus, a, um, of an oke.



Suetonius
in caligula
Gelli. ult.



Quercicus, ca, cum, idem quod quernus.



Quercerus, ra, rum, quyuerynge or shakyng
for colde. somtyme it was taken for great
and greuous, as Festus sayth.



Quercetum, a groue of okes.



Querela, & querimonia, a complaynt.



Queribundus, a, um, lamentable.



Quærimoniarius, a complaynant.



Quernus, na, num, of an oke.



Querna folia, oken leaues.



Vide com.



Qu&ecedil;ror, quæstus sum, quæri, to lamente or
complayne.



Querquedula, a waterfowle callyd a teale.



Qu&ecedil;rulus, la, lum, that which complaineth,
or is full of complayntes. It is put some­
tyme of the Poetes for shrylle or lowde
in syngynge. Cicad&ecedil; querul&ecedil;, grassehop­
pers, whyche doo synge lowde, or with
a shrylle voyce.
Vergilius in
georgic.


Qu&ecedil;sitah, amonge the Iewes dydde syg­
nifye a coyne, sometyme a lambe, somme­
tyme a sheepe.



Quæstus, quæstus, a complaynte, a lamen­
tation.

¶ 

QVI, the whyche. Alsoo sometyme it
sygnifyeth howe. Efficite, qui detur tibi,
Doo what ye canne, howe or by whatte
meanes thou mayste haue hyr. Qui uo­
câre, Howe arte thou callyd? Alsoo yt
sygnyfyeth why. Dauo istuc dedam ne­
goti. S. Non potest. P. Qui? S. Quia ha­
bet aliud magis ex sese. I wyll commytte
this mattier to Dauy. S. That may not
be. P. Why? S. For he hath an nother
greatter mattier to doo for hym selfe.
Alsoo it sygnyfyeth frome whense. Qui
istæc tibi incidit suspectio? From whens
is this suspycion happened vnto the?
Also it sygnyfyeth Wolde to God. Qui
illum Di omnes perdiunt, I pray god that
a vengeaunce lyghte on hym. Alsoo yt
sygnyfyethe bycause. Nam in prologis
scribundis operam abutitur, non qui ar­
gumentum narret, sed qui maleuoli uæ­
teris Poetæ maledictis respondeat, For
he spendethe his laboure in wrytynge
of Prologues, not bycause he wyll telle
the argumente, but for as moche as he
wolde make aunswere to the yuell re­
portes of the olde enuyouse Poete.
Alsoo it sygnyfyeth Wherefore. Qui e­
nim beatior Epicurus, quod in patria ui­
uebat, quam Metrodorus, quod Athe­
nis? 
wherfore was
Epicurus more happy that he lyued in his
owne countray, than Metrodorus whi­
che lyued at Athenes.
Plautus in
Amph.Ter. in An.Ter. in An.Terent. in
Phorm.Terent. in
prolo. An.Cice. Tus.


Quia, for. Alsoo hit sygnyfyeth that. Sed
tamen recordatione nostræ amicitiæ sic
fruor, ut bear&ecedil; uixisse uidear, quia cum Sci­
pione uixerim, All be it I take this plea­
sure in remembrynge oure frendeshyp,
that I maye seeme to haue lyued moste
fortunatelye, that I lyued in Scypy­
ones companye. Alsoo it sygnyfyeth for
as moch. Sed quia multis & magnis tem­
pestatibus vos cognoui fortes, fidosque
mihi, eo animus ausus est maximum at­
que pulcherrimum facinus incipere, But
for as moch as in many great stormes or
daungiers I haue proued you to be va­
lyaunt, and faythefull vnto me, therfore
my hart is bolde to begynne an excellent
and commendable enterprise.
Ci. de ami.Salustius
in Catil.


Quia nam, wherfore.



Quia ne, in dede.



Quias, quiatis, for cuius, cuiatis.



Quias, a, um, for cuius, a, um.



Quibus in extremis, for quorum in extremo.
Liter&ecedil; dantur mihi a te, quibus in extremis
scriptum est? I receyued letters frome
you, in the laste ende of the whyche hit
is wrytten.



Quicquid est, all that is, what so euer it be,
what so euer.



Quicquid pauxillum, neuer so lyttell.



Plautus in
truculen.



Qui cum, for cum quo. Qui cum loqui­
tur filius? With whome dothe my sonne
talke?



Quicunque, who soo euer.



Quicquam, any thynge.



Quid, What. Quid causæ est? What is the
cause? Quid ætatis? Howe olde? of what
aege? Quid animi? What mynde? Quid
animi est? What mynde is he of? Quid ca­
ptiuorum ? Howe manye prysoners?
Tum Captiuorum quid ducunt secum?
Thanne howe many prysoners doo they
bryng with them? Quid id sit hominis, cui




Lyco nomen siet? What man is he, whose
name maye be Lyco? Quid mulieris uxo­
rem habes, What maner of woman haste
thou to thy wyfe? Quid rei est? What is
the mattier, Ibo intro ut quid huius sit rei
sciam: I wyll goo in, that I may knowe
what the mattier is. Quid rei est tibi cum
illa, What haste thou to doo with hyr?
Quid sententi&ecedil;? What is his or thyn opi­
nyon? Quid istuc uerbi est? what meanest
thou therby ? Also Quid is taken for Ali­
quid, somewhat. Also ob quid for what,
or wherfore. Quid? senem quoad expe­
ctas uestrum. But nowe? howlonge wyll
ye tary for your maister? Note here that
after the dayly forme of speakynge, quid
is rehersed, whan we passe from one mat­
ter to an other. Quid mecum est tibi? what
haue I to do with the? Quid faceret aliud?
what shoulde he doo els? Quid eo, what
to doo? Propere curre ad Pamphilum. P.
Quid eo? D. Dic me orare ut ueniat. Runne
quyckely to Pamphilus. P. what to do?
D. Say that I prayed hym to come. Quid
uerbis opus est? what nede manye wor­
des? Quid multa uerba, idem. Quid mul­
tis moror? what shall I longe tarie? Quid
mea refert, what care I? Also quid signi­
fyeth wherin. Quid enim indigens Affri­
canus mei? wherin had Scipio any nede
of me? Quid istic? Si certum est facere, fa­
cias: uerum ne post conferas culpam in me,
What woldeste thou I shoulde doo? If
thou be determyned to doo it, goo to on
goddis name: but afterward put not the
fault in me.
Plautus in
mercatorePlautus in
Epidico.Plautus in
pænulo.Terent. in
Heau.Terent. in
Eunucho.Terent. in
Phorm.Plautus in
Pseudolo.Terent. in
phormi.Donatus.Plautus.Cicero de
amicitia.Terent. in
Eunucho.


Terent. in
phorm.



Quidnam, what is hit, or wherfore is it?
Quidnam ille commotus uenit? What is
it that he commeth soo chaused? Also it
sygnifieth what. Reuiso quidnam Ch&ecedil;rea
hic rerum gerat, I come to se what Che­
rea doth here.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Terent. in
Heaut.



Quid ni, Why not? Quo ore appellabo pa­
trem tenes, quid dicam? S. quidni, With
what countenaunce shall I speake to my
father? Wotest thou what I wyll say? S.
Wherfore shuldest thou not do so? Also it
signifyeth ye. Archimedem nosti? P. quid
ni? Knowest thou Archimedes? P. ye
mary doo I.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Quidam, one, any man. in the plurell num­
bre it sygnifieth some.



Quid agimus, What shall we do?



Quidem, an aduerbe, affyrmyng that, whi­
che ys spoken. Sommetyme yt sygny­
fyeth verylye. Sommetyme it hathe no
sygnyfycacyon, but ys oonely a dystin­
ction of thynges: as, Ego quidem scri­
bo, tu uero legis, Ille autem dormit, I
doo wryte, thou reedyst, he alsoo sle­
pethe.



Quid ita, for Cur, wherfore.



Quidpiam, any thynge, or any wyse.



Quid quæris, What wylt thou more? What
nedeth any more wordes?



Quid tum denique, Quid ergo, quid tum po­
stea, Quid itaque, quid interea, quid demum,
all these doo sygnifye, whereto speakest
thou this? What than, or what meanest
thou hereby?



Quiescas, uel quiesce, Holde thy peace,
Leaue.



Plautus in
milite.



Quiescas cætera, care not for the reste.



Quies, & quietudo, reste, ease, slepe.



Quiesco, quieui, quiescere, To take reste,
to ceasse.
Vide com.


Quietalis, was a name of Pluto, callydde
god of Helle.



Quietus, quieta, quietum, quyete, peasible,
in reste.



Quietus esto, care not.



Quilibet, cuiuslibet, cuilibet, who thou wilt.
also it sometyme signifieth vyle or base in
estymacyon.



Quidlibet, what I, thou, or he wyll.



Quin, but, why not. Quin uenis, why com­
mest thou not?



Quin pergis, Why goste thou not?



Ter. inAn.



Quin dic quid est, go to, tell me what it is.



Quin, for etiam, alsoo. Pudet me. S. Cre­
do, neque id iniuria: quin mihi mole­
stum, I am asshamed. S. I beleue, and
not without a cause: And I am alsoo so­
rye therfore. Quin taces? Wylte not
thou holde thy peace. Also it sygnyfy­
ethe but yet, or but for all that. C. Pe­
rij. S. Quin tu animo bono es. C. I am
vndoone. S. But for all that be thou
of good cheere. Alsoo therfore. Quin
tu uno uerbo dic, quid est quod me ue­
lis, Therefore telle me atte oone worde,
whatte thou woldest haue me doo. Also
more ouer, or that moore is. Quin, ipsi
pridem tonsor ungues dempserat, colle­
git, omnia abstulit præsegmina, And that
more is, the other daye, the barbour pa­
ryd his nayles, he gathered the paryn­
ges togyther, and caryed them all away
with hym.
Terent. in
Heauton.Terent. in
Andria.Terent. in
Adelph.Plautus in
Aulularia.


Quincunx, quincuncis, of fyue ounces.
Alsoo the gayne of fyue in oone hun­
drede by exchaunge amongeste Mar­
chauntes. It was alsoo an order of set­
tynge of trees in a gardeyne or orchard
veraye exactelye, that whyche waye
soo euer that a manne dydde looke, the
trees stoode dyrectely oone agaynste
an nother.






Quinarius, a, um, the nombre of fiue. quina­
rius lapis, a stone of fyue pounde weyght.



Quinarius, narij, was amonge the olde Ro­
mains their halfe peny, whiche was fyue
pounde weight of brasse, callyd As, It is
two soulces of frenche money, whiche is of
our money. iii. pens farthing, or therabout.



Quincentum, of olde wryters was vsed for
quingentum, fyue hundred.



Quincuntialis, le, of fyue ynches.



Quincuplex, cuplicis, fyue double, or fyue
folde.



Quincuplus, a, um, fyue tymes so moche.



Quindecies, fyftene tymes.



Quindecim, fyuetene.



Quindeceremis, a barge with fyftene ores.



Quindecuplex, fyuetene double or folde.



Quindecuplus, a, um, fyuetene tymes soo
moche.



Quindenus, a, um, the fyuetenthe.



Quin ergo, Wherfore then. Quin ergo quod
iuuat, quod charum æstimant, id semper faci­
ant, Wherfore than, what so euer lyketh
them, that whiche semeth pleasant vnto
them, let them doo it as longe as it plea­
seth them.
Salustius
in Iugurt.


Quingeni & quingenti, fyue hundred.



Quingentarius numerus, the noumbre of
fyue hundred.



Quingentenus, & quingentesimus, the fyue
hundrethe.



Quingenties, fyue hundred tymes.



Quingentuplus, a, um, fyue hunderde ty­
mes so moche.



Quinimo, but rather.



Quinquagenarius, genaria, rium, of fyftie
yeres olde.



Quinquaginta, fyftye.



Quinquagenus, a, um, of fyftie.



Quinquagesimus, a, um, the fiftieth.



Quinquagies, fyftye tymes.



Quinquagesies, idem.



Quinquangulus, a, um, fyue cornerde.



Quinquatria, triorum, a feast dedicate to Pal­
las, whiche duryd fyue dayes.



Quinquatrus dies, a feast so called, bycause
it was after the fyfth Idus of Marche.



Quinque folium, an herbe callid cynkfoyle,
or fyue leauyd grasse.



Quinque, fyue.



Quinquies, fyue tymes.



Quinquemestris, tre, of fyue monethes.



Quinquenalis, le, that whiche hapneth or is
done euery fyfthe yere.



Quinquennis, ne, of fyue yeres.



Quinquennium, the space of fyue yeres.



Quinquepartior, tiris, tiri, to dyuyde in fyue
partes.



Quincupertitus, in fiue partes diuided.



Quinquertium, the exercyse of fyue son­
drye craftes.



Quinquertiones, they whiche exercised fiue
sondry craftes.



Quinqueremis, a barge with fyue oores, it
may be nowe taken for a shyppe with fiue
toppes, or with fyue sayles.



Quinqueuiratus, an office or auctorite, wher­
in fyue men were associate.



Quinqueuir, oone whiche is in the sayde
authoritie.



Quintana porta, was a gate in the Campe,
where the armye was lodged, whyche
was the chiefe gate next to that whiche
was called Prætoria, where the market
was wont to be kepte.



Quintus, ta, tum, the fifthe.



Quintia porta, & quintia prata, was a gaate
and medowes at Rome, whyche tooke
their names of one Quintius, a noble con­
sule of Rome.



Quintilis mensis, the moneth of Iuly.



Quintipor, tiporis, the boye or seruaunt of
Quintus. 



Quintius, & Quintus, the names of dyuers
Romaynes.



Quintius, a, um, pertainyng to Quintius. 



Quinus, a, um, fyue: Quini denarij, fiue pens.



Quipote, howe is it possible?



Quippe, surely, forasmoche.



Quippini, why not.



Quire, for posse, to maye.



Plautus in
Merc.



Quirinalis collis, an hylle at Rome, where
the temple of Romulus was sette.



Quirinalis porta, the gate next to that hyll.



Quirinalia, orum, dayes, in the whyche men
dydde sacryfyce to Romulus, callydde
Quirinus. 



Quirinus, a, um, of Romulus. 



Quiris, quiritis, a Romayne.



Quirites, was a name, wherby the Romans
were callyd of their fyrste kynge Romu­
lus, called Quirinus, as hit were Quiri­
nus people.



Quiritatus, ritatus, a crye of Romayne
chylderne.



Quirinus, was the name of Romulus, after
that he was taken for a god.



Quiritare, to crye out, to styrre vp the Ro­
mayns with a crye.



Quisnam homo est, What man is that?



Quisputas, idem.



Quisquam, any manne. It is somtyme vsyd
in the femynyne gender for any woman.



Quisquam gentium, idem.



Quisque, euery manne. Doctissimus quisque,
Euery welle lerned man. Decimus quisque,
Euery tenthe.



Quisquili&ecedil;, arum  pluraliter, be those thynges




whyche in makynge cleane of a garden or
orcharde, be caryed oute, as stickes, le­
ues, and weedes: it is vsed of Cicero for
noughty men, the refuse of all other.
Ci. ad At. I


Quisquilium, a lytle braunche of a kynde of
holy, whyche beareth grayne, wherewith
scarlet and crymsyn colours be made.



Quiuis, in the genitiue case cuius cuius, who
so euer.



Quiuis, in the genitiue case cuiusuis, any man:
one of them.



Quis, quæ, quod, vel quid, who or what.



Quis, is sometyme taken for some man.



Quispiam, some man.



Quisquis, who so euer.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Quo, Whyther. Quo abis, whyther goest
thou?



Quo non. Perreptaui vsque omne oppidum,
ad portam, ad locum, quo non? I went all
the towne aboute, to the gate, to the lake,
there is no place but that I was in it. Also
it signifieth frome whense and where. Il­
luc quæso redi, quo cœpisti, I beseche the
tourne backe agayne, where thou began­
nest: also, bycause. Non pol quo quenquam
plus amem, aut plus diligam, eo feci, In good
fayth I dyd it not bycause I more louyd or
fauored any man: also, wherfore. Forma
bona memini videre, quo &ecedil;quior sum Pam­
philo, I remembre she is well fauored,
wherfore I am the lesse displeased with
Pamphilus. 
Terent. in
Adelph.Terent. in
Eunucho.Ter. in An.


Quo gentium, whyther: also Quo, signify­
eth, that. Neque enim id feci, quo tibi mole­
stus essem, Nor I dyd it not, that I wolde
displease you: also, to what purpose or vse.
Quo mihi fortunam, si non conceditur vti,
For what purpose shall fortune serue, if I
may not haue commoditie by it?
Plinius.


Quoaxo, are, to crye lyke a frogge.



Quoad, vntyl, as longe.



Quoad eius, as moche as he maye.



Quoad quenque peruenit, aut peruenerit ex 
pr&ecedil;da, ex manubijs, ex auto coronario? How
moche of the praye or spoyle, garlandes or
crownes of victours is comen, or shall come
to any of your handes?
Ci. pro le­
ge Agraria


Ci. de ora.



Quoad eius facere possum, as moche as I
may do.



Quoadusque, vntyll.



Quocirca, wherfore.



Quod, that, wherein . Sed si quid sit, quod
mea opera opus sit, aut tu plus vides quam
ego, manebo, But yf there be any thynge,
wherein ye shall haue nede of my seruice,
or that ye perceyue more than I do, I will
tary: also it is put for Quem. Alienum homi­
nem intromittat neminem, quod illa aut a­
micum, aut patronum nominet: She maye
let in no man, whome she will call derlyng,
or master. Nube grauida candicante, quod
vocant tempestatem albam, grando immi­
nebit: Whan there doeth appiere a greate
clowde, that waxeth whyte, whiche they
call a whyte tempeste, ye shall haue hayle
shortly after: also it sygnifyeth for as moch
or bycause. Senatusconsulta duo facta sunt
odiosa, quod in consulem facta putantur, Ca­
tone & Domitio postulante: Two actes of
counsayle were made very displeasant, for
as moche as they were supposed to be
made, at the desire of Domicius and Cato:
also it signifyeth but. Quod si quiescem, ni­
hil euenisset mali, But if I had let it alone,
there hadde none yll happened, or it had
bene well ynoughe: also, as moche. Tu ve­
lim, quod cum commodo valetudinis tu&ecedil; fiat
quam longissime poteris, obuian nobis pro­
peres: I wolde that ye, as moche as maye
be with the helthe of your persone, make
speede to meete with vs, as farre frome
home as ye can. Also it signifyeth why. Si
ad vitulam spectes, nihil est quod pocula
laudes: If thou consyderest the caulf wel,
there is no cause why thou shuldest prayse
so thy pottes. In uiam quod tedes hoc tem­
pore, nihil est, There is no cause why thou
shuldest take thy iournay at this tyme: Al­
so it signifyeth wherfore. Quod te per ge­
nium, dextramque, Deosque penates obsecro &
obtestor, vitæ me redde priori: Wherfore I
beseche and praye the, for thy good aun­
gelles sake, and for the loue betwene the
and me, and for the sainctes which be thyn
auouryes, restore me eftsones, to my fyrst
lyfe, or to the state that I was in erst. Also
it signifyeth, as to that. Sane quod tibi vir
videatur esse, hic nebulo magnus est. As to
that, that thou thynkest hym a man, surely
he is a stourdy vagabunde.
Terenti.Plautus in
Asinar.Plinius.Cice. Atti.Ter. in An.Cice. Ter.Vergilius
in Buc.Cice. Ter.Hor. in ep.Ter. in Eu.


Quod absque molestia fiat, so that it be no dis­
pleasure vnto you. Quare pergratum mihi
feceris, si eum in amicitiam receperis, atque
eum (quod absque molestia fiat) si qua in re
opus ei fuerit: Wherfore ye shall do me sin­
guler pleasure, if ye take hym into your fa­
uour, and (so that it be no displeasure vn­
to you )whan neede requyrethe, be good
lorde or master vnto hym.
Cice. Sulp.


Quod quidem, no that. Non nouisti me? P.
quod quidem veniat in mentem. Doeste
thou not know me? P. No that I remem­
bre me.
Plautus in
Epidico.


Quodammodo, somewhat. Quamobrem vt
hi, qui superiores sunt, summittere se debent
in amicitia, sic quodammodo inferiores ex­
tollere, Wherfore lykewyse as they, which
are superior in state or degree, shuld hum­




ble them selfes in frendshyp, so they whi­
che are inferior shulde aduaunce and sette
them selfes forewarde.
Ci. de ami.


Quodcunque, what so euer.



Quodcunque militum, for quotcunque milites.
Vos hortor, vt quodcunque militum contra­
here poteris, contrahatis, I aduyse you,
that as many souldiours as ye can gete, ye
gather vnto you.
Cice. atti.


Quominus, for Vt non. Si poterit fieri, vt ne
pater per me stetisse credat, quo minus h&ecedil; fi­
erent nupt&ecedil; volo: If it may be brought to
passe, that my father maye beleue, that it
is not in my fault, that this mariage is not
concluded, I am content.
Terent.
in andria.


Quomodo, howe, by what reason, in what
maner, by what meane. Quomodo tibi res
se habet? Howe is the matter with the? Sed
quomodo dissimulabat? But in what ma­
ner dyd he dissemble? Primulo diliculo ab­
ijsti ad legiones, By tyme in the mornynge
thou wentest to the armye. Amph. Quo­
modo? In what maner of facion? also it si­
gnifieth wherfore. Illa quidem nullum sacri­
ficabit. G. Quomodo? quid igitur me volt?
She will doo no sacrifyce. G. Wherfore?
what thynge wolde she than with me?
Plautus in
Aulul.Plautus in
milite.Plautus in
amph.Plautus in
Stich.


Quomodocunque, howe so euer it be. Sed
tamen quomodocunque, quamquam sumus
pauperculi, est domi quod edimus: Yet how
so euer it be, thoughe we be poure folkes,
we haue at home somewhat to eate.
Plautus in
penulo.


Quomodolibet, idem.



Quondam, Sometyme, ones: signifyenge
the tyme past, or tyme to come. Quondam
tua dicere facta Tempus erit: The time shal
be ones, whan thyne actes shall be decla­
red. Alsoo it is put in the tyme present.
Quondam etiam victis redit in precordia
virtus, Ye, and in them that are vaynquys­
shed, sometyme good courage eftsones
imbracith their stomakes. Sometyme it si­
gnyfyeth allwaye. Vt quondam in stipulis
magnus sine viribus ignis, Lyke as in stub­
byll or holme fyre is allwaye greate with­
out any puyssaunce.
Verg.Vergili.


Plautus in
Trin.



Quonam, whyther. Eamus intro, sequere. S.
Quo tute agis? C. quonam, nisi domum.
Let vs go in, folowe me. S. whyther wylt
thou go? whyther shulde I goo but home
to my house?



Quoniam, for as moche as.



Quo officio es? what is thyne office?



Quopiam, any whyther. Iturane Thais quo­
piam es? Thais, wylte thou goo any why­
ther?



Quoquam, any whyther.



Quoque, also.



Quoquo, wheresoeuer.



Quoquo pacto, In any maner of wyse. Tum
si maxime fateatur, cum amet aliam, non est
vtile hanc illi dari: qua propter quoquo pa­
cto c&ecedil;lato est opus, Than yf he vtterly con­
fesse it, for as moch as he loueth another,
it were not conuenient, that he were ma­
ryed to this woman, therfore in any maner
of wyse, this thinge must be kept secrete.
Ter. in Ad.


Quoquo modo, idem.



Quo quouersum, seu quoquouersum, eue­
ry waye, on euerye parte . Eius imperio
classem quo quouersum dimittunt, By his
commaundement they dyspeched the na­
uy in euery part. Rates duplices quoquo­
uersum pedibus triginta e regione solis col­
locabat: he sette shyppes double agaynste
the sonne, thirty feete euery waye.
C&ecedil;s. in com.


Quorsum, seu quorsus, apud Plinium, why­
ther, to what place, or thinge.



Quorsum istuc? to what purpose.



Quot, how many.



Quota pars, how small a porcion.



Quotannis, yere by yere, euery yere.



Quotennis? of what age? howe olde?



Quot annos natus, idem.



Quotenus, a, um, how many.



Quotidian&ecedil; forma, a commune beautye or
facion, euery daye sene.



Ter. in Eu.



Quotidiani sumptus, dayly expenses.



Quotidianus, quotidiana, quotidianum, a
thynge that is or happeneth dayly or daye
by daye.



Quotidie, dayly, euery daye.



Quoties, howe oftentymes.



Quotiescunque, as often.



Quotquot, as many.



Quotuplex, how many sortes.



Quotuplus, howe moche in measure or
wayght.



Quotus, ta, tum, of what numbre, howe ma­
ny, Hora quota est, what is it a clocke? Dic
quotus es ? Telle howe many be of you.
Quotas ædes dixerit, id ego admodum in­
certo scio: How many houses he spake of,
I am not well assertayned, or I remembre
not well.
Horatius.


Quotusquisque, how many.



Quouis, whyther, or to what place ye
wyll.



Quouis gentium, idem.



Quousque, how longe, how farre.



Quousque tandem, how longe yet.



Qur, & Quor, wherfore.



Quum, seu qum, whan, in the whiche.



Quum primum, as soone.










RAbia, olde wrytars vsed
for Rabies. 



Rabidus, da, dum, madde
or woode, as a madde
dogge.



Rabies, madnesse of a
dogge.



Rabiosus, a, um, madde or
very angry, woode angry.



Rabio, bire, to be madde or woode as
a dogge.
Varro.


Rabiosulus, a, um, somewhat madde.



Rabula, one which is hasty or wilfull, in any
cause, ianglynge, or full of wordes.



Racemarius, a twygge of a vyne, out of the
which the grapes do springe.



Racematio, the gatheringe of grapes after
that the greate clusters be gathered to
make wyne, the glenynge of grapes.



Racematus, ta, tum, that hath grapes.



Racemosus, full of grapes.



Racemus, a grape or a cluster of grapes.



Racha, a reprochefull worde of Hebrewe,
which signifyeth, thiftlesse, braynlesse, fy­
nally it is a rebukefull worde sygnifyenge
the extreme ire of the personne that spea­
keth it.



Radicitus, frome the roote, or vppe by the
roote, Radicitus euellere, to plucke vppe
by the roote.



Radico, care, to roote or take roote.



Radicula, an herbe, the iuyce whereof is
good to wasshe woulle: also a lytle roote.



Radio, are, to sende forth beames lyke the
sunne.



Radius, a beame of the sun, or other bright
sterre, sometyme of the eyes: also a rodde
or yerde, that Geometricians haue to de­
scribe lynes: also a wayuers shyttell, wher­
with he throweth the yern in to the webbe
also the spoke of a wheele, alsoo an instru­
ment, wherwith measures be shauen: alsoo
longe olyues or oyle beryes.



Radix, dicis, a roote.



Rado, si, dere, to shaue, or make smoothe, to
cut or pull vp, to hurte, to rent, to offende,
to fatigate. Aures delicatas radere, to of­
fende or fatigate delicate eares.



Radula, an instrument to shaue with.



Radulanus, a, um, that whiche is shauen of,
frome any thynge.



Ragadia, & Ragades, cleftes or choppes in
the fundament.



Raia, a see fysshe called Raye or skete.



Ralla, a thynne garment.



Rallum, the staffe, wherewith plowghmen
in tyllynge do put the erthe frome their
share.



Ramalis, le, a bowghe.



Ramale, a seryd or deed bowghe.



Ramentum, a lytle piece of any thynge.



Rameus, a, um, that whyche is of a bowgh.



Ramex, micis, a kynde of rupture, whan the
bowels do fal downe into a mans coddes:
also a rayle or barre, whiche goeth ouer­
thwart a pale or a gate.



Ramicosus, he that is broken.



Ramnus, a whyte thorne.



Ramulus, & Ramusculus, a lytell bowghe.



Ramus, a bowghe.



Rana, a frogge: also a sickenesse which doth
anoy cattell.



Rana Seriphia, is a prouerbe applyed to them
that canne not speake in tyme conuenient.



Ranceo, cere, to be mouldy or putrifyed.



Rancidus, da, dum, rankled, mouldy, or pu­
trifyed: also vnsauery, or vnpleasaunt.



Rancidulus, la, lum, a lytle mouldy or pu­
tryfyed.



Rancor, oris, rancour, fylth.



Randus, in olde tyme was taken for æs,
brasse.



Randuscula porta, the brason gate.



Rantum, in the olde tyme was a quarterne
of a pounde.



Ranunculus, a lytell frogge, or frosshe.



Rapa, a plant and roote called Rape.



Rapacia, rape leaues.



Rapatior, more rauenous or catchinge.



Rapacissimus, a, um, moost rauenous.



Rapacitas, raueny.



Rapaciter, rauenousely.



Rapax, acis, rauenouse.



Raphanus, a plante, and roote called Ra­
dysshe.



Rapere aliquem in ius, to arrest one, or cause
him to be arrested to appere before iuges.



Rapide, quickly.



Rapidus, a, um, very swift.



Rapina, robbery.



Rapinator, a robbar.



Varro.



Rapio, pui, pere, to take by violence, hast, or
fury: also to rauysshe a woman.



Rapo, Raponis, for Rapax.



Raptim, hastily.



Raptio, violent takynge of a persone.



Raptus, rauysshynge or deflourynge of a
woman.



Raptito, tare, to take often violently.



Rapto, to take or drawe violently.



Raptor, toris, a rauysshour or vyolente
taker.



Rapulum, a lytle rape roote.



Rapunculus, a lytle roote, whyche is eaten
in salates.



Rara auis, a byrde seldome seene: whereby
is signifyed any thynge that seldome hap­
peneth.






Rarefacio, cere, to make thynne or slender.



Rarefio, fieri, to be thynne or slender.



Rarenter, seldome.



Raresco, scere, to waxe thynne, or not thicke
growen, to be or happen seldome.



C&ecedil;s. in commentarii.



Rari, a sonder, here and there one or a few.



Raripilus, la, lum, thynne heared.



Rarior, rarius, more selde.



Rarissimus, a, um, seldest.



Rarissime, moost selde.



Raritas, seldomnesse.



Raro, selde, rare.



Raro, aui, are, to make scant or selde.



Rarus, ra, rum, selde or not ofte, thynne, not
thicke growen or set.



Rasamentum, shauinge or shredes.



Rasilis, sile, that maye be shauen or made
smoothe.



Rasito, tare, to shaue ofte.



Rasor, soris, a barbour, or shauour, alsoo a
fydler.



Rasorius, a, um, pertaynynge to shauynge.



Rasta, a duche myle.



Rastellus, a lytle rake.



Rastrum, & Raster, a rake.



Rasura, the shauynge.



Ratariæ naues, lyghters, or woode barges.



Rates, tis, are pieces of tymber pynned to­
gither, wheron haye or other lyke thinge
beinge layde, they are drawen on ryuers,
as on the great streames of Germany and
France is now sene: but they be commun­
ly vsed and taken for shyppes, or the syde
beames of a shyppe.



Ratiarius, the master of a shyppe.



Ratifico, care, to ratyfye, or confirme.



Ratificatio, a ratification or confyrmation.



Ratio,  rayson, counsayle, purpose, care, re­
specte, cause, the maner, the waye, the
fourme, proportion.



Ratiocinatio, raysonynge.



Ratiocinator, oris, a caster of accompt.



Ratiocinor, aris, to rayson, to gather in ar­
gument, to accompte.



Rationabilis, le, raysonable.



Rationale, that whiche hath the vse of rai­
son: alsoo that whiche a preest weareth at
masse on his heed, & after putteth it backe
lyke a hoode.



Rationes referre, to yelde accompt.



Rationem dare, idem.



Plautus in
amph.



Rationem dictare, to accompte.



Ratio de integro ineunda est mihi, I muste
fynde another meane.
Terent. in
Heau.


Ter. in Ad.



Rationem subducere, Nunquam ita quisquam
bene subducta ratione ad vitan fuit: quin res,
ætas, vsus semper sliquid apportet noui,
There was neuer man in the ordre of his
lyfe so well aduysed: but that mater, age &
experience bringeth to hym somwhat that
is straunge.



Ratio constat, the matter appiereth, or is
shewed.



Rationarius, a boke of accompt: also a boke
belongynge to the counsayle of Princes,
wherin actes done and to be done are wri­
ten: also an auditour.



Ratiuncula, a lytle accompt or rekenynge.



Rationes putari, whan accomptes be exa­
myned and tryed.



No. Mar.



Ratare, olde wrytars vsed for Ratificare, to
ratify, to confyrme.



Ratum habere, idem.



Ratus, ta, tum, stablysshed, confyrmed, sup­
posed.



Ratus, a participle signyfyenge, Suppo­
synge.



Ratus sum, I supposed.



Raua vox, a voyce that maye not be well
harde.



Festus.



Raucæ, wormes, beinge in the rootes of
trees, and eateth them.



Rauce, horsely.



Rauceo, Raucio, cere, to be horse.



Raucesco, scere, idem.



Raucus, ca, cum, horse.



Raucedo, & Raucitas, horsenesse.



Raudus, a thynge vnwrought, and vnpolys­
shed: it was also taken for æs, brasse.



Rauenna, a citie in Italy.



Rauilia, purblynde or dull sighted.



Rauio, are, to be horse.



Festus.



Rauis, horsenesse.



Rauiscellus, a, um, lytell broune of colour.



Plautus.



Rauus, a, um, horse: also Rauus color, a dull
or sadde colour, or broune.

 

¶ R, ANTE E.

REalis actio, an action concernyng the
goodes.



Reapse, in the selfe or very thinge.



Reate, a citie in Italy.



Reatus, a fault or offence.



Rebellare, to rebell.



Rebellis, a rebell.



Rebellio, rebellion.



Rebito, tare, to retourne. At vnum hoc te
qu&ecedil;so, si huc rebitet e Philocrate, vt eius mi­
hi facias conueniendi copian, But one thinge
I praye the, if he retourne frome Philo­
crates, finde the meanes, that I may speke
with him.



Reboo, are, to sowne agayne.



Recalcitro, trare, to stryke with the heele,
to kicke.



Recalesco, scere, to waxe warme.



Recaluaster, tri, he that is balde before.






Recaluus, idem.



Recalueo, ere, to be balde agayne.



Recanto, tare, to charme awaye or charme
out a thynge, which was brought in by in­
chauntement, as the witches called wyse
women are wont to do.



Recapitulatio, a rehercynge of thynges in
chapiters.



Recedo, recessi, recedere, to departe or goo
awaye.



Recedere a conditione, a persona, a statu, is
to chaunge or alter the condicion, person,
or state. Quanquam id nomen durius efficit
iam vetustas, a peregrino enim iam recessit,
All thoughe auncienty maketh that name
diffuse, yet is it now altered from beinge a
straunge worde.
Cic. de off.


Recello, cellere, to plucke backe, or with­
drawe.



Recens, tis, newe late.



Recentior, newer.



Recentissimus, newest, or latest.



Recenti pede recurrere, to runne eftsones af­
ter that he hath rested him, to make a fresh
course. Postquam thermopotasti gutturem,
recipe te, & recurre pede recenti: After that
thou haste warmed thy throte with good
drynke, take thy harte to the, and make a 
fresshe course.
Plautus in
Trin.


Recenter, newly, fresshely.



Recentius, more newly.



Recento, tare, to renewe.



Recentor, taris, tari, to be renewed.



Recenseo, ere, to numbre or tell, to reken.



Recensus, us, & Recensio, a tale or reke­
nynge.



Recensitus, ta, tum, tolde, or rekenyd.



Receptaculum, the place, which receyueth
thinges: also a place of suerty or comfort.



Recepti in ciuitatem, they whiche of straun­
gers be made Citezens.



Recepto, tare, to receyue often.



Receptitius, a, um, that whiche is reserued
from other.



Receptum, taken in custome.



Receptus, tus, a retrayt in batayle.



Erasm. in
Chiliad.



Receptui canere, to blowe the retrayte: also
it is a prouerbe, which signifyeth to fynysh
or ende the contention.



Recessim, an aduerbe, whyche signifyeth,
goynge backe.



Recessus, us, a goynge awaye or backe.



Plautus in
Menech.



Recident in te hæ contumeliæ, those rebukes
shall lyght on the.



Terent. in
prolo. He.



Recidit ad paucos, it is come to a fewe per­
sonnes.



Recidipna, a garment to soupe in.



Recidiuus, a, um, eftsones restored: somtyme
eftsones decayed or fallen.



Recido, dere, to gall eftsones: or to fal back­
warde.



Recido, di, dere, to cut agayne, to cut be­
hynde.



Recinium, a square garmente, whiche they
that dyd weare them, dydde caste the one
part thereof ouer their shoulders at their
backe, lyke to frenche clokes.



Reciniati, they that dydde weare suche
clokes.



Recino, ere, to synge agayne.



Recipere se, to retourne or come agayne.
Percunctatum ibo ad portum, quoad se re­
cipiat frater, I wyll go seeke at the hauyn,
vntyll my brother come agayne.
Terent. in
Phorm.


Recipere se ad cœnam, to come to souper,
Hic homo ad cœnam recipit se ad me, This
man will come to me to souper.
Plautus in
Capt.


Recipe te ad me, come hyther to me.



Plautus in
Per.



Recipere se ex opere, to retourne frome his
busynesse.



Recipere se domum, to go home.



Recipere in aures, to heare: Non ædepol istæc
tua dicta nunc in aures recipio, In good soth
I do not heare now what thou sayest.
Plautus in
cist.


Recipere se in portum, to arryue at an ha­
uyn.



Recipere se in Principem, to take on hym as
a Prince.
Plinius in
panegyr.


Recipere anhelitum, to fetche brethe or
wynde. Priusquam recipias anhelitum, vno
verbo eloquere, vbi ego sum, Or euer thou
fetchest breth, tell me at a worde, in what
case I do stande.
Plautus in
mercatore


Recipe animum, take breth.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Recipere, to recouer. Cum quidem me au­
diente Salinatori, qui amisso oppido fugerat
in arcem, glorianti atque dicenti, mea opera
Quint. Fab. Tarentum recepisti: Certe, inquit
ridens, nam nisi tu amisisses, nunquam rece­
pissem: For in my hearynge, to Salinator,
which (the towne of Tarentum being lost)
fledde into the castell, sayenge vnto hym,
Thou hast recouered Tarentum Q. Fab.
by my meanes: That is true sayde he, law­
qhinge: for if thou haddest not lost it: I had
not recouered it. also to reserue to a mans
owne vse.
Cicero in
Cato.
Cato spe­
keth here
of Fabius
the wyse
Captayne


Recipie, Cato vseth for Recipiam.



Receptus, ta, tum, receyued.



Receptio, a retourne backe, drawynge or
bryngynge agayne. Quid tibi huc receptio
ad te est meum virum? Why draweste thou
my housbande eftsones backe vnto thy
house.
Plautus in
Asinar.


Reciprocatio, a goynge backe, or retour­
nynge to the place that he came fro.



Recipio, cœpi, cipere, to receyue or take, to
admitte, to call agayne, to brynge in saulf­




garde, to delyuer, to vndertake, to pro­
myse: also Recipere, is to reserue to hym
selfe, or to excepte a thinge in gyuynge or
bargaynynge.



Reciproco, care, to turne backe, to repete,
to go backe.



Reciprocus, ca, cum, that whiche is repeted
or eftsones reherced.



Recisamentum, a lytle piece, a gobat.



Recisus, a, um, new cut.



Recito, tare, to reade that other maye here
and vnderstande: to recite or telle eft­
sones.



Reclamo, are, to denye with a lowde voyce
or crye.



Festus.
Val. in po.



Recliuia, & Recliuium, is whan the skynne
of the fyngar is loose frome the nayle.



Verg.



Recludo, si, dere, to open. Infernas reserat se­
des & regna recludat pallida, Undo he the
lockes of places infernall, and let hym set
wyde open the pale regions of deth. Iu­
stinus putteth Reclusus for clausus, shut.



Recocta, seconde or course cheese.



Recogito, tare, to remembre.



Recognitio, a knowlege.



Recognosco, noui, noscere, to recognise, to
knowe perfectly, to ouerloke.



Recolligo, legi, ligere, to assemble or gather
togither: also to reconcile. Quod scribis,
etiam si cuius animus esset in te offensior, a
me recolligi oportere, quid dicas? Where
thou wrytest, that moreouer yf any man be
displeased with the, that he shoulde be re­
concyled by my meanes, whatte sayeste
thou?



Recolo, lere, to repute, to repete, to calle to
remembraunce.



Recomminiscor, sceris, recomminisci, to re­
membre, or call to remembraunce.



Reconcilio, are, to reconcyle, to restore vn­
to fauour.



Reconcilior, aris, reconciliari, to be recon­
cyled.



Plautus in
cap.



Reconciliare in libertatem, to sette at ly­
bertye.



Reconciliatio, a reconcylynge.



Reclusus, a, um, opened.



Reconcinno, nare, to newe make, to make
meete, proprely a garment.



Recondo, dere, to hyde, to laye vppe.



Recordor, aris, ari, to remembre.



Recoquo, coxi, coquere, to boyle or seeth
eftsones, to amende with study.



Recordatio, remembraunce.



Recreatio, a recreation, a restoringe.



Recreo, aui, are, to recreate, to refresshe, to
restore.



Recresco, scere, to growe agayne.



Recrudesco, scere, to renewe a fault made
by Princes to their familiars.



Recta, a souper, where they sate all in a
rewe.



Rectangulus, is where lynes are soo ioy­
ned, that no part is longar or shortar than
another.



Recta, an aduerbe signifyenge strayghte.
Cur non recta introibas? why wentest thou
not strayght, or the strayght waye in.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Recte, well ynoughe. Quid tu igitur lachry­
mas? aut quid es tam tristis? Pamp. Recte
mater. S. Quid fuit tumulti? Than where­
fore doest thou mourne? or why arte thou
so heuy? Pamph. It is well ynoughe mo­
ther. S. what was all this noyse?
Terent. in
Hecy.


Recte parere, to brynge forth no monster.



Recte, of good right, with good raison.



Recte dicis, thou sayest truely.



Recte est, it is ynoughe, or I haue ynough.
Tum quod dem ei, recte est, I haue alsoo
ynough to gyue hym.
Terent. in
Heauton.


Recte facere alicui, to do good to a man.
Stultus & sine gratia es, tibi recte facere:
quando quod facias perit, Thou art a foole
and without thanke, to do hym any good,
whan all is lost that thou doest.
Plautus in
Aulularia.


Recte ferre, to take paciently. Si sapis, neque
pr&ecedil;terquam quas ipse amor molestias habet,
addas: & illas quas habet, recte feras, If
thou be wyse, adde to no more griefe than
loue bringeth with hym, and them that he
bringeth, suffre paciently.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Recte, signifyeth sometyme nothynge, as
Donate sayth. Rogo, nunquid velit. recte,
inquit: abeo, I asked if he wold any thyng,
Nothinge, he sayde: I went than my way.
also ye, straight waye. S. Tu rus hinc abis?
D. recte, goest thou now into the contray?
D. ye strayght waye.
Ter. in Ad.


Recte valet, he or she is in good helth.



Rectius, better.



Rectitas, & Rectitudo, Iustice or rightwys­
nesse.



Rector, toris, a rular.



Rectus, the nominatife case.



Rectum intestinum, the gutte frome whense
the ordure passeth.



Rectus, ta, tum, straight, which is not croo­
ked, vpright, iust.



Recubitus, a lyenge at reste.



Recubo, are, to lye and rest.



Recudo, cudi, dere, to newe hamer, or newe
worke, as it were on an anduylde: also it is
taken for, to make newe, or newe prynte.



Recuperatores, iuges assigned, or commissi­
onars, for a pryuate mater.



Recumbo, to sytte at a table, or at meales:
sometyme to leane on one. Recumbebat
mecum vir egregius Fidius Rufinus, super




eum municeps ipsius, There satte with me
that worshypfull man Fidius Rufinus, and
aboue hym his neyghbour.



Recuperatio, & reciperatio, & reciperantia,
was of olde wryters sayde, where there
was a lawe made betwene the people of
Rome, and other nations & cities, wher­
in they accordyd, that pryuate thynges
taken, shoulde be redelyuered, whyche
is nowe vsyd in our leagues and enter­
courses with straunge countrayes and
prynces.



Recupero, rare, to recouer.



Recupio, cupiui, cupere, to desyre moche.
Quin ita faciam, ut recupias facere sump­
tum, & si ego uetem: And yet wylle I soo
handle it, that thou shalte moche desyre
to spende, although I wolde forbyd the.



Recurro, rere, to rounne agayne, to goo or
come agayne quyckely.



Recursus, us, a runnyng backe, a recourse.



Recurso, are, to runne often backe or agayn.



Recurue, an aduerbe, signifieng bowid bak­
warde, crokydly.



Recuruitas, tatis, a bowynge backe.



Recuruo, are, to bowe backe.



Recuruor, ari, to be bowed backe.



Recuruus, a, um, bowed backe, or crooked



Recusabile, that whyche is worthye to be
refusyd.



Recusatio, a refusall.



Recusator, a refuser.



Recuso, are, to refuse, also to defende.



Recutitus, he that is circuncysed. somtyme
exulcerate.



Redabsoluo, uere, to discharge or dispeche.
Sequere hac, te redabsoluam, qua aduenisti
gratia, Folowe me thyther, I wylle dys­
patche thy mattier, for the whyche thou
camest hyther.



Redactus, ta, tum, brought.



Redambulo, are, to retourne. Cura quem opti­
me potes. Er. bene ambula, & redambula,
Do the beste that thou canste. Er. Wel get
the hens, and come agayne quyckely.
Plautus in
Curcul.


Redandruo, are, idem.



Redamo, aui, are, to loue mutually.



Redarguo, guere, to reproue.



Reddo, di, dere, to render or yelde, to dely­
uer, to restore, to gyue, to make.



Reddere certiorem, to assertayne.



Reddere rationem, to make accompte, or
rekenynge.



Reddere, to putte in other. Tempestas ue­
nit, confringit regulas imbrices que, ibi domi­
nus indiligens reddere alias ne uult, The
tempeste camme, and brake the Tyles,
and the Eueyses, where as the negly­
gente owner wolde not putte other in
theyr places.



Ter. in An.



Reddere commotum, to cause one to make
haste, to haste hym forwarde.



Reddere dictum ac factum. Videre egisse iam
nescio quid cum sene. S. De illo quod dudum?
dictum ac factum reddidi, It seemeth thou
haste done late, I wote not what with the
olde man. S. Meanest thou that, the o­
ther daye? thou haddest not so so one spo­
ken, but it was doone.



Reddidi impetratum, I brought it to passe.



Plautus in
Epid.



Reddere operam, to requyte a good turne
or an ylle.



Reddere aliquem, to resemble or be lyke
to oone.



Redemptio, redemption.



Redemptito, demptitare, to redeeme or bye
agayne often.



Redempto, tare, to redeme.



Redemptor, toris, a redemer.



Redeo, diui, dij, redire, to retourne.



Redhibeo, hibui, bere, to cause the seller to
haue ageyne that whiche he solde.



Redhibitio, restitution.



Redigo, degi, digere, to brynge by force or
cunnynge. sometyme to restore.



Redigere in ordinem, to compelle menne to
lyue according to their astate or profession



Redis ad ingenium, thou doest after thyne
olde facion, or as thou arte wonte to do.
Terent. in
Hecy.


Redire ad se. Sed paululum sine ad me ut re­
deam, But lette me take breathe a lyttelle.
Tandem reprime iracundiam, atque ad te
redi: Nowe leaue thy fume, and remem­
ber thy selfe.
Ter. in An.


Redeam ad pauca, Vt ad pauca redeam, ac
mittam illius ineptias, To the intente that
I wyll be shorte, and passe ouer his foly.
Terent. in
phorm.


Redi ad rem, goo to the pourpose, or to
the mattier.
Terent. in
Heaut.


Redijt ad restim res. Opera tua ad restim mi­
hi quidem res redijt, By thy meanes I am
brought to the poynte to hange my selfe.
Terent. in
phormi.


Redijt ad rastros, Nam si illi pergam suppe­
ditare sumptibus Menedeme, mihi illæc
uere ad rastros res redijt, Surely if I shuld
mayntayne his expenses Menedemus, it
wolde brynge me to rake corne or grasse
for my lyuynge.



Redit res in eum locum, the thynge is come
so to passe. In eum iam res redijt locum, ut
sit necesse, The matter is come so to passe,
that there is no remedy.



Redit mihi animus, my courage is comme
vnto me.
Terent. in
Hecyra.


Redit animo, it commeth to my mynde.



Redire in concordiam, to be agreed.



Redire in gratiam, idem, Also to be efteso­
nes in fauour.






Redimicula, the ornamentes or apparaylle
of a womans heed: as a veluette bonette
or frenche hode.



Redimio, iui, ire, to adorne or apparayle, or
trymme.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Reditur, is retourned.



Redhibitum, restored.



Redico, cere, to tell or saye agayne.



Rediculi, a temple at Rome withoute the
gate callyd Capena, where Hannyball be­
ynge aferde, retyred backe.



Redimitus, ta, apparayled on the heed.



Redimere, to take in charge.



Redinunt, for redeunt, they retourne or
comme agayne.



Redintegro, a renewynge, a fortification.



Redipiscor, sceris, sci, to recouer or gette
agayne.



Redimo, demi, dimere, to redeme, to bye, to
recouer, to recompence, to take in bar­
gayne.



Redemptores, they that hyre lande, or ta­
keth any thyng in great or taske.



Ti. Liuius
C&ecedil;s. in com.



Redintegrare, to begynne a fresshe.



Redintegrato animo, with courage reuy­
ued, with a freshe courage.



Redito, tare, to retourne by and by.



Reditus, tus, a retourne.



Reduuia, whan the skynne commeth with­
oute the nayles of the fyngers. alsoo an
adders skynne.



Rediuiuum, that whiche retourneth efte­
sones to lyfe. Also that whiche of an old
thynge is made newe or yonge.



Rediuias, a worme callyd a tycke, whyche
souketh bloode from a man or beaste.



Redoleo, ere, to smelle or sauour.



Redonatio, a gyuynge agayne of the thing
that is taken.



Redono, are, to gyue agayne.



Redorior, riris, riri, to begynne agayne.



Redormio, to awake.



Redormitio, an awakynge out of slepe.



Festus.



Redostio, tire, of olde wryters was taken
for to gyue thanke.



Reducem, & reduces, they do cal such shi­
che are brought out of exile or captiuitie.



Reducere, to brynge saulfe. Me que oppido
in arcem reduco, And I conueyed my self
quyckely into the Castell. Alsoo to pacy­
fye or appease. Numenque reducant, Lette
theym appease the wrathe or dyspleasure
of god.
Apuleius.Vergilius


Reduco, duxi, ducere, to brynge backe, or
plucke backe, to delyuer or set out of pe­
ryll, to reconcyle.



Reductus, a, um, brought backe or safe.



Redundo, are, to ouerflowe, to reflowe or
retourne backe, to redounde.



Reduro, are, to stoppe or close.



No. Mar.



Reduplico, care, to double eftsones.



Redulcero, rare, to impostume or make an
impostume in some parte of the body.



Refello, to proue fals, to repreue of false­
hode, to denye that whiche is obiected.



Referio, rire, to stryke agayne.



Referre ad aliquem, to aske one counsayle
in any matter.



Referre de re aliqua ad Senatum, was whan
the Consuls purposed a matter in the Se­
nate, desyrynge the Senatours to reason
and consulte therof.



Referre pedem, to set forthe a foote, or goo.
Eutyche hanc uolo rem prius agi, quam meum
intro refero pedem, I wyll that this thyng
Eutyche be doone, or I go oone foote in.
Plautus in
mercatore


Retulit ad me pedem, He came toward me.



Plautus in
Epidico.



Referunt hæc ad rem, these thinges pertain
to the matter.



Refero acceptum, Omnia quæ uidimus, si re­
cte rationabimus, uni accepta referemus An­
tonio. All that we see, yf we recken well,
we may impute it onely to Antonie.
Quod uiuit, mihi acceptum refert: He con­
fesseth to be longe of me, that he nowe ly­
uethe. Verum omnem tranquillitatem &
quietem senectutis refert acceptam cle­
mentiæ tu&ecedil;, But all the tranquyllytie and
quyetenesse of his age, he confesseth to
procede or haue receyued of your mercy
and goodnesse.
Cicero.Cicer. pro
Oluen.


Referre gratiam, to gyue thanke. Nun­
quam ego illi possum gratiam referre, ut
meritus est de me, I canne neuer gyue
hym thanke suffycyent for that he hathe
doone for me. Spero ego mihi quoque
tempus tale euenturum, ut tibi gratiam re­
feram parem, I trust the tyme shal come,
that I shall doo you as moche pleasure.
Non enim sperasti mutuam tibi gratiam
relaturum, ut uicissim tuos compella­
rem, Thou dyddest not thynke, that I
wolde in this wyse haue requyted the,
in remembrynge thyne auncetours, as
thou haste doone myne.
Plautus in
Mostell.Plautus in
merca.Ci. in Sal.


Referri in acceptum, to be brought in a rec­
kenyng. Posteaquam reus factus est, primo
negabat opus in acceptum referri posse, af­
ter that he was accused, fyrste he denyed,
that the warke mought be brought vnto a
reckenynge.



Referre in melius, to turne it to a better vse.



Referre mores, to expresse the condicyons
or maners of an other.



Referre oculos, to caste the loke vpon one.



Referre par, to requyte. Ille quem beneficio
adiungas, ex animo facit, studet par re­
ferre, Whom thou gettest with benefytte,




he dothe all thynges with a good harte,
and studieth to requyte the.



Referre pedem, uel gradum, to steppe back,
to retreate.



Referre, to shewe or tel. At illa retulit, quæ­
siuitque, quidnam mihi uideretur, She tolde
me all, and asked what I thought therin.



Cicer. pro
Seruilio.



Refert. Cuius consilii magni referebat te inter
esse. Atte the whiche counsayle, it hadde
bene very necessarye, that ye shulde haue
bene. Parui retulit non suscepisse, It made
lyttell matter, that he tooke hir not. Mea
quid refert? What care I? Mea nihil refert?
I haue noughte to doo with it. Tua refert,
It is for thy profyte. Quid refert me fecis­
se regibus, ut mihi obedirent, wi me hodie
hic umbraticus deriserit? What auayleth it,
that I haue made kynges to obeye me, yf
nowe this lewde knaue shall laughe me to
scorne? Refert, It is expedient or neces­
sarye. Neque enim numero comprehen­
dere refert: It is not necessarye, to re­
herce them in numbre.
Terent. in
phorm.Ver. geor.


Refercio, cire, to fylle.



Refero, tuli, ferre, to brynge agayne, to re­
semble, to reporte, to referre, to reuoke.
Referebam me, I retourned. To adde to,
or ascribe, to turne, to renew, to brynge,
to declare or expresse.



Ci. in Pis.



Refero impensum, I make accompt of that
whiche is bestowed.



Referre rationem, to yelde or make ac­
compte.



Refectus, ta, tum, restored, renewed, amen­
ded, made eftesoones.



Reficio, ficere, to recreate, or restore, to a­
mende, to make agayne.



Reficior, ceris, ci, to be restored, recouered
from sicknes, Also renewed or new made.



Refigo, fixi, figere, to make faste or sure, to
thruste in harde. Sometyme it signifyeth
the contrarye, to drawe out that whyche
is fastned.



Ci. Phi.13



Refigere tabulas & leges, to vndoo or de­
stroye lawes. Acta Antonij rescidistis, le­
ges refixistis: Ye haue cancelled the actes
of Antony, and vndoone or dissolued his
lawes. Fixit leges, pretioque refixit, He sta­
blyshed lawes, and for money efteso ones
dissolued them.
Ver. ænei.


Refirmo, are, to fasten or stablyshe agayne.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Reflatio, a contrary wynde.



Reflatus, tus, idem.



Reflecto, xi, tere, to bowe backe, to tourne
back or agayn. Quem neque fides, neque iusiu­
randum, neque illum misericordia repressit, neque
reflexit, Whom neither promyse, nor othe,
nor yet pitie, withdrewe or pulled backe.



Reflo, are, to blowe agayne or contrarye.



Refluo, xi, fluere, to flowe.



Refluxus, us, the tyde, whanne the water
floweth.



Refocillatio, a comfortynge or refreshyng,
or recreation.



Refocillo, are, to recomforte, to refresshe,
to recreate, to fortifye.



Plinius in
panegyr.



Reformo, mare, to refourme.



Reformator, a reformatour.



Plin. in epi­
stol.156.



Refoueo, foui, fotum, fouere, to nourysshe
or comforte eftesoones, to restore or set
in his fyrste state.
Plinius in
panegyri.


Refractarius, obstynate, in a wylfulle op­
pinion.



Refragor, aris, ari, to resyste with wordes,
or clamour.



Refrango, fregi, refrangere, aut refringere,
to braste open.



Refreno, refrenare, to pull backe one from a
purpose.



Refrico, care, to renewe a sore or grief, whi­
che was out of remembraunce.



Refrigeratorius, a, um, that whiche cooleth
or maketh colde.



Refrigeratio, a koolynge.



Suetonius
in Claudi.



Refrigeratus, ta, tum, kooled: also refreshed
or comforted.



Refrigerium, a recreation or aduauncynge
of the mynde.



Refrigesco, scere, to make colde.



Refrigero, are, to coole, or make colde, to
refreshe or recomforte.



Refrina, a beane, whiche the olde Romans
were wont to bring home out of the felde,
to doo sacrifyce for the good lucke of
their corne.
Festus.


Refuga, an vnrulye persone, whiche wylle
not be ordered.



Refugio, gere, to flee or run away or backe.
also to refuse.
Colum.4.


Refugium, refuge, succour, or place where
one may be succoured.



Refugus, a, um, that whiche gothe away, or
is layde aparte.
Sidonius.


Refulgeo, gêre, to shyne.



Refundo, fudi, fundere, to restore that why­
che lacketh. Quicquid deerit, ex meo re­
fundam, Whatte soo euer dothe lacke, I
wylle make it vppe of myne owne. Al­
soo to paye home agayne, or to yelde.
Id erat non tam accipere beneficium, quam
refundere, That was not soo moche, to
receyue a good tourne, as to doo a good
tourne. Alsoo to caste vppe by vomyte.
Quod hesterna crapula ingurgitauerat, pa­
lam refudit, That whyche in his yester­
dayes ryotte he ingourged or deuoured,
he openely dydde parbrake or vomyte
hit vppe.
Seneca.Seneca de
benefic.Plinius.





Refutatio, a denyenge, a replycation, an
argument to the contrary.



Refuto, tare, to denie, to replye.



Regaliolus, a byrde, betwene whome and
the egle is contynual hostilitie, and is ye­
lowe of colour.



Regaliter, royally.



Regalis, le, royalle.



Regelo, are, to thawe, or resolue that, whi­
che is frosen.



Regenero, rare, to regenerate or eftesones
ingender.



Regero, gessi, gerere, to putte in wrytynge,
to brynge backe, to vomyte vp.



Regestum, erthe caste vp.



Regia, a kynges howse.



Regiesco, scere, olde writers vsed for cres­
cere, to growe.



Regificus, ca, cum, that whereby a kynge
is made.



Regilla, a kynges robe.



Regillus, a lyttell kynge. Also the name of
a ryuer in Italy.



Regimen, minis, a rule or gouernaunce.



Regina, a queene.



Regionatim, place by place, by euery regi­
on or coste.



Regio, a region or countrey, also a coste, as
easte, weste, northe, and southe.



Regium, a cytie beyonde the mountaynes
towarde Italye.



Regius, a, um, of a kynge.



Regius morbus, the iaundyse.



Regno, are, to reigne.



Regnum, a realme, and the gouernance.



Rego, xi, regere, to rule, to gouerne.



Regor, geris, to be ruled or gouerned.



Regrador, deri, di, to goo backe.



No. Mar.



Regredo, dere, to reuoke, or call agayne.



Regredior, regredi, to go backe.



Regressio, & regressus, us, a returne backe,
a resorte backe.



Regula, a rule.



Regularis, regulare, that whyche is vn­
der a rule.



Regulo, are, to rule or dyrecte.



Regulus, a Prynce or lorde of a lyttelle
countreye, proprely Reguli, be the chyl­
derne of kynges. Also Regulus is a lyt­
tell byrde, callyd a Wrenne, and a serpent
callyd a Cockatryce, whiche sleeth a man
with his syghte. It was alsoo the name
of a Consule, whiche for kepynge of his
promyse, was putte to cruelle deathe by
the Carthaginensis. Also a great Rheto­
rician in the tyme of Plynie. 



Reieculæ, uel reijculæ oues, sheepe drawen
out of the folde for aege or syckenesse,
kebbers, crones, or cullyars.



Reiectanea, of phylosophers be taken for
thynges to be abhorrid, as sycknesse, po­
uertie, and sorowe.
Vergil. in
Bucolic.


Reiectio, parbrakynge.



Reiectio sanguinis, the yssuynge oute of
bloudde atte the mouthe, the noose, or
the vaynes.



Reiectus, ta, tum, caste out, caste awaye, or
put forthe.



Reijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caste awaye, to dryue
backe. Tityre pascentes a flumine reiice ca­
pellas, Tityre dryue thy gotes, that doo
fede, awaye from the ryuer. Also to re­
fuse, to put away. Me uero tanquam inuti­
lem reiecerunt, As for me they refused, as
a person vnprofytable. Si altera illa magis
instabit, forsitam nos reiiciat: If the other wil
be importunate, perchaunce they wyll put
me away.
Apuleius.Terent. in
Phorm.


Reiicere iudices aut testes, to refuse iudges
or wytnesses.



Reiicere, to parbrake or vomyte . Senos
sextantes non excessit: aut si excessisset, reii­
ciebantur, He exceded not twelue oun­
ces, yf he passed that, they were caste vp
agayne.
Seutonius
in August.


Relatio, a reporte, a respecte: Amonge
Logycians, it is the effecte of the Re­
latyue, as the father, the sonne, the may­
ster, the seruaunt, the husbande, the wife.
For withoute the oone, the other canne
not retayne his name, for a sonne may not
be withoute a father: nor a wyfe with­
oute a husbande, nor a seruaunt withoute
a mayster.



Relati in ærarios, were they, whiche for
some defaute were by the maysters of ma­
ners, called Censores, put out of the num­
bre of Citisens, and dyd only pay tribute,
or heedsyluer, as straungers.



Relatiue, hauynge relacion to a thynge.



Relatiuum, a relatife, whiche hath relation
ro some thynge.



Relaxo, are, to lowse.



Relegatus, banysshed.



Relegatio, a banysshemente oute of his
countreye.



Relego, relegare, to banysshe, to remoue,
to seuer oone frome an nother, to sende
awaye.



Religatus, ta, tum, faste bounde.



Relego, legi, legere, to rede agayne.



Relicinus, he that hathe a good busshe of
heare, well trymmed behynde.



Relicina frons, a fayre large and hygh for­
heed, without heare.



Relictus, ta, tum, forsaken or lefte.



Relictus sum mihi, I am lefte alone.



Religio, onis, relygion, a reuerende drede,




doubte leste he shall offende. Also consci­
ence, or as a man mought say, a scruple of
conscience.
Plautus in
Curgul.


Religiose, fearefully, doubtefully, daunge­
rousely, scrupulously.



Religiosus, sa, sum, relygious, dredefulle,
doubtefull.



Liuius.6.



In religionem uertere, to feare leeste god
were displeased.



Religionem inducere, to brynge in feare of
goddis displeasure.



Suetonius
in August.



Religio est, it is not lefull. Huc introire, nisi
necessario, & caste, religio est, To enter in
there, but for necessitie, and chastely, it is
not lefull.



Religiosus, sa, sum, religious. also supersti­
tious.



Terent in
Heauton.



Religiose, auysedly, circumspectly, curiously.



Plautus in
Styc.



Relino, releui, relinere, to open that whiche
is stopped. Releui omnia dolia, I haue
broched all th vesselles. Nolo ego nos
pro summo bibere: nulli relerimus postea,
I wolde not that we dranke all out: for I
wyll for no manne sette any a broche af­
terwarde.



Religionis obstringere, whiche is common­
ly sayde to haue conscyence in a thynge.



Religioni obstringi, to be bound in conscience.



Religioni exoluere, to discharge a mannes
conscyence.



Religo, are, to loose or vnbynde.



Relimino, to gyue lyght.



Relinquo, liqui, relinquere, to leaue. Relin­
quere animam, to dye. Relinquit eum ani­
mus, His harte fayleth hym.



Reliquatores, they whyche bene in arre­
rage on theyr accompte. Also any other,
whiche haue in their handes some part of
that, whiche they ought to haue payde.



Reliqui&ecedil;, that whyche is lefte.



Reliquium facere, to leane, to omytte.



Reliquus, a, um, the remenaunt, that which
remayneth.



Reliquum est, the reste is.



Pli. in epis.



Reluceo, luxi, cere, to shyne or be bryght.



Reluctor, tari, to contende or striue agayne.



Reluo, luere, to paye agayne that which is
borowed, to fetch home a gage or pledge.
Also to washe eftesoones.



Remandere, to chewe the cudde.



Remaneo, si, nêre, to abyde stylle.



Remano, are, to tourne backe to a place.



Remansio, an abydynge.



Remeculi, lyttell shyppes, whiche men of
Lemnos vsed.



Remedium, remedye.



Remeligo, a fysshe, whyche cleauynge to
the keale of a shyppe, causeth hym to tary.



Remendo, are, to amende or correct a faut.



Remeo, are, to retourne or go back ageyn.



Remigatio, a rowynge or saylynge.



Remiges, they whyche doo rowe in a ga­
laye or boote.



Remigium, the rowynge of a shyp or bote.



Remigo, are, to rowe.



Remigro, are, to go backe, to returne.



Remillum, a thynge croked and brode.



Reminiscor, sceris, sci, to calle agayne to re­
membraunce.



Reminiscentia, the remembraunce of that,
whiche was ones in the mynde.



Remisse, fayntly, without courage, humbly:
Sometyme meryly.



Remissio, remyssion, forgyuenesse, a re­
creatyng of mynde after study or labour.



Remissus, a, um, gladde, remytted or forgi­
uen, sente agayne.



Remitto, misi, remittere, to sende, to sende
agayne, to sende backe, to release or for­
gyue, to graunt, to lette downe, to com­
mytte, or remytte, to relinquishe or leaue.



Remittere animum, to putte awaye care, to
vnbende or louse.



Remittere, to cesse. Remittere aliquid adole­
centiæ, pardon him somwhat for his youth.



Remittere nuntium. Gratiam habeo tibi, qum
copiam istam mihi & potestatem facis, ut
ego ad parentes remittam nuntium: I thanke
the, that thou gyuest me this leaue, and
also authoritie, that I maye sende to thy
frendes, to prouyde for the els where.
Plautus in
cap.


Remissio, a release, a losynge, a withdra­
wyng. Oculorum remissio, a withdrawing
of the looke.



Remora, a lyttell fyshe, whyche retayneth
a great shyppe vnder sayle.



Ci. de ora.



Remorbesco, to fall eftesones into sicknes.



Remordeo, dêre, to tourment the mynde,
or make one heuy.



Remores, byrdes, whyche by their flyght
or voyce sygnyfyed, that the thyng pur­
posed was not to be folowed.



Remoria, a place on the toppe of the hyl
callyd Auentinus, where Remus stoode,
and by the flyght of byrdes, aduysed the
buyldynge of Rome.



Remona, the dwellynge house of Remus. 



Remoueo, êre, to remoue, to take awaye.



Remouete moram, make ye hast, spede you.



Remoror, aris, ari, to tary or make to abide.



Remugio, giui, gire, to belowe or lowe a­
gayne, to render a great sowne.



Remulco, care, & remulculo, is proprely to
drawe a greatte shyp or barge with a lasse
vessell, by translation it signifieth to drawe
a thynge easyly.



Remulcus, a lyttell bote or barke.



Remulinus ager, Remus felde.






Perottus.



Remuncop&ecedil;, instrumentes, wherwith ship­
pes be drawen on lande.



Remunero, are, & remuneror, ari, to reward
to recompense a good tourne.



Remuneratio, recompense.



Remus, the brother of Romulus, whyche
buylded Rome.



Renanciscor, sceris, sci, to gette agayne.



Renarro, are, to telle, to repete.



Renato, tare, to swym back, or swym agayn.



Renes, the kydneyes.



Renideo, dêre, to shyne, to sauour or smell.



Renodo, dare, to vnknytte, or vndo a knot.



Renones, garmentes made of skynnes of
wolfes or other beastes, wherin the an­
cient Almaynes were wont to lye in the warres.



Renouo, are, to renewe.



Renouello, lare, to make newe agayne.



Rentifolia, a kynde of wylde roses, why­
che haue neither good sauour nor facion.



Renumero, rare, to paye agayne moneye,
whiche is receyued.



Renuntiata, an Ile by Ethiope, soo ryche,
that the inhabytantes doo giue for a hors
by exchaunge, a talent of golde.



Renuntio, are, to report, to signify, to shew
openly, to renounce, to refuse, to resigne,
sometyme to restore.



Renuntiare uitæ, to refuse to lyue.



Renuntiatur Consul, he is declared consule.



Renuntiatio, a report, also a resignation of
an offyce. also a summons by an offycer.



Renuntij, they whyche do carye tydynges
from one to an other.
Plautus in
Trin.


Renuo, nuere, to refuse, to despyse.



Renutus, nutus, a refusalle or denyar with
countenance.



Reor, reris, ratus sum, I suppose.



Repagulum, a doore or wyndowe or other
thynge that shutteth or closeth.



Repages, idem.



Repandus, a, um, bent or bowed, and brode
backwarde, as ores were in the old tyme.



Repando, dere, to bende backe.



Reparo, rare, to repayre, to restore to the
fyrste astate.



Reparamen, & reparatio, a repayrynge or
reparation.



Reparco, parsi, sere, to spare.



Repastinatio, a newe dyggynge aboute vy­
nes. Also a bryngyng of grounde to tem­
per with moche labour and dyggynge.



Repastinatus, ta, tum, newe digged or brought
in temper.



Repastino, are, to dygge agayne about vy­
nes, to alter lande or grounde, with ofte
dyggynge or labourynge.



Repastinor, nari, to be eftesones dygged, or
brought into temper.



Repauso, are, to take reste.



Repedo, are, to go awaye, to go backe.



Repello, puli, pellere, to put backe, to repel.



Rependo, di, dere, to recompence.



Repenso, are, to ponder, to ouersee, to iuge.



Repente, sodaynely.



Repentinus, a, um, sodayne.



Reperibitur, it shall be founde.



Repertor, he that fyndeth.



Repercutio, cussi, cutere, to stryke agayn, to
reuerberate.



Repercussus, sus, a reuerberation or stry­
kynge often.



Reperio, reperi, reperire, to fynde by auen­
ture. sometyme otherwise.



Plautus.



Repetere, to calle agayne. Hem repudiatus
repetor, Howe nowe, beinge ones refu­
sed, I am callyd agayne. Alta repetita, re­
hersed from the begynning, farre fought,
or farre fette.
Ter. in An.


Repetere pœnas, ab aliquo, to be auengyd
on one.



Repeto, I remembre. Me quidem adolescen­
tulo, repeto quendam principem nomine
alternis diebus declamare, alternis disputa­
re, I remembre me, whan I was a boye,
that one, whyche was a prynce of name,
dydde one daye declame, an nother daye
dispute.



Repetenti memoria, to cal to remembrance.



Repeto, tij, tere, to aske again, to aske often,
or eftesoones, to reherce agayne, or re­
pete, to reuolue.



Repetundarum accusari, is proprely where
a man sometime beinge in great auctoritie
and hauyng the rule of a countrey, is ac­
cused and callyd to a reckenynge, for all
that he hath receyued, being in his office,
aboue that whiche is his ordynarye allo­
waunce, also for all thynge that he tooke
wrongefully from any persone or towne:
whyche was the mooste necessarie action
for a publyke weale, that mought be deui­
sed, to be nowe put in execution.



Repignerator, he that redemeth or quiteth
his gage or pledge.



Repignero, are, to quite or redeme a pledge
or gage. It may be taken sometyme with
vs, that whyche in our lawe is callyd to
repleuy: and repignoratio, a repleuy: and
repignoratitia actio, for a replegiare.



Replaudo, dere, to make noise with the han­
des beaten togither.



Replicatio, a replycation or vnfoldynge of
a thynge.



Replico, care, to vnfolde. also to reply.



Replumbo, are, to vnsowlder.



Iure com. ff.li.
de auro &
argento.



Repo, repsi, pere, to crepe, to runne as roo­
tes do in the grounde.






Repoleo, liui, lire, to polyshe agayne.



Repolleo, lere, to be moche able, to be of
power to doo.



Colum. 5.



Repollesco, scere, to be eftesoones stronge
or in force.



Reponere fidem, to truste.



Reponere, is also to put in by writing. Scri­
ptor honoratum si forte reponis Achillem,
Thou that writest, if peraduenture thou
puttest in Achylles. 
Horatius.


Repono, sui, nere, to putte or sette agayne in
his place, to laye vp, to recite agayne, to
hyde, to redelyuer or restore, to reuoke,
to represse, to lay to more, or exaggerate,
to heape one on an other, to make to grow
agayne, to brynge agayne.
Et quantum longis carpent armenta diebus,
Exigua tantum gelidus ros nocte reponet:
Loke howe moche the sheepe in the longe
dayes shall byte.
The colde dewe in oone nyghte with gro­
wynge shall requyte.
Vergeo.2.


Reporto, are, to brynge backe, or agayne.



Reposco, poposci, scere, to aske agayne that
whyche is myne owne, or is as it were
dewe to me.



Repositorium, a storehowse.



Repositus, & repostus, ta, tum, layd vppe, to
hyde. Manet alta mente repostum, Iudicium
Paridis, Depe in his minde, remayned the
iudgement, that Parys gaue betwene the
goddesses, of the whiche sprange the oc­
casyon of the destruction of Troye.



Repotium, whan the day after the mariage
frendes do come & drinke with the bride.



Reprehendo, dere, to plucke backe, to re­
proue. Reprehensi, caught.



Represento, tare, to represent, to render, to
brynge in presence, or present a thynge, to
laye before one.



Reprimo, mere, to refrayne, to lette.



Reprobo, are, to reproue.



Reprobus, a man reproued.



Reproces, sharpe.



Reptile, all thynge that crepeth.



Repto, tare, to crepe moch: also to go soft­
ly lyke a snayle.



Repudio, are, to forsake, as a man forsaketh
his wife, also to refuse, to abandon, or leue.
Repudio consilium, quod primum intende­
ram, I wyll nowe leaue the counsayle that
I fyrste intended to folowe.
Ter. in An.


Repudium, a deuorce.



Repudium remittere, to be deuorced.



Repudium renuntiare, to declare a deuorce.
Is me nunc repudium renuntiare iussit tibi,
He wylled me to declare to the, that he
hath forsaken the.
Plautus in
Aulul.


Repudios&ecedil; nuptiæ, mariage, after the which
foloweth sone after a deuorce, Necessita­
te me mala ut fiam facis, uerum uideto, me
vbi uoles nuptum dare, ne hac fama faciat,
repudosas nuptias, Thou compellest me to
be nought, but take hede, that where thon
wylte mary me, by that reporte he shall
make suche a weddynge as shall soone af­
ter be dissolued or broken.
Plautus in
Persa.


Repuerasco, scere, to be eftesones a chylde.



Repugno, are, to repugne or say contrary,
to resyste.



Repugnanter, an aduerbe, whiche signyfy­
eth contrariously, displeasantly. Vt igitur
monere & moneri, proprium est uer&ecedil; ami­
citi&ecedil;, & alterum libere facere, non aspere:
alterum pacienter accipere non repugnan­
ter, sic habendum est nullam in amicitijs pe­
stem esse maiorem, quam adulationem, blan­
ditias, assentationem, Lyke therfore as to
giue counsayle, and to be counsailed, pro­
prely belongeth to very frendeshyp, also
the tone to do euery thyng frankely, the
tother to take all thynge pacientely, not
displeasantly: So it is to be consydered,
that in frendshyp there is no more pesti­
lence, than flatterye, fayre wordes, and
consentynge to all thynges.
Cicero de
amicitia.


Repugnantia, repugnancy, where one thing
agre eth not with an nother.



Repungo, gere, to prycke agayne, or mutu­
ally displease or offende.



Repulsa, a puttynge backe of hym, whiche
eyther demaundeth or looketh for autho­
ritie or offyce.



Repulsor, oris, he that putteth an nother
man backe.



Repulsus, he that is put backe.



Reputo, tare, to thynke often, to consyder
moche, to reuolue in the mynde, to compt.
Also to cut of eftesoones.



Requies, reste.



Requiesco, scere, to reste or take reste.



Requietus, ta, tum, that whiche resteth.



Requiro, requisiui, requirere, to seke efteso­
nes or often, to requyre.



Res, occasion. E re nata melius fieri haud
potuit, quemfactum est, Of the occasion begon
it coulde not better haue ben doone, than
it is. Also it sygnifieth meane. Iam reppe­
ri rem, quo pacto nec fur, nec sotius fies: I
haue nowe founde the meane, howe thou
shalt be neyther a thefe, nor a companion
with hym.
Terent. in
Adelph.Plautus in
Ruden.


Rem facere, to gayne or wynne. Nunquam
rem facies: abi, nescis inescare homines,
Thou shalte neuer gayne penye: Gette
the hense, thou cannest noo skylle to an­
gle menne.
Terent. in
Adelph.


Rem habere cum aliquo, to haue to do with




one to meddell with one.
Ter. in Eu.


Res gerere, to haue or make warres. Scipi­
one Aemiliano res in Affrica gerente, Poly­
bius annalium conditor, ab eo accepta classe
scrutandi orbis illius gratia circunuectus est:
Scipion Emilianus making warres in Af­
frike, Polybius the wrytar of Histories,
with a certayne numbre of shyppes, was
conuayed aboute that coste, to inserche
that parte of the worlde.
Plinius.
lib.5.


Plautus in
Epidico.



Re iuuare, to helpe with deedes & not with
wordes onely. Is amicus, qui in re dubia re
iuuat, vbi re est opus, He is a frende, which
in a case that is doubteful, helpeth me with
his deedes, where deedes are required.
Quid isti credam? res ipsa indicat: what shal
I trust hym? the deede selfe declareth.
Verba ad rem conferre, to doo as he sayth.
Vsque adeo ego illius ferre possum ineptias,&
magnifica verba, verba dum sint, verum enim,
si ad rem conferentur, vapulabit: Hitherto
I can suffre his lewdenesse, and bragges,
as longe as they are but wordes: but yf he
do as he sayth, he shall smart therfore.
Terent. in
Eunucho.Terent. in
Eunucho.


Re vera, in deede, in very trouthe, matter
in dede.



Resalutatio, a courtayse speakynge to hym
that speaketh to you, a resalutinge.



Resaluto, salutare, to salute hym that salu­
teth you.



Resarcio, si, cire, to amende, to refourme.



Resarrio, iui, ire, to weede eftsones corne.



Res, a thinge, the thinge, the matter: some­
tyme astate, condicion, busynesse, contenti­
on, cause, rychesse or substance, profyte,
weale, experience.



Res est, it is matter in dede.



Res ad manticam redijt, it is all come to a
bagge and a staffe, or a staffe and a walet.



Res comperendinata, a mater adiourned or
deferred vntyll the thirde daye.



Res iudicata, the matter or cause finally de­
termyned and adiuged.



Res controuersa, the mater in sute.



Res forensis, a mater in lawe.



Respublica, a publike weale.



Rescindo, scidi, scindere, to cut or breake in
sunder, to take awaye, to destroye, to make
voyde or repell an acte or lawe, to breake
vp. Cœlum rescindere fratres, Ter sunt co­
nati: Thries the brethern assayed to breke
vp heuen, for to enter.
Vergil
Geor. li.1.


Rescio, sciui, scire, to knowe a thinge, which
is hydde and kepte secrete: also to knowe
a thinge after that it is done, whiche was
not knowen before.



Rescisco, scere, idem quod Rescio.



Rescribo, psi, bere, to wryte agayne, to rede­
lyuer, to repay money.



Reseco, are, to cut awaye that which is su­
perfluouse.



Resecare ad viuum, to pare to the quicke, to
touche the quicke in a mater.



Resecro, crare, to praye or desire eftsones:
also to assoyle one of his auowe.



Resegmen, the paringe of a mans nayles.



Resero, are, to open a thinge that is closed.



Resero, rere, to sow or set agayne.



Reseruatio, a reseruation, a kepyng of some
thyng e.



Reseruo, uare, to kepe a part frome other
thinges, to reserue.



Reses, idis, ydell frome accustumed labour
or occupacion.



Resex, secis, that which is cut and springeth
agayne, and beareth more fruyte than it
dyd before.
Col. lib.3.


Resideo, resedi, residere, to rest, to sytte, to
stande fast.



Resido, sedi, sidere, to syt downe, also to a­
bide. Nam Viennensium vitia inter ipsos re­
sidunt, nostra late vagantur, For the faultes
of men of Vienne, doo abyde with theym,
oures runne abrode, and be euery where
knowen.
Plinius in
Episto.


Residet in vultu, there doeth rest or appiere
in the vysage. Quorum non in sententia so­
lum, sed etiam in nutu residebat autoritas, In
whose sentence not onely, but also counte­
naunce, autoritie rested.
Cic. de Se.


Residuus, a, um, the rest or remnaunt.



Resigno, are, to open that which is sealed:
sometyme to seale fast, also to shyt, some­
tyme to restore agayne, also to resigne or
surrendre.



Resignatum æs, wages stopped for negli­
gent seruice in warres.



Resilio, lij, iire, to lepe backe, or steppe away
quickely.



Resimus, he that hath a camoysenose, that
is to saye, tourned vpwarde.



Resina, rosyn, all lyke gumme whyche run­
neth out of trees.



Resinatus, sinata, tum, rased, or dressed with
rosyn.



Resipio, pui, pere, idem quod Resipisco.



Resipisco, resipui, resipiscere, to retourne to
perfect vnderstanding, to be eftsones wise,
where before he erred.



Resisto, restiti, resistere, to resyste or with­
stande.



Resoluo, uere, to resolue, to destroye, to pay
dettes, to remoue, to vndo or vnlowse.



Resolutio neruorum, the palsey.



Resono, nare, to sowne agayne, to make an
Eccho.



Resorbeo, bui, & psi, bere, to poure out or
disgorge the licour that was receyued.






Respecto, are, to see often, to loue, to helpe.



Respectus, tus, a looke: also, respect or re­
garde. Neque eo respectu commotus disces­
serat: Hauynge no regarde thereunto he
departed.
Plini.


Respergo, si, gere, to cast water or other li­
cour about, to sprynkle.



Respergimen, a sprynklynge or castynge a­
bout of licour.



Ter. in An.



Respicere, to helpe or socour. Age, me in tuis
secundis rebus respice: Let se, nowe in thy
prosperitie, socoure me.



Respicit nos deus, god hath pytie on vs.
Tace modo, deus respiciet nos aliquis, peace
now, some god will haue pitie on vs.
Plautus in
Bacch.


Respicere se, to take hede or haue regarde
of hym self. Non soles respicere te, cum di­
cas iniuste alteri? Art thou not wont to take
hede of thy selfe, whan thou sayest wrong
of another man? Non tu te cohibes? non te
respicis? non tibi exempli satis sum? Wilte
thou not beware? wilt thou not take hede
of thy self? am not I a good example vn­
to the?
Plautus in
Pseudolo.Terent. in
Heaut.


Respicio, exi, spicere, to loke backe, to haue
regarde, to prouyde, to remedy, to kepe, to
reserue, to loue.



Respiro, are, to take brethe, also to take com­
forte, to retourne to the fyrst state. Si armis
aut conditione positis, aut fatigatione abie­
ctis aut victoria detractis, ciuitas respiraue­
rit: & dignitate tua tibi, & fortuna vti licebit:
If that harneyse, eyther by condicions of
peace beinge layde away, or by werynesse
of both partes beinge throwen awaye, or
pulled awaye by victory, the citie shall re­
couer her fyrst estimation, thou than shalt
enioye thy possessions and dignitie.
Cice. Aul.
Torquato.


Resplendeo, dere, to shyne.



Respondeo, di, dere, to aunswere, to appiere
whan one is called, to agree, to consent or
be lyke or equall, to be against, as one thing
set or lyenge agaynste another.



Responsio, an aunswere.



Responsito, tare, to make or gyue aunswere:
it pertayned proprely to lawiars: and them
whyche hadde the interpretation of cere­
monyes.



Cicer. pro
Cluen.



Responso are, to aunswere.



Responsum, an aunswere.



Responsus, sus, sui, where one thinge doeth
agree with another, a consent, a conue­
niencye.



Respuo, ere, to refuse, or reiect.



Restagno, restagnare, to contayne or holde
water.



Restat, Restare, to be or remayne of that
thinge, that is lefte, to stande backe, to re­
syste. Hoc me restat, that remayneth or
abydeth for me.



Restauro, Restaurare, to restore, or make a­
gayne.



Restibilis, that which is renewed, or sowen
agayne.



Restibilis ager, a feelde which is sowen two
yeres togither.



Restinguo, xi, guere, to stint or put oute, or
cesse, as fyre, lyght, and thurst.



Restio, onis, a roper: alsoo he that hangeth
hym selfe.



Restipulatio, a puttynge in of pledges, put in
gage or pledge, for to make aunswere to
an action.
Plautus.


Restipulor, aris, ari, to make aunswere in the
lawe.



Restire, to be redy to be sowen, ploughed, or
dygged.



Restis, a halter or corde, a rope or bunche of
of garlyke or onyons.



Restem ducere, whan maydens and children
daunse togither hande in hande, or with
napkens, leadynge one another. Ad restim
res redijt, the mater is in despayre, or de­
sperate.



Restito, tare, to abyde or tary.



Restituo, ere, to restore, to yelde agayne.



Restitutio, restitution.



Resto, tare, to remayne, to tary. Hic nunc me
credit aliquam sibi fallaciam portare, & ea
me hic restitisse gratia: He weeneth, that I
warke hym some falshede, and that I tary
styll therfore. Nullam querentes volupta­
tem Stoici restant, The Stoike Philoso­
phers do resist or sticke to their opynion,
sekinge for no pleasure.
Ter. in An.Cicero de
finibus.


Restat mihi, it taryeth for me: it shal happen
vnto me.



Restricte & Restrictim, straytely, or
strayte.



Restringo, xi, stringere, to bynde or strayne
backwarde, to bynde agayne, to restrayne:
sometyme it signifyeth to lowse. Apulei.
Iumentum restrinxit, abireque stabulo liberum
sinit: he lowsed his horse, and let hym out
of the stable at libertye.



Resulto, tare, to lepe agaynste a thinge, to
rebounde, to rebelle, to leape or steppe
backe.



Resumo, psi, sumere, to take agayne, to
resume.



Resuo, ere, to sowe agayne, or make a dou­
ble styche: also to ryppe or vndo that whi­
che is sowen, to vnstytche. Sumenti virilem
togam, tunica laticlaui resuta ex vtraque parte,
ad pedes decidit: Whan he came fyrste to
mannes age, his Senatours cote beynge
rypte on bothe sydes, fell downe to his
feete.
Suet. in au.





Resupinus, na, num, vpryght, the bely vp­
warde.



Resurgo, rexi, gere, to aryse vppe.



Resurrectio, resurrection.



Resupino, nare, to tourne vpwarde, or vp­
right, to reuoke or calle backe, to differ, to
peruerte.



Retæ, trees growyng on the bankes of ry­
uers, or in the ryuers.



Retardatio, a taryenge.



Retardo, dare, to make to tary.



Rete, tis, a nette.



Retego, Retexi, tegere, to discouer or dis­
close.



Retento, entare, to retayne often, to tempte
eftsones.



Retexo, ere, to vntwyste or vntwyne, or vn­
wynde: sometyme to twist or wynde eftso­
nes, to dissolue.



Retiaculum, a lytle net.



Retiarius, he that casteth a nette, proprely
in fyghtynge to apprehende his aduer­
sarye.



Retia, nettes, sometyme it signifyeth one
nette.



Reticeo, cui, ticêre, to holde ones peace, to
speake no worde, to kepe secrete, to saye
nothynge.



Reticentia, silence, whan one holdeth his
peace.



Reticula, a lytle net, wherin a mans heare or
womens is trussed.



Reticulatus, Reticulata, culatum, made lyke
a nette.



Reticulum, a cawle or coyfe: also a bagge,
wherin meate is caryed.



Retinaculum, what so euer holdeth any o­
ther thinge, a staye.



Retinere, to holde vppe, that a man fall not.
Ah retine me obsecro . B. obsecro quid tibi
est? An. Disperij. T. perij misera, quid stupes
Antiphila? Oh holde me vppe I praye the.
B. alak what ayleth the? A. I am vndone.
B. alas that euer I was borne, why doth
thy hart fayle the Antiphila? 
Terent. in
Heauton.


Retineo, nui, nere, to holde agayne, to re­
tayne, to kepe in remembraunce.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Retinere, to restrayne or let one frome do­
inge that, that he wolde. Pudore & libera­
litate lib eros retinere satius esse credo, quam
metu: I thinke it better to restrayne chil­
dren frome their wanton willes, by shame
and liberalitie, than with feare.



Retinens, he that kepeth still.



Retiolum, a Cawle, or coyfe.



Retondeo, dere, to klyppe all ouer.



Retorqueo, torsi, quere, to cast backewarde,
to throwe or shute agayne.



Retorresco, retorrescere, to be burnedde
with the sunne.



Retorridus, da, dum, burned or seryd.



Retracto, ctare, to calle backe, or reuoke a
thinge that is done, to drawe backe, to ex­
cuse, to laye to another man, to drawe vp.



Retrahe, traxi, trahere, to pull or drawe back,
or to drawe to.



Retribuo, buere, to recompence.



Retrica, old writars called the water, wher­
with gardens are watered.



Retrimentum, the dragges of a thynge: som­
tyme ordure or dung.



Retro, behynde.



Retrocedo, cessi, cedere, to go backe.



Retrorsum, bacwarde.



Retrorsus, a, um, turned backewarde.



Retrudo, si, dere, to put backe.



Retundo, dere, to make blunt or dull, that
whyche is sharpe: also to beate often on a
thynge.



Retusus, a, um, dull, blunt, contrary to sharp.
Aliæ agrorum partes, quæ acuta ingenia gi­
gnant, ali&ecedil; quæ retusa: Some partes of con­
trayes there be, whyche do bringe forth
sharpe wyttes, some bringe forth dull.
Cic. de Di.


Reualesco, scere, to be recouered frome sic­
kenesse.



Reueho, uexi, here, to brynge or cary backe,
or agayne.



Reuelatio, a reuelynge or a disclosynge of a
thinge.



Reuello, reuellere, to plucke backe, to pull
agayne.



Reuelo, are, to discouer.



Reuenio, nire, to come agayne.



Reuerendus, worthy reuerence.



Reuerens, rentior, rentissimus, he that doeth
reuerence.



Reuerenter, reuerently.



Reuerentia, reuerence or honour doone
to one.



Reuereor, reris, reri, to haue in reuerence.



Reuersio, a retourne.



Budeus.



Reuertor, teris, ti, to retourne.



Reuerto, idem.



Reuincio, uinxi, uincere, to bynde backe or
behynde, as to bynde ones handes be­
hynde hym.
Vergil.
Gell.


Reuincere paratus est, whyche the lawyars
do saye, Paratus est verificare, He is redy
to auerre.



Reuiso, sere, to retourne to see.



Reuiuisco, scere, to be reuyued.



Reuoco, uocare, to calle backe, to reuoke, to
brynge agayne, to drawe backe, to rayse
frome deth.



Reuocare pedem, to turne backe, to recule.



Reuocare, to restore or renewe. Item circa
omnium ordinum statum domi, forisque, aut




correxit, aut exoleta reuocauit, aut etiam no­
ua instituit: Moreouer concernynge the
state of al degrees, as wel within his house
as withoute, eyther he dyd amende them,
or renewed those thynges that were oute
of vse, or els ordayned newe.



Reuocatio, a reuocation or callynge backe.



Budeus.



Reuocare testes, to reherce the deposicions
of witnesses, Publication.



Reuolo, are, to flee backe.



Reuoluo, ui, uere, to turne vppe and downe,
to reuolue, to tourne backe, to remoue.



Reuolutus, ta, tum, to be tourned backe, to
be remoued.



Reuolutio, a tournynge backe to the firste
place or poynt: a reuolucion or tournynge
of celestiall bodyes or spheres.



Reuorto, tere, olde wrytars vsed for Reuer­
tor, to retourne.



Reus, he that is sued or accused, sometyme
he that is gyltye.



Reus facti, gylty of an offence.



Reus agitur, he is sued or accused.



Reus peragitur, he that is condemned.



Reus stipulando, he that bargayneth.



Reus uoti, he that hath auowed.



Reum subdere, to accuse one of gret offence



Rex regis, a kynge.



Rex sacrificulus, was a chief minister of sa­
crifices amonge the Romayns onely.



¶ R, ANTE H.

RHabarbarum, Rubarbe, a preciouse
roote, medicinable to pourge coler.
also to corroborate the stomake and
lyuer.



Rachinon, a spyder, hauynge a lytle blacke
heed, and is somewhat whyte, and hath
short feete, whose bytynge is as venymous
as the styngynge of a Scorpion.



Rhadamanthus, was kynge of Licia, which
was a strayghte executour of iustice: and
therfore was supposed of the Paynyms
to be afterwarde one of the iuges in hell.



Rhagades, & Rhagadiæ, certayne kleftes
or as it were Scrachis aboute the siege or
fundament.



Pli. li.24.
cap.14.



Rhamnus, a kynde of brembles, whyche is
whyte, and beareth more frute than other
do, and also hath floures, & sendeth forth
branches with strayght prickes, not croked
as other are, and hath brode leues.



Rhamnusia, was called goddesse of ven­
geaunce.



Rhamnusius, a man of a town called Rham­
nus, by Athenes.



Rhampsinithus, the propre name of a kynge
of Egypte.



Rhaphanus, an herbe called Radysshe.



Rhebanus, a ryuer in the mouth of Bospho­
rus, a countraye in Thracia.



Rhea, was called the mother of goddes,
called also Cibele. 



Rhea Syluia, the mother of Romulus and
Rhemus. 



Rheda, a chariot.



Rhedarius, a chariotman.



Rhegiam, a citie on the bordure of Italy to­
warde Sicile: also an other citye not ferre
frome Parma.



Rheginus, a man of the citie of Rhegium in
Calabre.



Rhemi, people in Fraunce, called also Rhe­
menses.



Rhenones, cotes made of the skynnes of
beastes.



Rhenus, a noble ryuer in Germania, called
the Rheyne.



Rhenense vinum, Rheynisshe wyne.



Rhenenses, people dwellynge on the ryuer
of Rheyne.



Rheon, Reubarbe.



Rhesus, kynge of Thracia, whiche came to
the ayde of the Troianes, and was slayne
of Diomedes: of whome a ryuer aboute
Troye was called Rhesus.



Rheti, a people in Italy.



Rhetia, a countraye in Germany, whyche
some men doo suppose to be Bauaria, or
Beuer, called in Duche, Berue.



Rhetor, oris, he that teacheth Rhetorike.



Rhetorica, Rhetorike, or the crafte of elo­
quence.



Rhetoricor, cari, to speake Rhetorike.



Rhetorice, lyke a Rhetorician.



Rhetus, a gyaunt, whome Dionyse, beinge
tourned into a lyon, slewe.



Rhetoricus, an oratour, or a man cunnyng in
the craft of eloquence.



Rhetorisso, are, to speake in the fourme of
Rhetorike.



Rheuma, a rewme or distillation of hu­
mours.



Rheumatismus, the disease of rheume.



Rhibis, a bremble called Raspys.



Rhinoceron, ontis, a best that hath an horne
in his nose, whyche naturally is enemy to
the Olyphant: it is also an oyle vessell, out
of the which oyle is dropped.



Rhinocerotis nasum habere, is sayd of them
that be witty. Iuuenesque, senesque, Et pueri na­
sum, Rhinocerotis habent, Yong men, olde
men, And children, and all be witty.
Horatius.


Rhodanus, a ryuer in Fraunce, called the
Rone.



Rhodia, a kynde of vynes.



Rhodites, a certayne precyouse stone, of




the colour of a rose.



Rhodope, a mountayne in Thracia.



Rhdos, an Ile called Rodes.



Rhodius, of the Rodes.



Plini.



Rhododaphne, & Rhododendros, a tree,
hauynge leaues lyke to an almonde tree,
but greatter and fatter sedes, open lyke a
horne, which hath in them wulle lyke pur­
ple silke, a longe roote, salte in tast, it gro­
weth in watry places.



Rhodonia, a gardyn of roses.



Rhodophone, that part of Syria, that goeth
ouer the mountayne of Taurus.



Rhodopeius, a, um, pertaynynge to the
mountayne, of Rhodope.



Rhombus, a fygure foure square, hauynge
the sydes equall, the corners crooked. it is
also a fysh called a Birt: also a spynnynge
wheele or tourne.



Rhœas, whan the corners of the eyen are
open, so that there doo still frome theym
continuall dropes.



Rhomphea, a sworde.



Rhœtus, a mountayne of Troye, where
Aiax Thelamonius was buryed.



Rhœton, wyne made of pomegranettes.



Rhopalon, a water lyly, called communely
Nenuphar.



Rhoxia, a countraye by Polonia.



Rhoxalani, people on the north part, of the
ryuer of Danubius, or Danowe.



Rhuteni, a people in Fraunce called
Rhodes.



Rhymnus, a ryuer.



Rhyndacus, a ryuer, which runneth in to the
see called Pontus.



Rhyparographus, a paynter of tryfles, a
Stayner.



Rhytion, a vessell lyke to a moone.



Rhythmus, numbre or armeny in speakinge.

 

¶ R, ANTE I.

RIca, a garment of purple, hemmed or
purfled. also a kerchief, whiche wo­
men do weare.



Ricinus, & Ricinum, euery garment that is
foure square. also it is a kynde of Cucum­
bres. also an herbe lyke a fygge gree, but
lesse, hauynge leues lyke to a plane tree.



Ricinium, & Ricinum, a cloke, whereof part
was cast ouer a mannes sholder.



Ricula, a handekerchief.



Rictus, & Rictum, a grynnynge or scorneful
openynge of the mouthe: also the fourme
of the vysage, whan a man grenneth, or a
dogge brawleth.



Rideo, risi, ridere, to laughe: also to skorne or
mocke.



Ridibundus, da, dum, that lawgheth moche.



Ridica, a proppe, wherwith a vyne, or other
lyke thinge is holden vp.



Ridiculare, a thinge to laughe at.



Ridiculum, idem. also a mocke.



Ridiculus, a man whome men doo mocke or
lawghe at.



Ridicularius, a, um, idem quod Ridiculum.



Ridicule, folyshly.



Ridiculosus, a, um, idem quod Ridiculus.



Ridiculose, folyshly to be lawghed at.



Rigeo, gui, gere, to be feruently colde, alsoo
to be harde or styffe.



Rigesco, scere, idem quod Rigeo.



Rigide, styffely, sharpely, cruelly.



Rigidus, da, dum, colde, harde, styffe, sharpe
or cruell.



Rigo, are, to make weate, or to water a gar­
den or felde.



Rigor, Rigoris, colde, hardenesse, styfe­
nesse.



Riguus, a, um, that maye be easyly weate or
watered.



Rima, a chynke, or kleft in woode or stone,
where it is not close ioyned.



Rimula, a lytell chynke or cleft.



Rimas agere, to be clouyn or chynked, as
tymber or bourdes are with lyenge in the
wynde.



Rimam inuenire, to fynde an excuse, or meane
to escape.
Plautus in
Cur. & in
Casina.


Rimor, aris, ari, to serche diligently, also to
kleue as tymber doeth.



Rimosus, a, um, full of kleftes of chynkes.



Ringo, xi, gere, to grynne or shew the teeth,
as a dogge doeth whan he will barke or
byte. also to be angry, to brawle, to barke.



Ripa, a water banke.



Riparia, a byrde whyche breedeth in water
bankes.



Ripæ, seu Ripei, mountaynes in Archadia.



Riph&ecedil;i, mountaynes in Scythia.



Riscus, a cofer couered with lether: also a
lytle wyndowe.



Risibilis, le, that which can lawghe.



Risus, laughter.



Risus sardonius, a lawghter without myrth,
as of them that be madde or cruell, such as
Irish men vse whan they be angry.



Rite, dyrectely, truely, euen as it shulde be.



Rituales, bookes, wherin the fourme of ce­
remonyes, and old maners and customes
are wryten.



Ritus, tus, an approued custome.



Riuales, they whiche equally doo loue one
womanne, or be woars togither. also they,
whose landes be deuyded by a ryuer or
brooke: also they which dwel vpon ryuers.



Riualitas, tatis, enuy or obseruaunce betwixt




the louers of one woman.



Plautus in
Asinar.



Riuinus, a wower, idem quod riualis.



Riuus, a ryuer or broke.



Riuulus, a lyttell broke.



Riuo, are, is to go to watryng, as bestis do.



Rixa, a braulynge contention.



Rixose, brawlynge.



No. Mar.



Rixosus, a stryuer or brawler.



Rixor, aris, ari, & rixo, to contende with
brawlynge.

 

¶ R, ANTE O.

RObigalia, the Ceremonyes pertay­
nynge to Robigus, the preserua­
tour of corne.



Robiginosus, a, um, moche blasted.



Robigo, was honored of the Romains for
a goddesse, whom they supposed mought
preserue their corne from blastinge.
it is also that vice in corne called blasting.



Robigus, whome the olde Romaynes na­
med the god, that preserued corne from
blastynge.



Roboraria, places, which ar paled about.



Roboreus, ea, eum, of oken tymber.



Roboro, are, to fortifie.



Roboses, the old wryters vsed for robore,
an oke.



Robur, roboris, hard oke. It is also strength
and hardenes of the body. sommetyme the
strength or hardnes of any thing generally



Robus, olde wryters called redde or co­
lour. Also al maner of matter, which had
many redde vaynes, was called Robus.
It is also a kynde of wheate, that yeldeth
fayre meale, whiche we nowe calle redde
wheate.



Robustus, ta, tum, stronge and harde.



Rodo, si, dere, to gnawe as a mouse or o­
ther lyke beaste dothe. sometyme to de­
tracte or backbyte.



Festus



Rodus, da, dum, a thyng vnperfect or rude,
vnpolysshed, vnwrought.



Rogamen, minis, a desyre.



Rogatarii, Notaryes, whyche requyred
the partyes, that eche of theym shoulde
promyse.



Plautus.



Rogator, rogatoris, a begger frome doore
to doore.



Rogito, tare, to intreate or demande, to in­
quyre often, to aske for a thynge.



Rogo, are, to requyre, to pray, to inquyre,
to aske of one, to inacte.



Rogare populum, to treat with the people.



Quintilia.



Rogare sacramento, to sweare oone, or to
gyue to hym an othe.



Rogatio, was amonge the Romaynes,
whanne the Tribunes, whyche were the
heed officers of the people, were content
that any acte shoulde passe, whyche was
made by the senate, or by the same Tribu­
nes deuysed.



Rogus, a great fyre, wherein deed bodies
were bourned.



Roma, the citie of Rome.



Romanensis, he that commeth from an no­
ther countrey, and dwelleth at Rome.



Romania, is a countrey called Thracia.



Romanus, a Romayne.



Romanus, na, num, of Rome.



Romandui, Normandes.



Romula, a tree, vnder the whiche Romu­
lus and Remus were founde.



Romuleus, a, um, & Romulidus, da, dum, of
Romulus. 



Romulus, the fyrste kynge of Romaines.



Ronchisso, are, to route or snorte.



Ronchus, a routynge. sometyme a scorne.



Ronchisonus, he that routeth or snorteth.



Rorarii milites, men in the vauntgarde, or a
forwarde of a battayle.



Roratio, is a disease in vynes, by the occa­
syon wherof the chiefe grapes doo falle
away.



Roresco, scere, to be washed with dewe.



Rorifacio, cere, to spryncle.



Rores, dewes.



Roro, are, to dewe, or droppe downe lyke
dewe.



Rorulentus, ta, tum, full of dewe.



Ros, roris, dewe.



Rosa, a Rose.



Rosaceus, a, um, of roses. Aqua Rosacea,
Rosewater.



Rosalia, garlandes of Roses.



Rosarium, a gardeyn or bedde of Roses.



Rosetum, a gardeyne of Roses.



Roseus, a, um, of a rose.



Rosidus, da, dum, wette with dewe.



Rosmarinum, Rosemary, or a lyttel shoute.



Rostellum, a lyttell beake or bylle of a byrd.



Rostra, rorum, rostris, was a place in Rome
afore the court callid Hostilia, wherin was
a pulpite, in which the oratours of Rome
were wonte to stande, whan they preched
to the people, of declared any matter, of
the whiche proceded this worde Pro ro­
stris, in the pulpit, or at the barre.



Rostrum, a beake of a byrde, a snowte of
a beaste or fyshe, also the stemme of a ship
or boote.



Rota, a wheele.



Roto, tare, to turne a thynge lyke a whele.



Rotula, a lyttell whele. Rotella, idem.



Rotunde, roundly, aptely, elegantly, hand­
somly, proprely in wordes.



Rotundus, tunda, dum, rounde, sommetyme




well compacte or facioned. Ore rotundo
loqui, to expresse moche in fewe wordes.

 

¶ R, ANTE V.

RVbefacio, cere, to make redde.



Rubefio, fieri, to be made redde.



Rubell&ecedil;, redde grapes.



Rubellum vinum, clarette wyne.



Rubeo, bere, to be redde.



Ruber, bra, brum, redde.



Rubesco, scere, to be redde.



Rubeta, a tode.



Rubetum, a busshy close.



Rubeus, ea, eum, redde.



Rubens, idem.



Rubi, borum, a towne in Campania.



Rubia, mader, wherwith clothe is dyed.



Rubicon, conis, a ryuer in Italye, whyche
dyuideth Italy from Lombardy.



Rubicundus, da, dum, ruddy.



Rubidus, da, dum, a swarte redde. Alsoo
rowghe or course, as bredde, hauynge
moche branne.



Rubigino, are, to ruste.



Rubiginosus, a, um, rustye.



Rubigo, ginis, ruste.



Rubor, oris, rednesse.



Rubrica, red chalke, or ruddell, wherwith
shepe are marked.
  


Rubriceta, rosette colour.



Rubrus, a, um, redde.



Rubricatus, ta, tum, coloured with redde,
or ruddelyd, as shepe are.



Rubus, a bremble.



Ructo, are, to belke or breake wynde vppe­
warde.



Ructito, tare, to breake wynde often.



Ructuatio, idem quod ructus.
 


Ructus, belkyng or breking wynd vpward.



Rude donari, to be discharged of attendance
proprely in warres.



Rudem accipere, hath the same signification.



Rudens, tis, a cabell of a shyppe.



Ruderarium, a rangynge syeue.



Rudero, rare, to laye on olde stoones and
rubbell.



Rudero, are, to daube or lay on morter.



Ruderatus, ta, tum, where moche rubbyshe
lyeth.



Rudetum, a place, where lyeth moche rub­
byshe or rubbell. Also lande, whiche hath
lyemty, and is newly put in tylthe.



Rudiarij, they whyche are dyscharged of
fyghtynge with swordes, as they whiche
were calledde Gladiatores, that openlye
faught, one with an other, to animate the
Romaynes, with shedyng of their blode.
They be also bodgers or amenders of old
garmentes, also seuiars, or makers of
sieues.



Rudicula, a potte stycke.



Rudi&ecedil;, arum, a citie in the further parte of
Italy, ioynynge to Apulia.



Rudimentum, the fyrst teching of children.



Rudio, dire, to teche one, which is vnlernid.



Rudis, a rodde or yerde, whiche was gy­
uen to sworde players, whan they came
to. lx. yeres olde, in token that they were
sette at libertie. sometyme lybertie frome
labour.



Rudis, de, rude, vnperfect, new, vnwrought



Rudus, ruderis, shardes or pieces of stones
broken and scattered, rubbell or rubbyshe
of olde houses.



Ruditas, rudenes, lacke of lernyng or wit.



Rudo, rudi, rudere, to braye lyke an asse. It
is sometyme spoken of a man. sometyme
of a woman.



Rufeo, & rufesco, scere, to be sommewhat
redde.



Rufo, fare, to make redde.



Rufuli, certayne Captaynes made by the
consul, who afterward were called Rutuli.



Rufus, a, um, somwhat redde.



Ruga, a wrynkle, or playte.



Rugio, giui, gire, to rore.



Rugo, gare, to be playted or wrynkled.



Rugo, xi, gere, to belke.



Ruina, ruyne, extreme decay.



Ruinosus, a, um, ruinous, in decaye.



Rulla, the staffe, wherwith the ploughman
clenseth his culter.



Ruma, was of the olde writers callydde a
teate, also it is the throte bolle.



Rumen, the dewlappe of a beaste. alsoo a
place in the bely, a panche.



Rumentum, a brastynge oute, an aposteme
that brasteth out of the fleshe.



Ruma, a goddesse, whom the paynyms did
suppose to be beneficiall to womens bre­
stes, and to suckynge chylderne.



Rumigare, to chewe the cudde.



Rumigero, rare, to carie tydynges.



Ruminatio, a chewynge of the cudde, as
a beaste dothe.



Ruminalis ficus, a figge tree, vnder the shi­
che it is supposed that a wolfe gaue sucke
to Romulus and Remus. 



Rumino, minare, & Ruminor, ari, to chewe
the cudde. Also to calle eftesones to re­
membraunce.



Rumex, icis, wylde sorell. also a weapon like
to a speare.



Rumifero, are, rumigero, rare, to beare or
brynge tydynges.



Rumis, a teate.



Rumito, to beare tydynges.






Rumigerulus, a teller of tydynges.



Rumo, are, to gyue the teate to a chylde.



Rumor, rumoris, tydynges, a rumoure, a
bruyte.



Rumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake, to make
werye. Rumpere moras, to make haste.



Rumpotinus, a busshe, whiche groweth in
France, of whom Columella writeth, that
no corne shulde be sowen within twentye
foote therof.



Rumpotinetum, the place where suche bu­
shes doo growe.



Rumusculus, a lyttell rumour or brute.



Rumula, a lyttell teate.



Runa, a weapon, sommetyme vsed in
Fraunce.



Runca, a sawe, wherwith tymber is sawen.



Runcatio, weedynge.



Runcina, a whypsawe, wherwith tymber is
sawen, it is also a bushesythe, or bylle, to
cutte busshes.



Runcino, are, to sawe tymber.



Runco, care, to wede or pull vp.



Runsor, oris, oone of the names of Pluto,
callyd god of Helle.



Vergil.



Ruere, is also to ouerthrowe, to runne forth
heedlynge. Quo moriture ruis, maioraque
uiribus audes? Whyther runnest thou hed­
lynge to be slayne, and attemptest thinges
aboue thy puissannce s Also to lyfte vp. Et
ruit atram, ad cœlum picea crassus caligine nu­
bem, And beinge thycke, it lyfted vp to
heuen a cloude, as blacke as pytche. some­
tyme it sygnyfieth to make a great noyse.
Ruit arduus æther, The highe firmamente
rumbled, or made a great noyse.
Ver. geor.


Ruo, rui, ruere, to falle, to poure out, to be
deceyued, to subuerte, to make playne,
to plucke vppe, to breake a sonder, to
throwe downe.



Rupes, be hylles, bankes, or rockes: soo
stepe downe, as noo manne maye clymme
theym.



In leg .xii.
tabularum



Rupicapra, a wylde goote.



Rupicias, for damnum dederis, thou shalte
paye or yelde damages.



Ruptus, rupta, ruptum, broken or braste, we­
ryed, torne or rent.



Ruralis, le, rusticall, or of the vyllage.



Rurestris, re, of the countreye, not of the
citie or towne.



Ruricola, a hus bande man.



Rurigena, borne in the countrey, oute of
a citie or great towne.



Ruro, rare, to do after the countrey facion.



Ruror, raris, rari, to dwelle in the countrey,
or out of the citie.



Rursus, & Rursum, eftesones or bakwarde,
on the other parte.



Rus, ruris, the countreye, oute of the Ci­
tie, where as housbandrye is vsed and
exercysed.



Ruscum, a wande.



Ruspor, ari, to serche dilygently. It is pro­
prely to shrape, as an henne dothe, whan
she seketh for meate.



Russus, & russeus, a, um, redde.



Rustica, a byrde lyke a partryche, but he
hath a longer byll.



Rusticanus, na, num, rustycall, of the coun­
trey or vyllage.



Rustice, rustycally, vncourteysly, rudely.



Rusticane, idem.



Rusticarius, caria, carium, perraynynge to
husbandrye.



Rusticatim, for rustice, an Aduerbe, chur­
lysshelye.



Rusticitas, tatis, earlysshenes, sommetyme
fearefulnesse. Et si resticitas non vetat,
ipsa rogat, And yf that foolyshe basshe­
fulnesse lette her nat, she maketh re­
queste.
Ouidius.


Rusticor, caris, cari, to dwelle in the coun­
trey, or exercyse husbandrye.



Rusticus, ca, rusticum, rustycall, vplandyshe,
homely, without curteysye.



Rusticus, is also the propre name of a man.



Ruta, Rewe, callydde alsoo herbe Grace.
It is amonge the lawyers all that is dyg­
ged oute of the grounde, as stone, cole,
leadde, and other mettalle.



Ruta & cæsa, All be it Mutius doth saye,
that in Rutis & cæsis are those thynges,
that be not faste in the grounde, nor are
any parte of the buyldynge or the coue­
rynge of a hous. Perchance we mought
name theym heyre lomes.



Rutabulum, a coole rake, to make cleane
an ouen.



Rutaceus, a, um, of rewe.



Plinius.



Rutatus, ta, tum, made of rewe.



Rutatio, & rutus, for ructatio, belkynge.



Rutellum, a lyttell mattocke.



Rutilo, lare, te shyne.



Ruto, tare, to ructo, to belke or breke wind
vpwarde.



Flac.
Cicero.



Rutor, idem.



Rutrum, a mattocke.



Rutum, idem.



Rutuba, trouble. Id postea uiderimus, nunc
sumus in rutuba, We wyll afterwarde see,
nowe be we in trouble.
Varro.


Rutubatri, men that dygge with mattockes.



Rutulus, la, lum, a brighte redde lyke to co­
les that be kyndled.



Rutupinum promontorium, a goore or el­
bowe of lande in Englande, lyenge into
the see, whiche I suppose is in Norfolke.










S##sp##A##sp##B##sp##A, a citie in Ethi­
ope.



Sabæi, people in Araby.



Sabbatarius, he that ke­
peth the sabbath daye.



Sabbatum, the day of reste
from labour.



Sabaoth, in the plurelle
numbre, in the hebrewe tunge, signifyeth
of hostes, or armyes, or powers.



Sabath, a propre name, wherof cometh Sa­
batheni, the name of a people.



Sabbatismus, a vacation after labours.



Sabbatizare, to kepe sabbat daye.



Sabe, in the tunge of Siria, is the moneth
of February.



Sabelli, people, whiche dwell in the moun­
taynes betwene the Sabines and Marsi,
in Italye.



Sabim, amonge the Arrabians doth signi­
fye god.



Sabina, a weapon lyke a bore speare.



Sabini, people in Italy.



Sabiusa, a gate at Rome, out of the whiche
men went to the Sabines.



Sabora, a citie of Araby.



Sabucus, an elder tree.



Sabuletum, a grauell pytte.



Sabulum, greatte grauell.



Sabulosus, a, um, grauelly.



Saburra, lastage, or balese, wherwith ship­
pes are euen poysed, to go vpryght, whi­
che is commonly of grauell.



Saburii, a kynde of sacrifice.



Saburro, rare, to balese a shyppe.



Sacal, a kynde of ambre founde in Egypte.



Saccarius, he that beareth a sacke.



Saccarum, sugar.



Saccellare, to apparelle or amende wynes
putte into sackes.



Sacciperium, a powche.



Sacconia, a clothe to wype a thynge with.
a napkyn, also a territorie.



Sacculus, & saccellus, a lyttell sacke.



Sacer mons, an hylle by Rome, an other by
Galatia, wherin golde is founde.



Sacerdotalis, le, pertaynynge to a prieste.



Sacon, amonge the Indians, sygnifieth a
bryght purple colour.



Sacondion, a precious stoone of a bryghte
purple colour.



Saccularius, a crafty deceyuour, whiche in
sellynge of grayne out of sackes, wylle
conuey away parte.



Saccus, a sacke. Sacculus, a bagge.



Sacellum, a chapelle.



Sacer, cra, crum, holy: sommetyme cursed,
detestable.



Sacer ignis, a sycknes, wherin is vehement
inflamation and burnyng of the body.



Sacer locus, a place consecrate or dedicate.



Sacer morbus, the fallynge syckenesse.



Sacerdos, dotis, a prieste.



Sacerdotium, priesthode. sometime a bene­
fyce or spirituall promotion.



Sacra uia, a streete in Rome, where peace
was made betwene Romulus and Tacius,
and through the whiche the vanquyshers
passed with their triumph vnto the capitol.



Sacramenta, is taken for men of warre.



Iuuenalis.



Sacramentum, an othe amonge vs christen
men, it signifyeth a sygne, wherin is con­
tayned a diuyne mysterie, and is callyd a
sacrament.



Sacramento contendere, to sweare.



Sacramento teneri, to be sworne.



Sacrarium, a sextrie or vestrie, wherein are
kepte thynges halowed, and relykes.



Sacrat&ecedil; leges, lawes, in the whiche it is en­
acted, that who so dothe offende agaynst
theym, is accursed.



Sacratio, a consecration.



Sacratius, more holy.



Sacrator, he that dothe consecrate.



Sacrificium, sacrifyce.



Sacrifico, care, to do sacrifice, to consecrate
to aske forgyuenes of god.



Sacrificulus, a prieste.



Sacrilegium, theft, or taking away of thyn­
ges halowed, callyd Sacrilege.



Sacrilegissimus, an errant thefe in stelynge
of thynges halowed.



Sacrilegus, he that violently taketh awaye
or stealeth thynges halowed, or thynges
vnhalowed out of a holy place.



Sacrimum, muste or newe wyne.



Sacriscrinius, he that keepeth the kynges
letters or Recordes, concernynge the
Crowne, or bokes of great affaires.



Sacrium, a kynde of aumbre, whiche com­
meth out of Scithia.



Sacro, crare, to dedicate or halowe.



Sacrosanctus, ta, tum, consecrate or halowid
with a solemne othe taken.



Sacrum, any thynge dedicate to god. Also
sacrifice. sometyme a temple or churche
Paulus Iureconsultus. Sunt autem sacrile­
gi, qui publica sacra compilarint. Also sacra
do signifye holy wordes. also charmes.



Sacrum Promontorium, a great mountayne
or rocke in the southwest part of Spayne,
lyenge on the see, callyd nowe, Capesainct
Vincent.



Sadducei, men of a speciall secte among the
Iewes, that beleued not of any resurrec­
tion, or that there be any angels or spiritis.



Sæculum, is proprely the space of a hundred
yeres: it is commonly taken for a space




oftyme, wherin one facion of the worlde
hath contynued.



Sæpe, oftentymes. Sæpenumero, sæpiuscule,
sæpicule, idem.



Sæpius, more often. S&ecedil;pissime, very often.



Sæuio, uiui, ire, to be very angrye, to do va­
lyauntly, to be cruell, or exercyse tyranny.



Sæue, cruelly.



Sæuiter, rudely. Magis cogito, sæuiter, blan­
diter ue alloquar, I thynke more, where
I may speake to hym rudely, or gentylly.



Sæuitia, & sæuitudo, crueltie.



Sæuus, ua, um, cruelle, horrible. sometyme
angry, valyant, myghty.



Saga, a wyse or subtil woman, also a witch.



Sagaperium, a gumme or rosyn, which run­
neth out of a kyxe or tree, callyd Ferula.



Sagaris, a ryuer.



Sagaria, the craft to make clokes to weare
on harneyse.



Sagarius, a seller of suche clokes.



Sagatus, apparayled in a souldiours cloke.



Sagax, acis, wyttye.



Sagaces canes, yernynge houndes.



Sagacitas, wyttynesse or sharpenes of wyt.



Sagaciter, wyttyly.



Sagda, a grene stone, whyche the Caldees
haue made fast to their handes.



Sagena, a greatte nette.



Sagimen, & saginatio, nouryshynge.



Saginarius, a, um, that whiche is franked or
made fatte.



Sagina, meate, wherwith all thynge is fat­
ted. sometyme superfluous fatte.



Saginarium, a place wherein any thynge is
franked or made fatte.



Sagino, are, to make fatte.



Sagio, ui, ire, to perceyue quickly or sharply.



Sagitta, an arow, also the top of a twygge
or rodde.



Sagittarius, an archer. It is also one of the
xii. sygnes amonge the sterres.



Sagitto, tare, to shoote.



Sagma, a packe saddell, or sumpter saddell.
also an heape.



Sagmen, minis, grasse, plucked vp with the
erthe, whiche in the olde time the ambas­
sadours of the Romanes dyd, whan they
denounced warres to other people.



Sagum, a souldiours clooke.



Sagulum, idem.



Saguntus, a citie in Spayn, whiche for the
constant fydelitie, kepte to the Romains,
was distroyed by Hanniball. 



Saguntina fames, extreme famyne, a pro­
uerbe made of the famyne, whyche was
in the cytie of Saguntus, whan Hanniball
besyeged it.



Sais, a citie of Egypte, where is one of the
entries into the ryuer of Nilus, the entry
or porte is callyd Saiticum.



Sal, salis, salt. somtime it is put for wisdom,
myrth. Sales, quycke or sharpe sentences,
iestynges. sometyme it sygnifieth the see.



Sala, a ryuer in Germanye.



Salaces, water that ryseth out of a quycke
springe.
Vergilius.


Salacia, was called goddesse of water.



Salaconia, pryde.



Salacones, they whiche are proude.



Salamandra, a beaste in fygure lyke to a ly­
sarde, full of spottes, which beinge in the
fyre, dothe extincte it, and is not burned.



Salamin, Salamis, mina, an Ile by Athenes.



Salaminius, a, um, of that yle.



Sal amoniacus, a kynd of salt founde vnder
sand, which is lyke to alume, & is medicy­
nable, in dissoluynge & purgyng of fleume.



Salanga, a very hygh hylle betwene great
Brytayne and Irelande, nowe callid our
ladyes hylle.



Salapusius, may be callid a mery iesting boy.
It was a name giuen to Caluus an orator,
which being of a childes personage, vsed
moche iestynge and tauntynge meryly.



Salaria uia, an hygh way, by the whiche salt
was caried to Rome.



Salarium, wages gyuen to seruauntes.



Salarius, a salter.



Salarius, a, um, pertaynyng to salte.



Salax, acis, lecherouse.



Salebræ, places whiche are not playne.



Salebrosus, a, um, vnplayne, where a manne
can not goo, excepte he do leape.



Salentinum, a countrey in Italy.



Salentini, a people in Italye.



Salgama, thynges condite or conserued, as
peares, figges, grapes, and other lyke.



Sali, a kynde of byrdes, whiche be greatte
breders: as partriches or hennes, I sup­
pose them to be hethecockes.



Saliares cœna, a banket or supper made by
the priestes of Mars. 



Saliares uirgines, maydens, whyche were
with the priestes of Mars, and did sacri­
fyce with the byshops, wearyng on them
cote armures, and bysshoppes myters on
theyr heedes.



Saliaris, re, pertaining to the pristis of Mars. 



Salicastrum, a kynde of wylde vyne, roun­
nynge vpon wyllowe trees.



Salicetum, & salictum, a place where wyl­
lowes growe.



Salientes, the cockes or pipes of cundites,
oute of the whiche water spouteth.



Salignus, na, num, of wyllowe or wythy.



Salii, the priestes of Mars. 



Salillum, a lyttell saltsellar.






Salina, a place, where salte is made.



Salinæ, narum, a citie in Sicile.



Salinator, the name of a noble man of Rome.



Salinacidus, & salnacidus, a, um, that whiche
is salte in taste.



Salinum, a saltesellar.



Salio, iui, ire, to salte or powder.



Salio, iui, ij, ire, to leape.



Salitura, powdrynge or saltynge.



Salitus, ta, tum, salted.



Saliuo, are, to laye salue.



Saliua, & saliuum, spettell.



Saliunca, a plant, hauynge long leaues, som­
what yelowe, and a yelowe flowre, & gro­
weth shorte, and hath many rootes. It is
taken for the Spikenarde, that groweth
in Fraunce, and is commonly vsed.



Salisi, people in the mountaynes of Alpes,
confynes to the Swycers, and the people
called Boii.



Saliuarius, he that layeth salue.



Salix, icis, a wyllowe or wythye.



Salmaris, a fountayne in Caria.



Salmacia, a praye gotten without labour.



Salmacidus, da, dum, that whyche sauou­
reth of salte.



Salmo, onis, a fyshe called Samond.



Salmonius, the kynge of Elides, which ta­
kynge foolyshely vppon hym, to haue di­
uine honours doone vnto hym, and wolde
seme to caste lyghtnynges, lyke vnto Iu­
piter, being ouerthrowen with lyghtning,
was caste into helle.



Sal nitrum, salte peter, whiche is putte into
gunne powder.



Sallo, lere, to powder with salte.



Salo, a ryuer callyd also Bibilis, wherwith
yron is tempred, and made stronger.



Salomon, & Solomon, monis, is interpre­
ted peasible, the name of a kynge of Ie­
wes, the sonne of kynge Dauid, who ex­
ceded all men in wisedome and knowlege,
and neuer the lesse was by dotage on wo­
men brought to ydolatrie.



Salomonius, a, um, of Salomon. 



Salon, a countrey of Bithinia, very common­
dious for the feedynge of cattell.



Salone, a cytie in Liburnia betwene Dal­
matiam and Illiriam.



Salpa, a fyshe whiche wylle not be sodden,
excepte it be beaten, as stockefyshe is.



Salpyga, a kynde of emotes or pysmeres.



Salsamentarius, he that selleth sawce.



Salsamentarius, a, um, pertaynyng to sauce.
Vas salsamentarium, a vesselle, whereinto
sawce is putte.



Salsamentum, sauce.



Salsedo, saltenesse.



Salsicortex, a tree, that bereth maste, which
nothyng wyll eate, excepte onely swyne.



Salsilago, & salsugo, ginis, a salte lycour.



Salsura, meresawce or bryne.



Salsus, a, um, salte in taste.



Saltabundus, da, dum, that whyche leapeth
or daunseth.



Saltatio, daunsynge.



Saltator, & saltatrix, a daunser.



Saltatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to daunsyng.
Ludus saltatorius, a scoole of daunsynge.



Saltatrix, & saltatricula, a daunsynge wench.



Saltatus, tus, daunsynge.



Saltem, at the lefte waye.



Saltiæ, people ioynynge to the see callyd
Pontus Euxinus.



Saltim, uel saltuatim, by leapes.



Saltito, tare, to daunse, to leape often.



Salto, tare, to daunse.



Saltuarius, a keper of a wod, a wodwarde.



Saltuosus, a, um, full of woddes.



Saltus, a thycke wodde, also a leape.



Saluator, toris, a sauyour, he that kepeth or
saueth a thynge from distruction or losse



Saluber, bris, bre, holsome, hole.



Salubrior, ius, Saluberrimus, a, um, more hol­
some, moste holsome.



Salubriter, holsomely.



Salubritas, helthe.



Salue, & Salueto, & saluete, god spede you.
ye be welcome, sometyme contrary, fare­
well, God be with you.



Salueo, ere, to be saufe, or spede well, to be
well at ease.



Salue. S. satis est mihi tuæ salutis, nihil moror
non salueo, God spede. S. It suffyseth me
that thou arte in helthe: but in fewe wor­
des I am not well at ease.
Plautus in
truculen.


Saluia, an herbe callyd sauge.



Saluiatum, a drench for a horse or other beest.



Saluifico, care, to make safe, or to saue.



Saluo, are, to saue.



Saluebis a meo Cicerone, my sonne Cicero
commendeth hym vnto you.



Ci. ad Att.



Salua res est, the matter gothe well.



Salum, the see.



Salus, lutis, helthe.



Salutarius, the forefynger.



Salutatio, a salutation.



Salutator, toris, a saluter.



Salutatorium cubiculum, a chamber, where
men do stande and abyde to salute a prince
or noble man in auctoritie, callyd nowe a
chamber of presence.



Salutem, in the old tyme was vsed for saltem.



Salutem dicere, to salute or to haue recom­
mendation to any man.



Salutifer, ra, rum, holsome.



Salutaris, re, holsome.



Salutaris digitus, the forefynger.






Salutariter, in helth.



Salutiger, he that bryngeth recommenda­
cione from another person.



Saluto, tare, to salute, aswell at commyng as
at departinge: also to honour.



Saluus, a, um, saulfe, hole, sounde, withoute
damage or harme.



Ennius



Sam, for Eam, her.



Samara, an hil in the east Ocean se, at the fur­
ther ende of the montayne called Caucasus.



Samarobrinæ, people in Fraunce, aboute
Cambry.



Samaria, a countraye in Iudea.



Sambuca, an instrument of musyke, now cal­
led doulcymers, an engyne of warre, wher­
with fortresses were assaulted.



Sambucina, a woman whyche playeth on
doulcymers.



Sambuceus, a, um, of Elder or Alder tree.



Sambucus, an Elder or alder tree.



Sambucistria, idem quod Sambucina.



Samia, vesselles made in the Ile of Samos.



Samius, a, um, of the Ile of Samos: the olde
wrytars dyd vse it for sharpe, and Samiare,
to whette or make sharpe.



Samites, people of Samnium a contraye in
Italy called nowe Aprutium.



No. Mar.



Samium, a shell.



Plautus.



Samiolum, a lytle shell.



Samos, the name of an Ile in the see, called
Icarium.



Samothracia, an Ile by Thracia in Grece.



Sampsuchus, & Sampsuchum, an herbe cal­
led Maioram.



Sanates, people dwellynge aboute Rome.



Sancio, xi, cire, to consecrate, to make firme.



Sancire leges, is to constitute lawes.



Festus



Sancus, one of the names of Hercules. 



Sancte, firmely.



Sanctificatio, halowynge.



Sanctifico, care, to halowe.



Sactitas, holynesse.



Sanctitudo, idem.



Sanctio, a lawe, a thynge decreed and sta­
blysshed.



Sanctus, ta, tum, holy, inuiolable by a lawe,
pure and cleane, vncorrupted. Vir sanctus,
a blessed man.



Sanctimoniales, Nunnes.



Sanctimonium, the profession of religious
personnes.



Sanctimonia, & Sanctitas, holynesse, perfe­
ction.



Sanctuarium, a place consecrate or ha­
lowed.



Sandalium, a slyppar.



Sandala, a spice called saunders.



Sandaraca, a colour founde in mynes of sil­
uer, or golde, yelow ocker.



Sandaliotis, an Ile called now Sardinia.



Sandaracinus, colour made with yelowe
Ocker.



Sandastros, & Sandaphorion, & Sandarison,
& Sandassites, a preciouse stone, hauynge
in a bright colour yelowe speckes, and is
called also, Garamandita.



Sandyx, dicis, an herbe of a delicate odour,
hauynge a short stalke, inthe residue lyke
to fenell. it is also a colour called a bryght
yelowe.



Sandicinus color, idem.



Sane, an aduerbe, whiche signifyeth, ye, or
certaynely, on goddes name. Bellum sane
difficile gessit, he fought a very daunge­
rouse batayle.



Sane vt vis, be it as thou wilt.



Belli.



Sane quam vtile, suerly very profytable.



Sane quidem, ye hardely. Nempe ergo a­
perte uis, quæ restant me loqui? D. Sane qui­
dem. But wilte thou than that I shall telle
playnely all the rest? D. ye hardely.
Ter. in An.


Sanesco, scere, to be or waxe hole.



Sanga, a ryuer in Portugall.



Sangaris, a ryuer of Galatia, whyche run­
nynge through Phrygia, falleth into Pro­
pontis, the see.



Sanguen, guinis, & Sanguis, guinis, bloode.
alsoo a tree, the barke whereof is of the
coloure of bloode.



Sanguineus, a, um, full of bloode. also cruell.
sometyme of sanguyne or bloody colour.



Sanguinolentus, idem.



Sanguiculum, the bloode of a kyd or swyne,
wherwith pouddynges are made.



Sanguino, are, to bleede.



Sanguinaria, & Sanguinalis, an herbe that
stoppeth bloode.



Sanguinarius, cruell, blody.



Sanguinolentus, idem.



Sanguis, guinis, bloode.



Sanguisuga, a worme, which is in standinge
waters, and doeth sowke the bloode of
men or beastes that come in to it. it is alsoo
called Hirudo.



Sanies, mater, corrupted bloode.



Sanna, a scorne or mocke.



Sannio, onis, a dysarde in a playe or disguy­
synge: also he which in countenaunce, ge­
sture, and maners is a foole.



Sanitas, tatis, helth.



Saniter, lyke a hole man.



Sannaus, a ryuer in Asia.



Sano, are, to heale.



Sansa, the stone of an olyue.



Sansucus, Maioram.



Sansucinus, a, um, of Maioram.



Sancæ, the stones of Olyues.



Santerna, souldre, wherwith gold is soudred.






Santones, people in Fraunce.



Sanus, na, num, hole, holsome.



Sanitas, tatis, helthe.



Sapa, muste or newe wyne sodden to the
halfe deale.



Saperda, a dunge hylle.



Sapide, sauourely.



Sapidius, more sauourely.



Sapidus, da, dum, sauoury, well seasoned.



Sapiens, tis, wyse.



Sapientia, the kunnynge of thynges diuine
and humayne, wysedome.



Sapio, sapui, sapere, to tast or sauour, to fele,
to be wise, to haue a right opinion.



Plautus in
Pseudolo.



Sapio rem, I knowe what I haue to doo.



Sapiunt male, they be yll aduysed.



Plautus in
Epidico.



Sapit hic pleno pectore, he is meruaylouse
wyse.



Plautus in
Trin.



Sapit plus, he hath more wytte.



Sapit satis, he is wyse ynough.



Plautus in
Persa.



Sapis multum ad genium, thou knowest howe
to make good chere.



Sapor, oris, a sauour, a taste.



Sapphiratus, a Saphyr full of spottes.



Sapphirinus, na, num, of a Saphire.



Sapphirus, a stone called a saphyre.



Sappho, a woman poete.



Sappinus, the lower parte of a fyrre tree,
whiche is without knottes.



Saprum, a drynke, made with salte and the
fruite callyd Sorba, whiche helpeth men
that haue the colyke.



Sapros, vynewed.



Sapsa, of olde writers was vsed for ipsa.



Sarcasmos, a maner of iestynge or scoffing
bytyngely.



Sarcimen, a seame.



Sarcina, a trusse or packe, or fardell. some­
time it is taken for an vnprofitable burden.



Sarcinas colligere, is proprely of menne of
warre, whanne they remoue or departe
from their campe.



Plautus in
Mostell.



Sarcinas, atis, for sarcina.



Sarcinator, a taylour.



Sarcinatrix, tricis, a shepster, or seamester.



Sarcin&ecedil;, all stuffe that is closed or shutte vp
in coffers.



Sarcino, are, to lade. sometyme to sowe.



Sarcio, ciui, cire, to make hole agayne, to a­
mende a thynge decayed or appaired, to
make amendes.



Sarcion, a stone of carnacion colour.



Ser. Sulp.



Sarcito, pay the damages or costes.



Sarcte, hole.



Sarcophagus, a sepulchre.



Sarculo, are, to rake.



Sarculum, a rake.



Sarda, a red stone, wherin seales ar grauen.



Sardanapalus, a kynge of Assiria, monstru­
ouse in all kyndes of lechery, and ther­
fore was slayne of one of his lordes as he
satte spynnynge amonge harlottes.



Sardinia, an Ile in the see callyd Ligusti­
cum, by Geane.



Sardis, a citie in Lidia.



Sardo, for intelligo, I vnderstande.



Sardoa, an herbe lyke to smallage, whiche
groweth in Sardinia, wherof if a manne
eate, he shall grenne and make counte­
nance of laughynge, and so dye.
Neuius.


Sardonius risus, a grennynge or laughyng
without cause, a longe laughter.



Sardonychatus, hauynge apparayle garni­
shed with the stone called Sardonix.



Sardonychus, idem quod Sardonyx.



Sardus, & Sardinensis, & Sardous, a, um, of
Sardinia.



Sardonyx, onychis, a stone of the colour of
a mannes nayle.



Sarepta, a towne in Siria, where Hely the
prophete was borne.



Sargac&ecedil;, people in the northe parte of the
worlde, ioynynge to the greatte mere of
Meotis.



Sargus, a fyshe beinge in the see of Egipt.



Sari, an herbe, growynge in waters, hauing
an harde roote, and wounden, necessarie
for smythes.



Sarissa, a longe speare.



Saronicus, a bosome of the see agaynste
Isthmus.



Sarmatia, all that great countrey, wherein
is contayned Russia, Liuonia, & Tartaria.



Sarmata, a man of that countrey.



Sarmenta, twigges or shroude of trees cut of.



Sarmentitius, tia, um, made of twygges or
smalle boughes.



Sarnus, a ryuer in Campania.



Sarpa, a vyne cutte of, shradde.



Sarpedon, the kyng of Lisia, whiche came
to the ayde of the Troyanes agaynste
the Grekes.



Sarpo, pere, to clense or make cleane.



Sarra, an Ile callyd sometyme Tyrus: also
the wyfe of Abraham. 



Sarra, a citie in Epire.



Sarranus, na, num, of that citie.



Sarraballa, plurali numero, a worde of Cal­
dey, signifienge breches.



Sarraca, the name of two cities, whereof
the tone is in Media, the tother in Felici
Arrabia, or the ryche Arrabie.



Sarracum, a certayne carre, wherin wodde
or stones be caried.



Sarranæ uestes, garmentes of purple.



Sarrastes, people in Campania.



Sarrio, rire, to wede corne.



Sarritor, & sartor, toris, a weder of corne.






Sarritura, & sartura, weedyng of corne.



Sarsina, an olde citie in Italy, where Plau­
tus the writer of comedies was borne.



Sarta recta, houses letten to certayne per­
sones to kepe them alway repaired suffy­
ciently, for a certayne somme of money.



Sarta tecta locare, to sette oute houses at a
price certayne to be repaired.



Sarta tecta exigere, to charge a man with
reparations.
Ci. in Ver.


Sartago, ginis, a fryenge panne.



Sarte, hole.



Sarticum, an entrie in to the ryuer of Nilus.



Sartor, & sarritor, an harower or weder of
corne.



Sartum tectum habere, to keepe hoole and
sounde, or vncorrupted or hurte.



Sartutillus, the bealye of a swyne stuffed
with meale.



Sas, olde writers vsed for suas.



Saso, an yle fyue myles frome the citie of
Brundusium in the realme of Naples.



Sason, a ryuer.



Sat, for satis, inough. Quantum sat est, asmo­
che as is sufficient. Sat habet, it is suffici­
ent. Sat scio, I knowe well inough.



Satagitæ, people in the countrey nowe cal­
led Tartarie.



Satago, gi, gere, to be dylygent, to do with
spede, to be busy about a thynge.



Satanas, is interpreted an aduersary, by the
whiche name the diuel was called, bicause
that he was aduersarye to Christe. Alsoo
what so euer is contrary to peace, is cal­
lyd Satanas.



Satarchæ, people in Scythia, which exclu­
ded from them the vse of golde & syluer.



Satelles, litis, one retayned to garde a mans
persone. Also a catchepoll or baylyff, that
dothe attache men.



Satellitium, a garde, the offyce of suche a
person or offycer.



Saterona, a beaste, whiche doth lyue some­
tyme in water, sometyme on lande.



Satias, sacietie, fulnes or werynesse in mo­
che vsynge of a thynge, sometyme it sig­
nifieth abundaunce. Hi, saltibus occupatis,
externorum agros inuasere, frumentique ex
inopia graui, satias facta, After that they
had gotten the woddes or forestes, they
inuaded the landes of them that were bor­
derers, and from scarsitie of corne, they
happened to haue their fylle or haboun­
daunce.
Salustius.


Satiabilis, le, that whiche may be easyly sa­
tisfyed.



Satietas, tatis, a sacietie or fulnesse.



Terentius.



Satin, for satisne, Satin fana es? Arte thou
not well at ease?



Satin saluæ? Be all thinges well?



Satio, tionis, the acte of sowinge of corne.



Satio, tiare, to satiate or fylle, whyche hath
relation not only to the body and sences,
but also to the mynde.



Satis, ynough, as moche as dothe nede.



Satis acceptio, a couenaunt, wherby a man
is bounden, and sureties with hym.



Satisaccipere, to take ioynt suertyes.



Satisdatio, & satisdatum, dati, the suertie or
bonde, wherby menne are bounden for an
nother, for perfourmance of couenaunte,
or the couenantour and suerties with him.



Satisdator, he that is bounden for perfour­
maunce of couenant



Satisdo, dare, to put in sureties for perfour­
mance of couenantes. also to be bounden
with suerties for the performynge of co­
uenauntes.



Satisfacio, cere, to satisfye.



Satisfactio, satisfaction.



Satispræstatio, idem.



Satis præsto, tare, idem quod satis dare, to
fynde suretie.



Satis, superque, ynough and to moche.



Satius, the comparatiue degree of satis, it
sygnifyeth better.



Satiuus, a, um, that may be sowen, or is sowen.



Satnois, a ryuer of Frigia.



Sator, toris, he that soweth corne.



Satrapa, amonge the Persians were as du­
kes and Erles be here.



Satrapia, a prouince, Duchie, or Countie.



Satullo, are, idem quod saturare, to saciate
or fyll superfluousely.



Satur, turis, full fedde, sometyme aboundant
or plentuouse.



Satureia, an herbe callyd Sauery.



Saturio, onis, he that hathe eaten ynoughe,
and to moche.
Plautus in
Persa.


Saturitas, fertilitie, or plentuousnes. Alsoo
abundance in excesse.



Saturnalia, fyue dayes assigned to Saturne
in December, wherin men vsed to feaste
one an other, & to sende mutual presentes.



Saturnalitium, pertayninge to the ceremo­
nies of Saturnus. 



Saturnia, was the name of a towne. Alsoo
high places were called Saturnia. 



Saturnius, a, um, of Saturnus. 



Saturniniani, were heretikes, whyche affyr­
med, that onely seuen aungelles made the
worlde agaynst the conscience of god the
father.



Saturninus, a mountayne at Rome, whiche
was afterwarde called Tarpeius.



Saturnus, one of the seuen planettes: alsoo
a god of the paynyms.



Saturo, are, to saturate or fyl with any thing




superfluousely, moste commonly in eating.



Saturum, & Satyrum, a citie of Calabria, not
farre from Tarentum.



Satus, ta, tum, sowen or begotten.



Satus, tus, the sowynge, also sede.



Satyra, a matter or poesye made in the re­
buke of some astate or persone.



Florus.



Satyria, a crowe.




Satyricus, & satyrus, a maker of suche mat­
tiers.



Satyriacum, an ymage of Priapus. 



Satyriasis, a syckenes, wherby the membre
of a man standeth alway without appetite
or dilectation.



Satyrica, was a comedye, wherin Satyres
were brought in.



Satyrice, an aduerbe, whyche sygnyfyeth
sharpely and with reproche.



Satyrus, a beast hauyng the heed of a man,
and the bodye of a gote.



Satyrion, an herbe, hauynge leaues lyke a
lyllye, but smaller, a knappe with manye
smalle purple floures, and a roote lyke the
genytours of a man.



Saucio, are, to wounde.



Saucius, a, um, wounded, sometyme werye.



Sauior, aris, ari, to kysse swetely.



Saura, a lysarde, whiche lyeth in hedges.



Saurites, a stoone, whiche is founde in the
bealye of a grene lysarde.



Sauromatæ, peple called also Sarmat&ecedil;, Rus­
ses, Tartariens, Moscouites.



Saxatilis, le, stonye. Pisces saxatiles, fysshes
bredde amonge stones.



Saxeus, a, um, stonye, or of a stone.



Saxlfragium, & Saxiphagos, an herbe called
Saxiphrage.



Saxonia, Saxonie. Saxones, the people.



Saxosus, a, um, full of great stones or rockes.



Saxulum, a lyttell rocke.



Saxum, a rocke. sometyme a stone.



Saxumferratum, a citie in Italy.



Saxum uoluere, to tourne the stone. A pro­
uerbe applyed to theym that be fatygate
or weryed with contynuall and vnprofy­
table labours.

 

¶ S, ANTE C.

SCabellum, a fote stoole, or lowe settle.



Scaber, bra, brum, rusty, rough, some­
tyme fylthye.



Scabies, scabiei, a scabbe.



Scabiosus, a, um, scabbed.



Scabo, bi, bere, to rubbe or scratche.



Scabredo, dinis, a roughnesse of the skynne,
as whan it dothe wrynkle.



Scabr&ecedil;, roughely, not playne, or smothe.



Scabrities, & scabritia, filthines,
rowghnes.



Scabro, onis, a worme, which is ingendred
of the carrayne of a deed horse.



Sc&ecedil;a, an hauen at Troye.



Sc&ecedil;i, people in Thracia.



Scæna, a place, whyche seruyth onely for
enterludes or comedyes to be playde in,
whiche was in the fourme of halfe a cer­
kle. It is also where trees or busshes, are
cutte and layde ouer the heed, in suche
fourme, as men may vnder them walke or
sytte in the shadowe. It is alsoo where a
vyce or offence is openly detected, in su­
che wise as men do cry out or wonder at it.



Sc&ecedil;naticus, uel sc&ecedil;natilis, for a player in co­
medies or enterludes.



Scænicula, a diminutiue of scæna.



Sc&ecedil;nicus, ca, cum, pertaining to enterludes.



Scænicus, a player in enterludes.



Sc&ecedil;nitæ, people of Arabie, whiche dwelle
alway in tentes, couered with the heares
of gotes, amonge whome yf a swyne or
hogge be brought, it dieth.



Scænoma, a tente, also a bagge.



Scænopegia, the feaste of the tabernacles,
wherin the Iewes did set vp tabernacles
or tentes in similitude of them, wherin they
dwelled whan they came out of Egipte.



Scænos, in greke, is a tent or shadowe.



Sc&ecedil;ua, the lefte hande, also he that vsethe
the lefte hande for the ryghte.



Sc&ecedil;uus, a, um, ylle, sometyme it sygnyfyeth
good, as Scæuum omen, good lucke or chance.
Festus.


Scala, & scalæ, scalarum, a ladder. Alsoo a
payre of stayres.



Scalmus, a lyttell piece of wodde, whervn­
to shyppemen doo bynde their oores, to
rowe the more easyly.



Scalpo, psi, pere, to scratche, also to graue
in mettalle.



Scalprum, & scalpellum, an instrument, wher­
with any thyng is scraped or rubbed, also
a surgeons instrument, wherewith he ta­
keth corrupte flesshe from the bones. It
is also a grauynge yron.



Scalptor, scalptoris, a grauer.



Scalptura, grauynge in mettall.



Scalpturatum, pauement made with stones,
of dyuers colours, ioyned togither.



Scalpturio, riui, rire, to scrape as a Cocke
dothe, or other fowles.



Scalpurio, rire, to scrape as a henne dothe.



Scamander, dri, a ryuer, whiche dyuydeth
Europa from Asia.



Scamandria, a towne by the hauen of Ilium,
not farre from Troye.



Scamnum, a benche or fourme. Also a step
or grise, wherby a manne gothe vp vnto a
high bedde. Also a balke vntilled betwene




two sorowes.



Scamonea, an herbe, the iuyce whereof is
vsed in medicine to purge coler vehement­
ly. All be it that it is venemous, & leaueth
wars matter behynd, than it doth expell.



Scandalides, a kynde of dates.



Scandalum, occasyon to synne, gyuen by an
nother to hym that synneth.



Scandinauia, an yle in the north occean see,
the quantitie wherof was neuer founde.



Scandix, dicis, an herbe lyke to cheruyll, but
it is sweter, and hath a whyte floure, and
a lyttell roote.



Scando, di, dere, to clymme.



Scandulaca, an herbe, whiche runneth vp­
pon corne, as iuye dothe on trees.



Scandul&ecedil;, shyngle, whiche be tyles of wod,
wherwith dyuers churches be couered.



Scandulum contectum, a house couered with
shyngle, or wooden tyles.



Scansile, that whiche maye be clymmed or
gone vppon.



Scansio, a clymmynge vp.



Scapha, a boote.



Scaphiarius, a boteman.



Scaphium, a bason or vesselle to receyue v­
ryne or ordure.



Scapilium, the space betwene the shulders.



Scaprum, a knyfe, wherwith vynes and o­
ther lyke thynges are cutte.



Scaptensula, a place in Macedonia, where
syluer was dygged.



Scaptia, an olde citie in Italy, wherof came
Scaptia tribus.



Scapulæ, the hynder parte of the shulders.



Scapularis, a boye or wenche, whiche is oft
beaten aboute the shulders.



Scapularis uestis, a garment, whiche coue­
reth onely the shoulders.



Scapus, the heade of popie or other lyke
herbes, wherin be the sedes, lykewise the
huske of grapes, wherin the graynes be
contayned.



Scarab&ecedil;us, a fly with a blacke shell or huske
called a bytell: whiche breedeth in cowe
shardes, and is black. Also there is a kind
of them, which hath hornes like to an hart.



Scarab&ecedil;us aquilam, a prouerbe applyed to
suche as endeuour them self to do disple­
sure to those that be more puissant thanne
they are.



Scarifico, care, to launce or open a sore, that
the matter corrupted may issue.



Scarificatio, launcynge.



Scarus, a fyshe, whiche dothe chewe lyke a
beaste. some menne doo suppose it to be a
Gylte heed.



Scatebræ, the bollynge or rysynge vppe of
water out of a spryng or sourges of water.



Scateo, tere, to runne or brast out, as water
dothe out of a narowe or strayte place.



Scaturigo, ginis, & scaturies, brastynge oute
of water or other thynge in lyke maner.



Scaturio, ire, to runne out or abrode. also
to springe or growe abroode, as somme
herbes done.



Scaturitio, a runnynge as water dothe.



Scauri, they whiche haue their toes swol­
len, or their ankley croked, that they may
not goo faste, it was alsoo an honourable
house of the Romaynes.



Scazon, tis, a kynde of meter.



Scelerate, myscheuously.



Scelerator, ris, he that polluteth or defileth.



Sceleratus, he vnto whome a myscheuouse
dede is done. sometyme it signifieth hym
that dothe an yll dede.
Donatus.
Vergil.


Sceleratus campus, a felde at Rome, where
the nunnes of Vesta were buryed quicke,
if they were founde to lyue incontinently.



Scelerose, vngraciously. Sceleste idem.



Scelerosus, a, um, he that hath done an vn­
gracious or myscheuous dede.



Scelestus, ta, tum, vngracious, ful of vnhap­
pynesse, myscheuous, vengeable.



Scelerosus, full of vngraciousnes.



Scelero, rare, to pollute.



Scelus, sceleris, a myscheuous dede. also an
vngracious person.



Scenoma, a pauyllyon, a sacke.



Scena, a pauyllyon or halle. Also a scaffold.



Sceparnon, a couerynge.



Scepsis, a citie in Phrigia.



Sceptici, were a secte of Phylosophers,
whiche affirmed nothynge: the chiefe of
that secte was Pirrhus and Herillus. 



Sceptrum, a princis septre.



Scheda, a leafe of paper, a scrowe.



Schedia, a thynge lyke to a brydge with
trees pynned togither, wheron thynges
are caried in the water, in the steede of a
barge, as it may be sene on dyuers greate
ryuers in hygh Hermany.



Schedion, any thynge sodaynly made, and
without moche labour.



Schedula, a lyttel scrowe or leafe of paper.



Schema, atis, & schematum, a figure. also an or­
nament, specially in spech. somtime a garment.



Schesis, where a multitude of wordes are
brought in togyther vnioyned, as Nubila,
nix, grando, procellæ, flumina, venti, Clou­
des, snowe, hayle, showres, flouddes,
wyndes.



Schilschi, amonge the Iewes was a weight
of foure ounces.



Schisma, matis, a diuisyon, specially in the
churche.



Schiston, the mylke that remayneth after




that the mylke is sodden, whiche is cal­
lyd well courdes.



Schœnobates, he that gothe on a corde.



Scœniculæ, harlottes, whiche dresse theym
selfes with stynkynge oynementes.



Schœnit&ecedil;, people, whiche do dwelle in pa­
uyllyons.



Schœnoplacos, a roper.



Schœnus, nuntis, a ryuer by Athenes, also
an other in Archadia, and also a tree callid
Lentiscus.



Schœnus, a space of grounde contaynynge
thre score furlonges.



Schola, a schoole. Also a place in a bayne,
where men dyd abyde, whiles other were
bained, lykewise in a porche, wherin men
taried for answeres. Schol&ecedil;, are taken for
dysputations betweene the mayster and
his scholers.



Scholaris, lare, pertaynynge to schooles.



Scholasticus, a scholer.



Scholasticus, ca, cum, scholasticall.



Terent. in
Heaut.



Scibilis, le, that which may be easily knowen.



Scibo, for sciam, I shall knowe.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Scire fidibus, to be perfytte in playenge on
instrumentes.



Sciens feci, I dyd it wittingly.



Scienter feci, I dyd it cunnyngly.



Scientia, counnynge.



Scilicet, as who sayth. It is moche, surely,
moreouer. Sommetyme it implyeth a ne­
gatyue.



Scilla, an herbe, whiche hath a rote lyke an
oynyon. some call it Squilla.



Scincus, a kynde of small cockodryls in the
ryuer of Nilus.



Scindo, scidi, scindere, to cutte.



Scinpodium, a lyttell cowche or benche.



Scintilla, a sparke.



Scintillo, are, to sparkle.



Scio, sciui, scire, to knowe.



Scire sciscereque, to ordeyne and inacte, as it
is in our parlyament.



Sciolus, he that knoweth somwhat.



Scio vti foro, I knowe what I haue to do,
also I can accommodate my selfe to other
mens maners, & to the condycions of the
tyme and place present.



Sciomantia, a part of nygromancy wrought
by shadowes.



Sciopodes, people, whiche lyenge vpryght
do shadowe them selfes with their feete:
all be it euery one man hath but one legge:
and yet be they wonderfull swifte.



Sciotericon, a dyall sette vppon a walle, to
knowe by the sonne what is a clocke.



Scipiadæ, & Scipionid&ecedil;, they whyche were
of the progenye of Scipyons, the noble
captaynes of Romaynes.



Scipio, the surname of a noble howse in
Rome.



Scironia saxa, rockis in the see by Athenes.



Scirpea, a dunge potte or colne made with
roddes.



Scirpicula, a lyttell hooke, wherwith rus­
shes, or any thynge is cutte of in bynding
of thynges.



Scirpita, howped vesselles.



Scirpo, are, to bynde.



Scirpus, a rushe, or an osyar. Nodum in scir­
po querere, To seke for a knotte in a rushe
is a prouerbe, wherby is signified, to seke
to diligently for a thyng that maye not be
found, or to make doubt of a thing, whi­
che is playne.



Scirpeus, a, um, of rushes.



Scirpiculum, a baskette.



Scirron, a thynge growen in a man or wo­
mans bealy, specially in them, which haue 
the dropsy, & causeth the bely to be great.



Scirophorion, the moneth of May.



Scirrhosis, a disease in the eyes, commynge
of a longe inflammation, fleshe growyng
in them somwhat blue.



Scirta, is a kynde of oynyons, growyng in
wynter, callyd scalyons.



Sciscitor, taris, tari, & Scisco, sciscere, to de­
maunde. Alsoo sciscere, is to ordeyne or
inacte.



Sciscito, gyue thou sentence or iudgement,
gyue thy voyce or consent in election.



Scisco, sciui, sciscere, to knowe, Also to de­
cerne or gyue sentence.



Scissilis, le, that whiche may be cutte.



Scissio, scissura, & scissus, us, a cutte.



Plautus. in
Amph.



Scita, ordynaunces made by the people.



Scitamenta, pleasant meates.



Scite, cunnyngly, craftily.



Scitor, aris, ari, to demaunce or inquire.



Scitum, a decree, or statute.



Scitus, ta, tum, wyse or wyttie, alsoo propre
or feate.





Sciurus, a squyrell.



Scius, he that knoweth a thyng.





Scleriasis, a swellynge of the eye lyddes,
with payne and rednesse.



Sclerophthalmia, where the eye lyddes ben
harde, and waxe heuy with ache.



Sclopus, a sowne, which is made with puf­
fynge of the chekes.



Scobina, an instrument, wherwith any thing
is shauen. sometyme the shauyng selfe.






Scobino, are, to wounde, to shaue of.



Scobs scobis, that which comith of the sha­
uyng or boryng of wodde or mettall: also
grit of stones, wherwith metal is scoured.



Scoletia, a kynde of ruste or canker.



Scolopendra, a worme with many feete and
rough, callyd a palmer.



Scolymos, the floure of a thystell.



Scombrus, a fyshe.



Scomma, matis, a scoffe, or sentence spoken
in myrthe, whiche sowneth otherwyse than
is ment of hym that speaketh.



Scopa, a brome or besome to swepe houses.



Scoparius, & scoparia, he or she that dothe
swepe.



Scopei, men of lyttell stature.



Cicero ad
Atti c.



Scop&ecedil;, dyssolute men without wyt or council.



Scopas dissipare, to say or do a thyng with­
out any purpose or reason.
Ci. de ora­
tore per­
fecto.


Scopo, pare, to swepe.



Scopelon, an hygh place, where men stande
to beholde or espie.



Scopulosus, a, um, rocky, or full of rockes.



Scopula, a brushe, suche as payntours and
pargettours doo vse.



Scopus, & scopulus, an high rocke, also it is
a marke, wherat men do shote. sometyme
it sygnifieth any thynge, wherevnto that
whiche is spoken, hath a principal respect.



Scopi, be grapes, after that the wyne is
pressyd oute.



Scoria, the refuse of metal tried out by fyre.
Sometyme it signyfyeth care or grefe.



Scorodon, Garlyke.



Ambrosius.



Scorpena, a fyshe, whyche kepeth hyr selfe
to one make.



Scorpionarii, they whyche doo shoote in
crossebowes.



Scorpites, a stone of the colour of a scorpion.



Scorpiuros, 
a lyttell herbe callyd
also Scorpioides, hauyng small leaues, and
the sede therof is like the tayles of Scor­
pions. It is also a worme like
to that whiche is callyd Locusta.



Scorpius, & scorpio, onis, a venimous worm
called a Scorpyon, whiche stryketh with
his taylle, and neuer ceasseth to serche,
where he maye haue occasyon to stryke.
Also a sygne in the fyrmament. It is also a
crossebowe. Som men take it to be an ark­
bushe. Also a whyppe, hauing plummettis
of leade at the endes of the cordes. It is
also an herbe, whyche hathe seedes lyke
to Scorpyons.



Scortia, that which is of lether: as Scortei
numi, lether money.



Scortes, the codde of a man or beaste.



Scorteus, tea, eum, that whyche is made of
skynnes.



Scortor, aris, ari, to haunt or company with
harlottes.



Scortum, an harlote or strumpette: it is also
the hyde of a beaste.



Scotia, Scotlande.



Scoti, Scottes, or Scottyshmen, of whom
sayncte Hierom writeth in this wise. Quid
loquar de cæteris nationibus, quum ipse adu­
lescentulus, in Gallia uiderim Scotos, gen­
tem Britannicam, humanis uesci carnibus:
& quum per syluas porcorum greges & ar­
mentorum, pecudumque reperiant, pastorum
nates, & fœminarum papillas solere abscin­
dere, & has solas ciborum delitias arbitrari?
Whatte shall I speake of other Nacyons,
sens that whanne I was a boye, I sawe in
Fraunce, Scottes, a people of Britayn,
eate mennes flesshe: and whanne they
founde in the forestes herdes of swyne,
beastes, and cattayle, they wolde cutte
of the buttockes of the boyes, whyche
kepte theym, and alsoo the womens pap­
pes, and toke that to be the moste deyntie
and delycate meate.



Scotos, in Greke, darknes: It is more apt­
ly callyd in the northerne tunge, myrke.



Scotoma, & scotomia, dymnesse of syghte.



Scranteum, a skynne, wherin arrowes are
putte: it may be callyd a sheafe.



Scraptia, a worme, whyche is founden in
leaues. Also a vyle and stynkyng harlotte,
a driuelynge queane.



Screabile, that whiche may be spette or ret­
ched out of the lunges or stomake.



Screator, he that retcheth or spitteth.



Screatus, tus, spettynge or rechyng to spyt.



Screo, are, to reache in spettynge.



Scriba, a Secretarye, a Notarie, a Scribe,
a Clerke.



Scribello, lare, the olde wryters vsed for
Scribo.



Scriblita, a delycate meate made of paste
stuffed and wounden lyke a rope, I thynk
it to be suche as fartes of Portyngal are.



Scribo, scripsi, scribere, to write, also to make
sometyme to paynte.



Scribligo, ginis, an vntrue somme of spea­
kynge or wrytyng, callyd also solœcismus.



Scrinarius, the keper of secrete letters.



Scriniolum, a coffer, or other like place, wher­
in iewelles or secrete thinges ar kepte, as
euydences and recordes of iudgementes
or inrollementes.



Scriptio, an inscription, or any other writing



Scriptor toris, a wryter.



Scriptorius, a, um, apt for writyng.



Scriptum, that whiche is writen.



Scriptura, writynge. sometyme style. Alsoo
reckenynge of a baylyffe, whiche dyeth
and selleth cattell.



Budeus.






Scripturarius, he that writeth thynges whi­
che be commonly done, or bokes of recke­
nynge for baylyffes and reues.



Scrobs, scrobis, a dyche or furrowe.



Scrobulus, a lyttell dyche or furrowe.



Scropha, a sowe that hath pygges.



Scrotium, the codde or skynne, wherein be
the stones of a man. Scrota, be also lyttel
ymages made of paste, whyche are wont
to be gyuen to chyldren.



Scrupulosa res, a thynge wherin there see­
meth to be some difficultie.



Scrupulosus, a, um, scrupulous or doubtfull
in lyghte thynges. sometyme it signifieth
dyffuse or difficulte.



Scrupulatim, by small pieces.



Scrupulum inijcere, to bring into a mans mind,
doubte, carefulnesse, or thought.



Scrupulum eximere, to put away dout or care.



Scrupulus, a lyttell sharpe stoone, whiche
sometyme hapneth to falle into a mannes
showe, and hurte his heele. It is also ta­
ken for moche sollicitude, also for dyfficul­
tie, or spiced conscience. Also a poise, whi­
che is the thyrde parte of a dramme: and
than is it also writen with y, as Scrypulus.



Scrupus a lyttell stone or piece of a stone.



Scrupeus, a, um, stonye.



Scruta, old garmentes, horseshoen, and such
other baggage, solde for necessitie. also litle
ymages made in paste, sold to the people.



Scrutarius, he that selleth olde stuffe, or ma­
keth suche ymages.



Scrutinium, a serche.



Scrutor, aris, ari, to serche.



Scrutellus, the bely of a swine farcid or stuffid



Sculna, olde wryters vsed for sequester, an
arbytrour.



Sculpo, psi, pere, to carue ymages in stoone.
sometyme to graue in mettall.



Sculponeæ, wollen sockes.



Sculponeatus, he that dothe weare woul­
len sockes.



Sculptile, that whiche is carued or grauen.



Sculptor, a grauer, a caruer.



Sculptrix, a woman of that occupation.



Sculptura, Ingrauynge or caruynge.



Scurra, a railer, a scoffer. Scurrilitas, railyng.



Scurrilis, le, pertaynyng to raylynge.



Scurriliter, in raylynge or scoffyng facion.



Scutarius, a buckeler maker, or a maker of
tergates.



Scutarius, ria, um, pertaynynge to shyeldes
or tergates.



Scutatus, armyd with a shielde or tergate.



Scutella, a sawcer.



Scutuca, a skourge.



Scutula, a rounde fygure, such as spynners
or spiders do warke. also a vessell, whyche
contayneth .viii. ounces. also a staffe, wher­
with flaxe is beaten.



Scutulatus, ta, tum, rounde and wroughte in
the fourme of a copwebbe.



Scutigerulus, a custrell or page, which bea­
reth his maisters shielde or bucklar.



Scutriscum, a diminutiue of scutra, or scutula.



Scutulata uestis, a garment of sylk, wherinbe
wrought fygures lyke to round copwebbes.



Scutulatus, is a colour, I suppose a wachet.



Scutulum, a lyttell shielde.



Scutum, a tergat or shielde, a buckelar.



Palladius.



Sylace, a cytie in Grecia.



Scylla, a daungerouse Rocke in the see by
Sycile. Alsoo a ladye, daughter of Ni­
sus, kynge of Megarensis, whyche for
loue of Minois, hyr fathers ennemye,
stale a pourple heare frome her fathers
heed, whiche caused hym to be vanquys­
shed: But she being forsaken of Minois,
threwe her selfe into the See, and was
transfourmed into a byrde of hir name.
It is also a kynde of fyshe in the ryuer of
Liris in Campania.



Scyllaceum, a towne in the furthermooste
parte of Italy, fyrste buylded and inhaby­
ted by men of Athenes.



Scylleta, places wherein is taken the fysshe
callyd Scilla.



Scylleum, a promontorie or hyl in the part
of Grecia, nowe callyd Morea.



Scyllis, the name of a Greke, whych swim­
mynge vnder water, dyd cutin sonder the
Cables of the shyppes of the Persyans.



Scyllus, luntis, a towne in Achaia.



Scylurus, the name of a manne, whyche
hauynge foure score sonnes, whanne he
dyed, he callydde theym afore hym, and
delyueryd to eueryche of theym a sheafe
of arrowes, commaundynge theym to
breake the sheafes incontynente: why­
che whanne they moughte not doo, he
toke out of the sheafes oone arowe after
an nother, and brake theym all lyghtely,
declarynge therby vnto his sonnes, that
yf they contynued and agreed well togi­
ther, they shoulde be puyssaunt: and yf
they varyed and were dysseuered, they
shulde be feble and shortly distroyed.



Scymnus, the whelpe of a lyon.



Scynifes, bytynge gnattes.



Scyphus, a great cruse or iugge.



Scyricum, a blonket colour or light wachet.



Scyros, an ile in the see callid Egeum, where
Achilles was hid in a maidens garment.



Scytala, a lytel beaste callyd a shyrewe.



Scytæ, people in the northe parte of Asia,
whiche were cruell, and harde to be van­
quyshed, they be nowe callyd Russyans,
Moscouites, and Tartariens.
This entry is moved from Y6v in accordance with Elyot's erratum note


Scyritæ, people in India, whiche haue noo
noses, but in the stede of a nose they haue
two holes in their vysage.






Scythia, is a great countreye, whiche stret­
cheth into the east from the ryuer of Ta­
nais, & hath on the south part Sacos and
Sogdianos, people vnder the kynge of
Persia, and on the southe parte be coun­
treyes vnknowen and deserte, and is nowe
vnder the dominion of the greatte Cane
of Cataye.



Scythia, the name of all the countrayes to­
gyther.
This entry is moved from Y6v in accordance with Elyot's erratum note


Scitha, a man or woman of Scithia.



Scythicus, ca, cum, of Scithia.



Scython, a countraye nowe called Thracia
in Grece.

 

¶ S ANTE E.

SE, is a pronowne, and sygnyfyeth hym
or hyr.



Sebasta, uel Sebastapolis, a citie in Siria.



Sebemytum, a cytie in Egipte.



Sebethos, a fountayn at Naples, which ser­
ueth the citie, running through out the cite.



Secale, a certayne grayne, whyche serueth
onely to putte away hunger.



Secedo, secessi, secedere, to goo backe, or to
go out of company, to go away, to goo to
play or sporte from labour.



Secerno, secreui, secernere, to diuide, or laye
oone frome an nother, to laye or putte by
it selfe.



Secespita, a cuttynge knyfe, wherewith the
paynyms diuided their sacrifice.



Secessus, us, & secessio, a departyng, a vaca­
tion from busynesse, a secrete place.



Secinium, a cake of breadde cut in sacrifice.



Secius, later. Nec eo secius, neuer the later.



Secludo, si, dere, to shutte out.



Seclum, for seculum, the space of one hun­
dred yeres.



Seclusa sacra, ceremonies, that be secretely
vsed, to be hadde in the more reuerence.



Secco, cas, cui, care, to cutte. Viam secare, to
leade the waye.



Secare, is also to folowe.



Secors, & socors, dis, hartelesse, apte to no
purpose, profytable neyther to hym selfe
nor to any other.



Secordes agni, lambes late enyd or fallen.



Secordia, & socordia, sluggardnesse, vnapt­
nesse, luskysshenesse.



Secreta, thynges secrete. A secretis, of the
pryuie councyll.



Secrete, & secreto, priuyly.



Secta, a dyuers consent in sondrye wylfulle
opinions, a secte of philosophers, a sect
of heretikes.



Sectacula, the sequele.



Sectarius ueruex, the bell wether, that goth
before the flocke.



Sectilis, le, that whiche maye be cutte.



Sectio, onis, a cuttynge, a diuision, the par­
tynge of a praye in takynge of a towne.



Sectio, all that is taken in pray at the wyn­
nynge and sackynge of a towne.
Cæs. in commentarii.


Sectiuus, ua, um, that is often cut.



Sector, aris, ari, to folowe, to rounne after
one. Also to folowe in maners or fourme
of speakynge, or lyuynge. Also to hunte
or chase a beaste.



Sectores, byers of forfayted goodes. Also
they that do take profyte by the condem­
nation of other.



Sectura, a cutting, caues vnder erth, or mines



Secubo, bare, to lye aparte.



Secula, a sythe, wherwith hey is mowen.



Seculum, some do suppose it to be the space
of one hundred yeres, some of one thou­
sande yeres, other of .xxx. yere. sometyme
it is taken for tyme. Seculum sterile, a bar­
rayne tyme.
Plini.


Secunda mensa, the laste course, wherein
commeth fruite and conserues.



Secund&ecedil;, darum, the after byrthe.



Secundarius, a, um, of the seconde sorte.



Secundo, the seconde tyme or place, alsoo
eftesoones.



Secundo, are, to prosper or make prosperous.



Secundo lumine, the nexte daye. Cæsaris in­
terdicta, si te secundo lumine hic offendero,
respuentur, If I find the here the next day,
I wyll set litle by Cesars commandementis.



Secundus panis, browne bread. Pasti siliquis,
& pane secundo, Fed with beane huskes,
and browne breadde.
Horatius.


Secundum, an aduerbe, signifieth nye, or by.
Secundum aurem, by the eare. Also nexte
after. Secundum patrem, next after my fa­
ther. sometyme for. Secundum te litem do,
I iudge the matter for the. also in. Secundum
quietem, in rest. also vppon. Secundum ea,
thervpon. secundum Platonem, After the
saying of Plato. Secundum Pythagoram uiuo,
I lyue lyke to Pythagoras. Secundum flu­
men, Alonge by the ryuers syde.
C&ecedil;s. in commentarii.


Secundus, da, dum, seconde or nexte to the
fyrste. Also prosperouse. Secunda fortu­
na, Good or prosperousefortune. Res se­
cund&ecedil;, that whiche dothe folowe our de­
sire or appetite, good fortune. Secundo flu­
mine nauigat, He gothe, or sayleth, or ro­
weth with the streme. Secundus uentus. A
good wynd. Secundum pr&ecedil;sentem, as if he
were present. Et post edictum secundum pr&ecedil;­
sentem iudicabitur, And after the decre, iuge­
ment shall be gyuen, as if he were present.



Vipianus.



Securis, an axe. sommetyme it is taken for
an offycer, whiche hath auctoritie to com­
mytte men to thexecution of dethe.



Secure, quietely, surely, in saufegarde.






Securus, ra, rum, sure, quiete, without care.



Securitas, quietenes, lacke of care, suretie.



Secus, by, or nighe to.



Secus flumen, seruntur salices, nyghe to the
ryuer, wyllowes are sette. Also it sygny­
fyeth otherwyse, or other, Non dixi secus
ac sentiebam, I sayde none otherwyse than
I thought. Quid diximus tibi secus, quem uel­
les? What sayde we vnto the, other thanne
thou woldest haue vs to say?



Sed, but. Sed autem, ye but.



Sedenim, all be it.



Sedentarius, ria, rium, that whiche is doone
syttynge.



Sedeo, sedi, sedere, to sytte, to be ydelle, to
content, to tarye or abide, to take council.



Sedes, a seate or place to sytte on, Alsoo a
mansion house. sometyme a sepulchre.



Sedicula, a setle. Sedile, idem.



Seditio, a sedition or discorde amonge the
people.



Seditionarius, a seditious person.



Sedo, are, to mitigate, to pacifie, to asswage,
to restrayne, to extincte.



Sedatio, a mitigation.



Seduco, xi, cere, to leade asyde, or leade a­
way. sometyme to deceyue.



Cicer. pro
Flacco.



Seducere arrogantiam, to lay aparte pryde.



Seductilis, he whyche maye be deceyued.



Sedulo, in deede, dyligentely, withoute
faynynge.



Sedulitas, dylygence, with moche care.



Sedulus, dylygente, he that playnely with­
out crafte dothe a thynge diligently.



Sedum, an herbe callydde Syngreene or
howseleke.



Seges, segetis, corne, whan it standeth. some­
tyme the grounde falowed, and redye to
receyue corne.



Segesta, a towne in Italye.



Segestria, was the strawe that was layde in
a lyghter, wherin greate men were borne
by their seruantes.



Segmenta, be certayne lynes ymagyned, by
the whiche Cosmographers doo deuyde
the worlde into porcions, whiche be callid
also Paralleli, wherby the distance of pla­
ces are founden.



Segmenta, the cuttynges of, of any thynge,
sometyme the partes of the worlde diuy­
ded by the sonne. also gardis, or other like
thynges sowed to garmentes.



Segmentarius, he that maketh cloth of gold



Segmentum, a piece cutte of frome anye
thinge, be it mettall or stone. It is alsoo a
bee or colar, whiche is aboute womennes
neckes. Some doo take it for the purfyll
of a womannes gowne. It maye as welle
be taken for a garde or border abo ute any
garmente.



Segmentatus, ta, tum, may be sayde of anye
thinge, whyche hathe borders or trayles
fynely wroughte, withe small peces fastned
theron, be it of mettall or tymber.



Segmentat&ecedil; uestes, garded or pourfylled
garmentes.



Segnis, slowe and dulle wytted, barayne.



Segnitas pro segnitia, slouthfulnesse.



Segniter, slowely.



Segnities, slownesse, dulnesse, baraynnes.



Segrego, are, to seuer or separate.



Segobriga, a towne in the parte of Spaine,
whiche is nowe called Byskay.



Plautus in
Trin. & in
Asinar.



Segregare suspitiones, to put away suspition



Segregare sermonem, to speake no wordes.
Si quis ibi est odiosus abeo domum, sermo­
nem segrego: If any man be there, whom
I loue not, I gette me home, and speake
neuer a worde. Segrega sermonem, tædet,
Holde thy peace, I am weary, or it irketh
me to here the.
Plautus in
milite.Plautus in
pænulo.


Segullum, is a vayne of erth in mynes, whi­
che declareth, that therein golde maye
be founde.
Plin. li.33.
cap.4.


Segor, a cytie, whyche was preseruyd by
the prayer of Loth, whan Sodoma was
dystroyed by the vengeance of god.



Seir, a mountayne in the countrey of Edon,
where Esau the brother of Iacob the pa­
triarche dwellyd.



Seiugi & seiuges, a teme of syxe horses.



Seiungo, xi, gere, to separate.



Selectio, a chesynge out.



Selectus, ta, tum, chosen amonge other. also
chiefe amonge other.



Selecti Iudices, amonge the Romans were
iudges appoynted of the state of gentyl­
men, callyd ordo equestris.
Cicero.


Selenetes, a stone, wherin is a whyte, whi­
che decreaseth and increasethe, as the
mone dothe.



Seleucia, the principall cytie of Siria, whi­
che is .xxx. furlonges from Babylonia.



Seleucus, kyng of Siria, next after Alexan­
der the greatte.



Selibra, halfe a pounde.



Seligo, legi, seligere, to gather a part, or the
chiefe thynges amonge many.



Selinus, a ryuer.



Selinon, an herbe called also Apium, wher­
of be dyuers kyndes, as Hipposelinon, Pe­
troselinon. Seke for them in their places.



Seliquastra, a stole to sytte on.



Sella curulis, a Chayre, whereon the chiefe
officers of Rome sate in a charyotte, and
were soo caried, whanne they came from
their houses. some do suppose that it was
callid curulis, bicause the fete were crokid




the iugement therof, I remit to the reders.



Sellaria, places, wherin were fourmes and
stooles for men to sytte on.



Sellularii, artificers, which wrought sittyng.



Semel, ones, also at one time, shortly, brefe­
ly, summaryly.



Semele, the daughter of Cadmus.



Semen, seminis, sede, sommetyme settes of
yonge trees, or nursgardeynes, somme­
time the kynde.



Sementicus, ca, cum, that may be sowen.



Sementis, the acte of sowynge, sometyme
sede, sede tyme.



Sementa facere, to sowe corne.



Sementinæ feri&ecedil;, holye dayes ordeyned to
praye, that corne beinge sowen, moughte
come forthe and increace.



Semento, tare, to brynge forthe sede.



Semestris, tre, of syxe monethes.



Semesus, a, um, halfe eaten.



Semet, hym selfe.



Semetra, halfe a measure.



Semianimis, halfe deade.



Semianimus, halfe quycke.



Semicadium, halfe a barelle.



Semic&ecedil;cus, halfe blynde.



Semicinctum, a ierkyn or shorte iackette.



Semicirculus, halfe a cyrkle.



Semicoctus, ta, tum, halfe sodden.



Semicommestus, ta, tum, halfe eaten.



Semiconsumptus, ta, tum, halfe consumyd
or wasted.



Semideus, halfe a god.



Semidoctus, meanely lerned.



Semifera animalia, beastes ingendred be­
twene a wyld beast and a tame, as betwene
a wolfe and a dogge, or betwene a wylde
boore, and a tame swyne.



Semiferus, somewhat wylde.



Semigro, grare, to goo to dwelle in an no­
ther place.



Semihomo, halfe a man.



Semihora, an halfe howre.



Cicer. pro
Rabi.



Semilissula, & semilixula, a lyttell cake made
with meale, chese, and water.



Semimadidus, da, dum, halfe wette.



Semimares, they whyche are not perfytte
men, as those, whiche are gelded.



Semimortuus, a, um, halfe deed.



Seminatio, sowynge.



Seminarium, a place frome whense settes
and plantes be translated or remoued. also
a tree of the whiche settes are taken.



Seminex, necis, halfe slayne.



Seminium, sede, also the gayne of sede.



Semino, are, to sowe.



Seminudus, da, dum, halfe naked.



Semiobolus, the .xii. part of a greke dramme.



Semipes, pedis, halfe a foote.



Semipaganus, halfe an husbandeman, halfe
a carle of the countrey.



Semipedalis, le, halfe a foote in quantitie
or heyghte.



Semipedaneus, a, um, idem.



Semiplagium, a lyttell nette.



Semiplenus, not full.



Semiplotia, were showes, whyche couered
but halfe the fote: whiche the Romaines
did weare on, whan they went in hunting.



Semiquinarius, a, um, that whyche is halfe
fyue in numbre.



Semiramis, midis, the wyfe of kyng Ninus,
and queene of Babylon, a woman of in­
comparable power.



Semirutus, partly decayed:



Semi, halfe.



Semisenex, uel semiseneus, halfe olde.



Semisomnis, & semisomnus, halfe a slepe.



Semisopitus, he that is halfe slepynge, halfe
wakynge.



Semisoporatus, idem.



Semispathium, a shorte sworde.



Semissis, halfe a cubite. It was also a certain
coyne or money, that was halfe a piece of
golde, as the halfe noble or halfe crowne.



Semissis homo, a vyle persone.



Semissis vsura, the gayn of syx in a hundred.



Semita, a pathe, also a footeway.



Semitatus, ta, tum, dyuided in pathes.



Semitogium, a shorte gowne.



Semitogatus, & semitogatulus, he that wea­
reth a shorte gowne.



Semitritæon, uel hemitritæon, a feuer, whi­
che is a tercian and a halfe, and of fourty
and eighte houres, and vexeth on .xxxvi.
houres.



Semiuir, an vnperfecte man.



Semiuiuus, halfe a lyue.



Semiuncia, halfe an ounce.



Semiuntialis, le, of halfe an ounce.



Semiustus, a, um, halfe burned.



Semimodius, halfe a busshell.



Semoueo, uere, to moue or go awaye.



Semper, euer, alway.



Semperlenitas, the accustomed gentylnesse
or myldenesse.



Terent. in
Andria.



Semperuiuum, an herbe callyd Singrene.



Donatus.



Sempiterne, euerlastyngly.



Sempiternitas, the tyme euerlastynge.



Sempiternus, a, um, euerlastynge.



Senaculum, a councylle howse. Also a lyt­
tell Senate.



Senarius, a, um, that whyche is of the num­
ber of syxe. Senarij uersus, & senarioli, ver­
ses hauynge sixe fete.



Senator, toris, a Senatour.



Senatorius, a, um, pertaining to Senatours.



Senatus, us, a senate or councyll.






Senatusconsultum, an acre of councill, or an
ordinaunce made by the senate.



Senecio, onis, an herbe, which groweth on
walles, and tyles, and is hore in sommer,
and hath redde stalkes, called groundswel.



Senectus, senecta, senium, age.



Seneo, & senesco, senescere, to be olde.



Senex, senis, an olde man or woman.



Senio, onis, a syce, or numbre of syxe mar­
ked in the dyse.



Seni, n&ecedil;, na, syxe.



Sennaar, the fielde, where the towre of
Babylon was buylded.



Senogallia, a cytie in Italy.



Senones, people in Fraunce.



Sensa, the senses, or those thynges, whiche
we do meane.



Sensibilis, bile, that whiche may be felte.



Sensiculi, the diminutiue of sensa.



Sensisicus, ca, cum, that which causeth feling.



Sensilis, le, that maye be felte.



Sensim, lyttell and lyttell.



Sensus, us, sense, or feelyng, or perceiuyng.



Senta, was called Fauna, or Bona dea, the
good goddesse.



Sententia, sentence, iudgement, opinion, or
councill spoken or writen concernynge the
lyfe of man.



Sententiola, a lyttell or shorte sentence.



Sententiam dicere, to shewe his opinion.



Sententiam ferre, to giue sentence or iugement.



Senticetum, a place full of bryers.



Sentina, the pumpe of a shyp, a place where
all fylthe is receyued.



Sentinatia, a countrey in Italy.



Sentino, are, to auoyde peryl: also to pumpe
vp water out of a shyppe.



Sentio, sensi, sentire, to perceyue, to vnder­
stande, to fele, to iuge, to suppose, to know.



Sentio tecum, I am of thyn opinion.



Sentis, a bryar or bremble.



Ter. in An.



Senticosus, a, um, sharpe as a bryer.



Sentus, hearye, roughe.



Senum, the syxte.



Senumdenum, the syxtenthe.



Seorsum, a parte. also namely, or specially.
Omnibus gratiam habeo, & seorsum tibi
præterea Demea, I thank you al, but name­
ly the Demea.
Terent. in
Adelph.


Seorsum a te sentio, I am of an nother opi­
nion than thou arte.
Plautus in
cap.


Seorsus, idem.



Separatio, separation.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Separatus, ta, tum, separate or diuided from
an other thynge.



Separo, rare, to putte aparte, or departe one
from an nother.



Separatim, aparte.



Sepedes, emotes.



Sepelio, sepeliui, lire, to burye.



Sepes, sepis, an hedge.



Sepia, a fyshe callyd a Cuttell.



Sepimentum, an inclosure.



Sepio, sepiui, sepire, to hedge or inclose.



Sepius, piuntis, & Sipus, puntis, & Sipontum,
a citie in the royalme of Naples.



Seplasiarius, a maker of foote oynementes.



Seplasium, uel seplasia, a shop, where swete
oynementes are solde. It was a strete in
the citie of Capua, wherin were dyuers
delicate oynementes.



Sepono, posui, ponere, to putte or lay apart.



Seps, a venymous worme, of whose stroke
or bytynge the fleshe rotteth.



Septa, the generalle name of all places
inclosyd.



Septangulus, a figure, hauing four corners.



Septem, the numbre of seuen.



September, bris, the .viii. moneth.



Septemdecim, seuentene.



Septempedalis, le, of seuen feete.



Septimus, ma, mum, the seuenth.



Septenus, na, num, idem.



Septemuir, an officer, hauynge equall auc­
toritie with seuen other.



Septennis, of seuen yeres.



Septentrio, the northe coste.



Septentriones, the seuen sterres, which are
sene by Charles wayne, or Vrsa maior.



Septemuiratus, the offyce, wherin be seuen
ioyntely.



Septennium, the space of seuen yeres.



Septicollis, by that name Rome was called,
bycause of the seuen hylles, whiche were
in it, Palatinum, Quirinalis, Auentinus, Cœ­
lius, Viminalis, Exquilium, & Ianiculum.



Septies, seuen tymes.



Septifariam, seuen maner of facions or wais



Septifarius, a, um, seuen dyuers.



Septimatrus, was a holyday kepte the daye
folowynge the sixt Idus of euery month.



Septimana, a wieke,



Septimonium, a place hauyng seuen hilles.



Septingeni, & septingenti, seuen hundred.



Septingenties, seuen hundred tymes.



Septingentenus, & septingentessimus, the se­
uenth hundred.



Septingentuplus, seuen hundred folde.



Septuagies, thre score and ten tymes.



Septuaginta, thre score and ten.



Septuose, darkely.



Septum transuersum, the mydrefe, whyche
dyuydeth the stomacke frome the lower
bowelles.
No. Mar.


Septunx, uncis, a poyse of seuen ounces.



Septus, ta, tum, inclosed.



Sepulchrum, a sepulchre or tombe.



Sepultura, sepulture or burienge.






Sepultus, ta, tum, buried or hydde. also lyke
as it were deade.



Sepum, talowe.



Sepatius, a, um, as it were of talowe.



Sequana, a ryuer in Fraunce called Sein.



Sequani, Burgonions of high Burgoyne.



Sequanque, for seorsum quanque, euerye wo­
man aparte.



Sequax, acis, that whiche foloweth.



Sequela, the acte of folowynge, sequele.



Sequester, tris, tre, indifferent to both partis.



Sequester, an arbitrer. Also he, with whom
money is lefte.



Sequestro, are, to lay or sette a thynge indif­
ferently, or in the kepynge of an indiffe­
rent person.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Sequi lites, to sue at the lawe.



Sequor, eris, sequi, to folowe.



Sera, a locke.



Serapis, idis, a god of the Egiptians.



Serenitas, fayrenesse of wether, drythe.



Serenissimus, is a terme appropried nowe
adayes to kinges onely, and is vsurped for
moste famous, or moste renoumed.



Sereno, are, to make fayre and clere.



Serenus, a, um, faire, clere, without cloudes.



Seres, a people in Asia, hauyng great plen­
tie of sylke.



Seric&ecedil; vestes, sylken garmentes.



Seresco, scere, to be fayre and drie. also to be
tourned into whay.



Seria, ernest wordes, and graue or sadde.



Seria, an erthen vessell, whiche is longe.



Sericarius, a weauer of sylke.



Sericatus, apparayled in sylke, or he that
weareth a garment of sylke.



Sericeus, a, um, of sylke.



Sericum, sylke.



Sericus, ca, cum, of sylke.



Series, order.



Festus.



Serilla, botes or shyppes calked with towe.



Seriola, a diminutiue of seria.



Serio, in erneste.



Seriphus, an Ile by Grecia in the see called
Aegeum.



Serius, a, um, erneste, graue, of importance.



Sermo, monis, a speche, a fourme of spea­
kynge: sommetyme an oration, also com­
munication.



Sermocinor, aris, ari, to talke, to commyn.



Sero, are, to shutre or locke.



Sero, seui, serere, satum, to sowe, to plant, to
ingender.



Sero, an aduerbe, signifyeth late, to late, af­
ter the tyme that it ought to be, Alsoo in
the euenynge.



Seropta, a citie in Phœnicia.



Serotinus, a, um, that whiche is in the euen­
nynge. sometyme late or latewarde. Sero­
tini fructus, latewarde fruites.



Serpens, pentis, a serpente.



Serperasta, a swathynge or swadlyng band.



Serpillum, an herbe, whiche growethe on
olde walles aboute welles or pondes, and
in some places it smelleth lyke tyme, and
in some places lyke to sauery.



Serpo, psi, pere, to crepe.



Serpula, of olde wryters was vsed for ser­
pens, a serpent.



Serra, a sawe.



Serra præliari, is to fyght in battayle, some­
tyme marchynge forwarde, sometyme re­
culinge, as a sawe goth, whan it is drawen.



Serrata, & serratula, an herbe, which is cal­
lyd Germander.



Seruilis, le, of seruyle or bonde condycion
or propertie.



Serratus, ta, tum, lyke a sawe. also sawed.



Serro, are, to sawe.



Serrula, a lyttell sawe.



Sertor, he that soweth seedes, or settethe
herbes.



Sertum, a garlande of floures.



Sertus, ta, tum, sette with flowres, as in a
garlande.



Sertula campana, an herbe callid Melylote.



Seruo, are, to kepe, to preserue, to possede,
or dwelle in a place.
Vergil.


Seruare fidem, to kepe touch, to be faithful.



Seruare de cœlo, to obserue tokens or signes
in the heuen or firmament.



Plautus. in
Amph.



Seruaueris, take good hede what thou dost.



Seruator, toris, he that preserueth or dely­
uereth one from harme.



Seruiliter, lyke a bondman or slaue.



Seruire auribus, to flatter.



Seruio, uiui, uire, to serue.



Cæs. in commentarii.



Seruitium, seruyce.



Seruitia, bondmenne.



Seruitus, bondage.



Serum, the laste parte of the daye, the euen
tyde. It is also whay of mylke.



Serus, a, um, late, sometyme great.



Serum bellum, great warre.



Seruus, a seruant, proprely whiche is com­
pellyd to serue, as bondemen or apprenty­
ses doone.



Seruum pœcus, is a prouerbe applied to him
whiche in speakynge or writyng, dare not
digresse from an other mannes steppes or
fourme of writynge.



Sesama, & sesamum, a whyte grayne, why­
che growith in Inde, wherof oile is made
whiche is called oleum Sesaminum.



Sescunx, cuncis, an ounce and a halfe.



Sescuplum, the hole and the halfe parte.



Seselis, an herbe called also Siler.



Sesqui, as moche and half as moche. ioyned




to an nother worde, sygnygyeth halfe as
moche more.



Sesquialtera, so moche and halfe so moche,
a proportion in musyke.



Sesquihora, an houre and an halfe.



Sesquilibra, a pounde and a halfe.



Sesquimensis, a moneth and a halfe.



Sesquimodus, a busshell and a halfe.



Sesquiopera, one iourneye in tyllage and
a halfe.



Sesquipes, a foote and a halfe.



Sesquipedalia uerba, great and stoute wor­
des, as some noble men do speake to their
inferiours, whan they are displeased.



Sessio, a syttynge.



Sestans, et sextans, that whiche is also cal­
lyd obolus, the syxt parte of a dramme.



Sestertius, was two pounde weighte and a
halfe of copper, whiche amonge the aun­
cient Romayns was alway estemed to the
value of the fourthe parte of their syluer
coyn called Denarius and Dragma, of the
whiche .viii. went to an ounce.
rede them afterwarde
in the table of coyne.



Sestertium, contained .ii. li. and a half weight
of syluer, estemed to two hundred & fyfty
grotes, wherof .viii. went to an ounce, that
is to say .iiii. li. iii. s. iiii. d.
rede them afterwarde
in the table of coyne.



Sestertius nummus, the fourthe parte of the
syluer coyne of the auncient Romaynes,
called Denarius and Dragma, amonge vs
it may be named a sterlynge peny.



Set&ecedil;, brystell heares.



Setia, a citie in Campania.



Setigerum, a beaste whiche hath brystelles.



Setinum uinum, wyne made aboute the cy­
tie of Setia.



Serim, a tree, lyke to whyte thorne. why­
che doth neuer rotte: wherof moch of the
tymber in the temple of Salomon was.



Setosus, sa, sum, full of brystels.



Setuosus, a, um, olde writers vsed for obscu­
rus, darke.



Setuose, darkely.



Seu, for siue, eyther, or.



Seuere sharpely, cruelly.



Seueriter, idem.



Seueritas, tatis, grauitie, constantnesse, pro­
prelye in mynystrynge Iustyce.



Seueritudo, idem.



Seuerus, ra, rum, graue, constaunt, cruelle,
sharpe, daungerous to meddle with.



Seuoco, care, to calle aparte or away, to call
asyde from other.



Seuosus, a, um, lyke to talowe.



Seuo, are, to make candels of talowe.



Seuum, talowe of beastes.



Sex, syxe in numbre.



Sexcenti, syxe hundred.



Plautus in
cap.



Sexcentoplagus, he that receyueth a hun­
dred strypes.



Sexcuplus, a, um, syxe double, or syxe tymes
so moche.



Sexennis, of syxe yeres olde.



Sexies, syxe tymes.



Sextans, tis, the syxte parte of a pounde.



Sextarius, a vessell amonge the olde Roma­
nes, whiche contayned .xx. ounces of wa­
ter or wyne.
rede in the table of measures.



Sextilis, is the monthe nowe callid August.



Sextula, the syxte parte of an ounce.



Sextus, ta, tum, the syxte.



Sexus, us, a kind. sexus uirilis, the male kind,
sexus muliebris, the woman kynde.

 

¶ S ANTE I.

SI, yf, although, I wolde god.



Si dijs placet, If god wyl, or on goddis
name: a worde spoken eyther in dys­
dayne, or in mockage, for any thynge not
well doone. Etiam latini, si dijs placet, hoc
biennio, magistri dicendi extiterunr, Ye and
also the latines, on goddis name, haue ben
these two yeres maisters of eloquence.
Quinetiam, si diis placet, nephas aiunt, con­
sulem plebeium fieri, They say also, on god­
dis name, that it is vnleful for a communer
to be made Consul.
Ci. in ora­
tore.Ti. Liuius.


Si sapis, yf thou be wyse.



Siambis, an Ile in the brytysshe occean see,
on the northe parte.



Sibaris, an old towne .xii. miles from Rome.
Also a citie in Calabria. sometyme it is ta­
ken for delycate and wanton lyuynge.



Sibariticus, ca, cum, wanton or delycate.



Sibi, to hym.



Sibilo, are, to whystell.



Sibilus, a whystlynge.



Sibilla, a woman prophete, of the whyche
were eyght, as Varro writeth.



Sic, so, in lykewyse, accordyngly, so lightly.
Mirabar hoc, si sic abiret, I wolde haue
meruayled, if that it shoulde haue passed
soo lyghtly.
Terent. in
Andria.


Sibus, a sharpe wytted felowe.



Sic ago, so am I wont to do.



Sic sum, suche a one am I.



Sica, a shorte sworde.



Sicambri, the people of Nasson, and Hessen
in Germanye.



Sicani, a people in Sapyne.



Sicania, a countrey in the Ile of Sicile.



Sicarius, a murdrer.



Sicaneus, a, um, drye of nature.



Siccesco, scere, to drye.



Siccine, of that facion, in suche facion.
Siccine tu illam? Siccine nos habes ludibrio
onmes? Wylte thou handelle her of that




fasshyon ? Wylte thou in suche fasshyon
mocke vs all.
Plautus.


Siccitas & Siccitudo, drythe.



Sicco, care, to drye or be dryed.



Siccus, ca, cum, drye, wythered.



Sicera, all maner of drynke made of corne or
frutes.



Sicileo, cilui, cilire, to cut agayne that whi­
che was not wel cut afore, proprely grasse
in a medowe.



Sicilia, the Ile of Sicile.



Siciliences, people dwellyng in Sicile, whi­
che were borne els where.



Sicilis, lidis, of Sicile.



Sicilides Musæ, the Musis of Sicile.



Sicilisso, are, to speake the language of Si­
cile.



Siciliqua, uel Sicilicus, a poyse or wayght,
wayinge two drammes: and is the fourth
parte of an vnce.



Sicilites, the heed of a Iauelyn.



Siclus, the ounce of the iewes, which is the
fourth part of our ounce.



Sicinnium, a kynde of daunsynge, wherein
they that daunsed dyd synge, as they doo
in Christmasse, whan they synge Carolles:
and as maydens do nowe vse to doo in the
streates.



Sicubi, wheresoeuer.



Siculi, men of Sicile.



Siculum mare, the se by Sicile.



Sicunde, of any place.



Sicut & Sicuti, as, lyke as.



Sicyonia, an Ile in the se of Aegeum.



Sideratio, a sickenesse, which in suche wyse
taketh some part of a mannes body, that it
sodaynly becometh drye, so that he felith
it not, women do cal it takynge, or benum­
mynge.



Sideratus, he that is so taken in any membre
or part of his body, that he can not feele it
or stere it, the homely people calleth be­
nummed.



Siderites, an herbe, which groweth on ty­
les and olde walles.



Sidereus, a, um, of the sterres.



Sideror, ari, to be blasted, or taken, that a
man maye not stere or moue his membres.



Sido, dis, sedi, sidere, to settyll.



Sidon, a citie in Phenicia.



Sidonius, a, um, of that citie.



Sidus, a numbre of sterres gathered, which
do make a sygne or celestiall figure: some­
tyme it is taken for one sterre.



Sifilare, to whystell.



Sifilator, oris, a whystler.



Sigæum, a great mountaygne in the see by
Troye.



Sigillaria opera, warkes wherein were set
small ymages.



Sigillatim, one after another.



Sigillo, are, to seale, sometyme to close or
shut.



Sigillum, a lytle ymage.



Sigma, tis, a lytle table.



Signaculum, a seale.



Signatorius anulus, a signet.



Signatus, ta, tum, notable.



Signa infesta, Standardes and baners ad­
uaunced in batayle, in marchinge againste
enemyes.



Signia, a citie in Campania.



Signa cœlestis, the twelue signes, by the
whiche the sonne and other planettes doo
passe.



Signifer, he that beareth standard orbaner
in a felde.



Significo, ficare, to signifye or gyue know­
ledge.



Signinum opus, a warke made with shelles
and mortar, or tyles and mortar.



Signo, are, to make a signe, to signe or seale,
to signifie or shewe by a signe or token, to
wryte.



Signum, a signe, token, or marke, a miracle.



Signa, be alsoo ymages of metall, stone, or
woode.



Silanius, an hyghe hill in Irlande.



Silatum, brekefast.



Sila, an helmet.



Sienta loca, quiete places, wherein is no
noyse.



Silentium, sylence, quietnesse.



Silenus, the foster father of Bacchus. 



Sileo, lui, lere, to kepe sylence, to speake
nothinge.



Siler, a kynde of wythy growing in water: it
is also a ryuer in the royaulme of Naples.



Silesco, scere, to be in silence, or quyete.



Silex, silicis, a flynt stone.



Silicatus, ta, tum, made with flynt stones.



Silicernius, & Silicernium, a certayne pud­
dynge, eaten onely at the tyme of funeral­
les, some doo take it for a feaste or dyner
made at the funeralles or terment of a man
or woman.



Sinem silicernium, is named of Terence for
an olde Cryppel, redy to haue suche a dy­
ner made for him.



Siliceus, a, um, of a flynt stone.



Silicia, siue Silicula, an herbe called Fenu­
greke.



Siligo, ginis, a grayne called Rye.



Siligineus, a, um, of Rye.



Siliqua, the huske or codde of any thinge,
also a certayne fruyt in Italy, which is in
length of a mannes fynger, and brode,&
somewhat hooked, the wayght of sixe of




them made a poyse called Scrupulus, a scru­
ple: wherof thre do make a dramme. It is
now called a Characte, and is vsed among
fynars of golde and syluer, and also coy­
ners in the fynynge and alayinge therof.



Siliquastrum, an herbe.



Siliquor, quaris, quari, to growe in huske or
codde.



Silura, a countraye in the more Britayne.



Silo, onis, he which hath great browes.



Silosontis chlamis, is spoken in a prouerbe
of hym, whiche bostith hym selfe of ryche
garmentes.



Silus, camoysed nose, or a nose whiche is
tourned vpwarde.



Silphion, an herbe.



Silurus, a fissh called a Stourgeon.



Simia, & Simius, an Ape.



Simila, fyne mele of corne.



Similago, ginis, idem.



Simillimus, a, um, moste lyke.



Similitas, lykenesse.



Similiter, lykewyse, also.



Similis, le, lyke.



Simileis habent labra lactucas, a prouerbe
applyed to theym, whiche beinge of lyke
yll condicions, be matched togither, as a
lewde seruaunt with an yll master, an vn­
ruly people to a negligent gouernour, a
shrewde wife to a frowarde husbonde &c.
Lyke master lyke man. Lyke will to lyke.



Similitudo, dinis, lykenesse.



Similo, are, to be lyke.



Simitu, pro simul, togither.



Simiolus, a lytle ape.



Simois, oentos, a ryuer by Troye.



Simonia, Symony, that is to saye, ambition
in spirituall thinges.



Simplariæ, symple thinges or of lytle value.



Simplares, they which doo weare hostinge
harneyse.



Simplex, plicis, that is not double, syncere
or playne, without deceipt.



Simplicitas, playnesse.



Simpliciter, playnly.



Simplicitus for simpliciter.



Simplius, a, um, sengle in numbre, one only.



Simpulum, a chalice or cup of erth, wher­
with they sacrifyced in the olde tyme be­
fore that golde and siluer were in great e­
stimacion. It is of Varro taken for a cruet
with a Pipe, out of the which wyne came
droppynge by lytle and lytle.



Simpuuium, a vessell of tree.



Simul, togyther with other, moreouer also.



Simul ac, simul atque, as soone as, inconti­
nent as.



Simulachrum, an ymage of a manne or wo­
man.



Simulo, are, to indeuour, to be lyke to one,
also to fayne.



Simultas, atis, pryuy displeasure or hatered,
with dissemblynge countenaunce.



Simulatio, fantasye, also dissimulation.



Simulator, he that dissembleth.



Simulter, for Similiter.



Simulto, tare, to be at varyance with one, to
hate one pryuyly.



Simus, a, um, flat.



Sin, or els, if not.



Sinapi, & Sinapis, Senuy sede, wherof mu­
starde is made.



Sinapium, mustarde.



Sinapodes, people in Affrike, whiche do go
as they crept.



Sinarum Regio, a countraye beyonde the
lyne equinoctiall.



Sinciput, the forepart of the hedde.



Sindo, donis, a fyne lynen cloth.



Sine, withoute.



Sine vt veniat, let him come.



Ti. Liuius.



Sine fraude mea, my right saued.



Singillatim, to euery one, or of eueriche,
one after another.



Singularis, re, synguler, excellent, one with­
out any mo.



Singulariter, singulerly, onely.



Singulatim, euery thinge by it selfe.



Singultio, tire, to yexe.



Singultiens, he that hath the yexe.



Singultiens gallina, a clockinge hen.



Singultus, tus, yexinge.



Singulus, a, um, euerych.



Sinistra, the lefthande, sometyme it sygnifi­
eth, contrary to prosperouse.



Sino, sini, sinere, to suffre.



Sinope, pes, a cite in the contray of Pontus.



Sinopis, pidis, a redde stone, communely
called Sinoper.



Sinistre, vnhappely, vnfortunatly.



Sinistrorsum, on the lefthande.



Sinuessa, a citie in Campania.



Sinuo, are, to tourne or winde in the fourme
of a serpent, makinge holowe bosomes or
furrowes: it is also applyed to garmentes
that are pleyghted or gathered vp: also to
streames of Ryuers, which do in runnyng
make dyuerse tournynges . also to bankes
which haue holow creekes or bosomes.



Sinuosus, a, um, that which hath many tur­
nynges and wyndynges.



Sinus, us, a bosome. also the tournynges or
holownesse of water bankes: somtyme the
holownesse of eyen: sometyme a sayle. also
a cuppe for wyne: also nettes. sometyme
a sayle, whan the wynde sylleth it.



Siparium, a courtayne.



Siphones, the pypes of a Cundyt.






Siqua, for si aliqua, if any.



Sipontum, a citie in Apulia.



Sipontinus, a, um, of that citie.



Siquide, for bycause. also if.



Siremps, for similis res ipsa.



Siren, & Sirena, a meremayden.



Siri, pittes, wherin corne was layde to be
preseruyd.



Sirius, a Sterre, whiche ryseth the . viii.
Calendis of Iune.



Sirpea, mattes, or other thinges made of
russhes.



Sirpices, were instrumentes made with teeth
lyke to a sawe, which beinge drawen with
oxen, plucked vppe by the rootes flagges
and greate weedes, which grewe in me­
dowes.



Sirpiculæ falces, hookes, wherewith vynes
are cut.



Sirpo, are, to bynde, or wynde with russhes
or osyars, or other lyke thinge.



Sirpus, a russhe. Nodum in Sirpo quæris, thou
fyndest difficultie or doubt, where there
is none. Sirpi, be also warkes or verses,
which be very harde to be vnderstande.



Sirpiculum, a lytell basket.



Sisamum, a maner of poulce or corne.



Siser, a delicate roote to be eaten, whiche
some men do suppose to be redde Carettes.



Sisara, & Sisarum, an herbe growynge in
Eubœa, the flower wherof is moost plea­
saunt to bees. it is also called Erica.



Sisto, ere, to make to tarye or stande styll, to
retayne or kepe backe, to appere, as a man
doeth beinge sued in the lawe.



Sistas te, appiere thou.



Plautus in
Cap.



Ore sistere. Eminor, interminorque, ne quis
mihi obstiterit obuiam, nam qui obstiterit,
ore sistet. I threten, and I menace, that no
man let me of my way, for whosoeuer let­
teth me, shall kisse the grounde.



Sistere uadimonium, to bringe in suerty.



Sistrum, an instrument lyke a horne, whi­
che was vsed in battayle, in the stede of a
trumpet.



Sisyphus, was a great thefe, whiche was
slayne by Theseus, of whom it is fayned,
that in hell he tourneth a stone vppe to a
great hill, but whan it is at the toppe, it
falleth downe agayne, and remeueth his
labour.



Sitanius panis, bred of newe wheate.



Sitarchia, a bagge, or gardeuiandes, wher­
in meat is put.



Sithonia, a countraye in Macedonia vppon
the se syde.



Siticen, he that dyd blowe in a trumpet whan
men were buryed.



Sitio, tire, to thyrst or be a thirst.



Sitiens, he that is a thirst.



Situlus barbatus, a lytle skyllet.



Sitella, a lytle potte, wherinto lottes were
putte.



Sitibundus, a, um, very thursty.



Siticulosus, he that is allwaye a thirst.



Sitis, thirst, or desire to drinke.



Situla, & Sitella, a lytle cofer, wherin lottes
were put, at the chesinge of officers: also
a buckat to drawe water.



Situs, ta, tum, put or set.



Situs, tus, fylthynesse gathered of moysture,
by lacke of klensinge. also of sluttisshnesse.
also the settynge or standinge of a place,
which is now called the syte or situation of
a maner or countraye.

 

¶ S, ANTE M.

SMaragdus, a preciouse stone called an
Emeraude.



Smigma, Sope, & all other thinge that
doth put awaye spottis or vnclennesse.



Smigticus, ca, cum, the efficacy of klensing.



Smilax, acis, a tree, whiche hath leues lyke
an yuy, with beryes, and a whyte floure,
and smelleth lyke a lyly.



Smyntheus, one of the names of Apollo. 



Smyrna, a citie in Asia.

 

S  ANTE O.

SOana, a ryuer of Asia.



Soanes, people of Asia, dwelling about
the extreme part of the mountayne,
called Caucasus.



Soboles, issue or succession of children.



Sobrie, sobrely, aduisedly, prudently.



Sobrini, susters childerne.



Sobrius, a, um, sobre, well aduysed.



Soccus, & Socculus, a socke, which women
and players in Comedies onely ware.



Socer, cri, the wyfes father.



Socrus, the mother.



Sociale bellum, that warre, whiche is made
with confederates.



Sociare sermonem, to haue familiar commu­
nication with one.
Qu. Curt.
lib.7.


Socienus, a companion, or felowe.



Societas, tatis, felowshyp.



Plautus.



Socio, are, to ioyne or confederate.



Socius, a felowe or companyon. also Socij,
be confederates, they whiche in all coun­
sayles and actes doo participate one with
another. Loke for Comites and Sodales,
in their places.



Socors, for Secors, luskysshe, apte to no
goodnesse.



Socordia, for Secordia, luskisshenesse, som­




tyme it signifyeth ydelnes.



Socrus, my wyfes mother.



Socraticus, he that foloweth the doctrine
of Socrates. 



Sodales, they that kepe company togither,
at meales or passetyme. they be also they,
whiche be of one fraternitie or company,
or gylde.



Sodalitas, tatis, a fraternite or brotherhode.
Also a company incorporate of any miste­
rie or crafte, generally al felowshyps pri­
uately assemblynge amonge the people.



Sodalitium, idem.



Sodes, If thou dare.



Sodoma, orum, & Sodomum, a citie in Iu­
dea, whiche for synne, done agaynste na­
ture, was by almyghty god consumed by
celestiall fyre.



Sodomito, tare, to commytte or vse the syn
of Sodoma, agaynste nature.



Sogdiana, a countrey in Asia, extendyng to
the northe parte of Scithia.



Sol, solis, the sonne.



Soles, sygnifyeth sometyme the day, some­
tyme the beames of the sonne.



Solamen, minis, solace.



Solanum, an herbe callyd nyghtshade.



Solanum soporiferum, an herbe callid dwabe.



Solaris, re, the sunne.



Solarium, a place where by the sunne, hou­
res are knowen. Also a soler of a house.
Also a pencion payde to the prince, to liue
out of commune busynesse.



Solati, they whych be dyseased or sycke by
the heate of the sonne.



Solatium, solace or comforte.



Solea, a showe, callydde a galage or paten,
whiche hath nothyng on the fete, but on­
ly lachettes. Also a fishe, called a sole. also
a groundsoyl, wheron standeth the wall of
a house. It is also a shoe, wherwith hor­
ses and oxen be shodde.



Solearius, a paten maker.



Soleatus, ta, tum, shodde.



Suetonius
in August.



Solemne, accustomed.



Solemnia, feastes or holydayes.



Plautus in
castel.



Solemniter, solemnely.



Solennis, ne, annuall or yerely, that whiche
is done euery yere.



Soleo, solitus sum, uel solui, solere, to be wont.



Solere, to kepe companye.



Solet, it was wont, or the vse hath ben.



Plautus in
epidico.



Solens, for ut soleo, Ego abcessi solens pau­
lum ab illis, I went a lyttell from them, as
I was wont.



Solers, tis, wytty, cunnyng.



Solertia, sharpenes or quyckenes of wytte,
craftynesse or subtiltie in practysynge, or
wyttynesse.



Solicito, tare, to shewe both hope and feare.
Also to inquiete, or make sorye, to solicite
or procure by meanes: sommetyme to la­
bour the erthe.



Solicitudo, dinis, care.



Solicitus, ta, tum, carefull.



Solido, dare, to make fyrme, to consolidate.



Solidesco, scere, to close togither, as a wound
dothe, whan it healeth.



Solide, hole, perfytely.



Solidarij, they whiche do selle in grosse.



Solidipes, that hath fete hole without toes.



Solidus, da, dum, hole, contynuall, not ho­
lowe, not broken or cutte.



Solifuga, he that keepeth hym oute of the
sonne, or fleeth from the heate of the son.



Solipunga, a flye, whiche in the heat of the
sonne prycketh moste sharply.



Soliloquus, he that talketh beinge alone.



Soliloquium, communication, which a man
beinge alone, hathe with god in contem­
plation.



Solinunt, for solent, they are wonte.



Solitarius, solitarie, alone without company



Solitas, solytarynesse.



Solitaurilia, an offryng of thre thynges of
sondrye kyndes, as a bulle, a ramme, and
a boore.



Solito, tare, to be wonte often.



Solitudo, deserte, where no man dwelleth.



Solitus sum, I was wonte.



Soliuagus, he that wandreth alone.



Solium, a place of astate, where a kyng syt­
teth: it is also a great vessell, whiche ser­
ueth to dyuers vses, as to translate lycour
from one to an other, to washe linnen clo­
thes, and for men and women to be bathed
in. It sygnyfyeth also a coffin, where deed
bodies are put.



Solœcismus, a vyce in speakynge, wherein
the trewe congruitie and ryght speche is
peruerted.



Solo, all in the oske tunge.



Solon, lonis, one of the seuen wysemen of
Grecia, which made lawes for the Athe­
nienses.



Solor, aris, ari, to recreate.



Solox, course woulle, or lockes.



Solstitialis herba, an herbe, whyche dothe
beare floures onely at the tyme, whan the
sonne is at the hyghest, or as some menne
suppose but one daye.



Solstitium, the stay of the sonne, whan he
can not be eyther hygher or lower, which
is twyse in the yere, that is in wynter, the
eyght calendes of Ianuarie, and is cal­
lyd Solstitium hyemale, and in sommer,
the. viii. calendis of Iulye, & is callid Sol­
stitium æstiuale.






Solstitialis uita, a lyfe whyche dureth but a
lyttell space.



Plautus.



Solstitialis morbus, a sycknesse whiche kyl­
leth men shortly.



Solstitialis ægritudo, is of somme men taken
for the burnyng feuer, whiche happeneth
aboute the canicular dayes, or excedynge
heate of the ayre.



Soluendo non est, he is not able to pay.



Solum, the soyle or grounde, generally it
signifieth all thynge, whiche doth susteyne
or beare any other thynge on it. It is also
the sole of the fote. also the sole of a shoe.
Natale solum, a mannes naturall countrey.



Soluo, ui, uere, to lowse, to paye, to recom­
pense, to put away, to delyuer, to resolue
or melte. Soluere fidem, to breake promise.
Soluere uenas, to open the veynes.



Soluere uotum, to performe an auowe.



Soluere uita, to slee one.



Solummodo, onely.



Solute, wantonly, incontynently.



Solutus risus, a great laughter.



Solus, alone, one onely, solytarie.



Solutilis, le, that whiche wyll be soone low­
sed or vndone.



Solutus, ta, tum, loused or louse, also payde.



Somniator, a dreamer.



Somnorinum, a dreame.



Somniculosus, slepy, a sluggarde.



Somniculosus, a, um, that whyche causeth
one to sleepe.



Somnifer, feri, that which induceth or bryn­
geth slepe.



Somnificus, idem.



Somnio, somniare, to dreame.



Somnolentus, disposed to slepe.



Somnus, slepe.



No. Mar.



Sonere, to sounde or make a sounde.



Sonito, to sounde often.



Sonipes, pedis, a lyght or swyfte horse.



Sonitus, tus, a sounde.



Soniuit, for sonuit.



Sono, sonare, to sounde or make a noyse.



Sonor, noris, a great sound or noyse.



Sonore, shyll or lowde.



Sonoritas, a shyllenesse, or lowdenesse.



Sonorus, ra, norum, lowde, or makynge a
great sounde.



Sons, tis, gyltye.



Erasmus in
Chil.



Sontica causa, a great cause.



Sonticus, ca, cum, noyfull.



Sonticus morbus, a contynuall syckenesse,
or wherwith all the body is greued.



Sonus, all that may be harde.



Sophaci, people of Affrica.



Sophistice, ces, the parte of logyke, whyche
is capciouse and subtylle.



Sophia, wysedome.



Sophisma, sophismatis, a craftye and de­
ceytefull sentence, an Oracyon or inuen­
tion, whiche seemeth to be trewe, whan
it is false.



Sophista, & sophistes, a dissembler of wyse­
dome, a deceyuer vnder an eloquente or
crafty speakynge.



Sophocles, a wryter of tragedies.



Sophron, in Greke, is Temperance in en­
glyshe, wherby carnall appetites and lu­
stes be refrayned.



Sophos, aut sophus, a wyse man.



Sopio, piui, pire, & sopior, to sette at rest, to
brynge aslepe.



Sopitus, brought aslepe, or to reste, or into
a sowne with a sodayne stroke.



Sopor, oris, deed slepe.



Soporifer, soporiferi, & soporiferum, that
bryngeth slepe.



Soporo, rare, to brynge or induce slepe.



Soporatus, faste aslepe.



Sora, an hyll in Italy.



Sorbeo, bui, bere, & sorbo, psi, bere, to suppe,
as one suppeth potage.



Sorbiciuncula, a thynne brothe.



Sorbitio, onis, suppynge.



Sorbities, idem.



Sorbillo, lare, to syppe.



Sorbillum, a cawdell.



Sorbum, an harryshe pere.



Sordeo, & sordesco, dui, dere, to be fowle, or
vnkleanly.
Plautus in
Penulo.


Sordes, fylthe, or vncleannesse.



Sordesco, sordescere, to be vncleane or
sluttysshe.



Sordide, vncleanly, sluttyshely.



Sordidior, dius, vnclenlyer.



Sordidissime, moste vnkleanly.



Sordidissimus, ma, mum, vnclenlyest.



Sorditudo, fylthynes, sluttyshenes.



Sordido, dare, to make fowle.



Sordidus, da, dum, fylthy, vnclenly, sluttishe.



Sorex, ricis, a ratte, or a fielde mous.



Sorech, the Iewes do calle vynes, whiche
contynually do brynge forthe moste plea­
sant and dilectable fruyte.



Soriantes, sworne bretherne.



Soriceus, a, um, of a ratte.



Soricinus, of a mouse.



Soriculata uestis, a garmente of chaunge­
able sylke.



Plaut.



Sorita, a subtil & captious forme of arguing.



Soritæ, people whyche are diuyded frome
Inde by the ryuer callyd Arabis.



Sorilla, shyppes whiche are calked or stop­
ped with hempe or flaxe.



Sororiari, is proprely of maydens brestes,
whan they begyn to be imbosed.






Soror, ris, a syster.



Sororiæ, maydens pappes.



Sororius, my systers husbande.



Sorracus, a cofer or baskette wherein are
caried the instrumentes or apparayle ser­
uynge for comedies or interludes.



Sors, sortis, chaunce, lotte, portion in enhe­
rytaunce: the hole somme in a commune
banke or stocke, wherin many haue parte.
It is also destyny, iudgement.



Sortes, were also the aunsweres of Idols.



Sorticula, the scrowe, wherein the lotte is
wrytten.



Sortilegium, dyuynation by lottes.



Sorrilegi, ben they, whiche do tell me nnes
destenies by takynge of lottes or verses 
of holy scripture.



Sortior, tiris, tiri, & sortio, tire, to make lot­
tes, to take or haue any thynge by lotte or
chaunce. Also to dispose or order.



Sortiri prouinciam, to receyue the rule of a
countray by lottes. It is vsurped to haue
auctoritie by election.



Sortito, an aduerbe, sygnyfyenge by lotte
or chaunce.



Sortitus, ta, tum, taken by lotte. also chaun­
gynge to haue a thynge.



Sospes, hole or saulfe. also he that gyueth
helthe.



Sospitalis, le, cause of helthe.



Sospito, tare, to kepe in helthe.



Sos, olde wryters vsyd for eos.



Sosia, a mannes name.



Sostratus, a mannes name.



Sotadicum carmen, metre hauyng. vii. fete.



Soticena, one of the names of Iuno. 



Soter, a saluyour.

 

¶ S ANTE P.

SPadicus, ca, cum, of scarlette colour.



Spadix, dicis, a date with the braunche
plucked from the palme tree. It is al­
so scarlette colour.



Spado, donis, a geldyng, be it man or beest.



Spadonia, a kynde of laurell.



Spargo, si, gere, to scatter or caste abrode.



Cor. Taci­
tus lib.3.



Spargere bellum, to make warre in sondrye
partes of a countrey.



Spartam nactus es, hanc orna, a prouerbe si­
gnifienge the astate or office, whiche thou
haste, order or applye it welle.



Sparganon, the roote of an herbe called
cynquefoyle.



Spargapises, the sonne of Thomiris the
quene of Massagetes.



Sparta, the chiefe citie of Lacedemonia.



Spartacus, was a famouse sworde player,
whiche gathered an host of slaues, & made
battayle agaynste the Romayns, and was
vanquyshed by Crassus. 



Sparteum, a money bagge.



Spartiata, & Spartanus, na, num, of Sparta.



Spartum, & Spartus, an herbe called brome.



Spara, be callyd caltroppes, sowen in tyme
of batayl, to wound the fete of men & horsis.



Sparus, a clubbe.



Sparum, a lyttell darte.



Spastici, out of the whyche any thynge is
plucked.



Spatha, a two handed or bastarde sworde. it
is alsoo an instrumente of the kytchen, to
tourne meate that is fryed.



Spathalion, an ornamente, pertaynynge to
women.



Spaticus, vexed with an yll spirite.



Spatiator, a wanderer.



Spatiosus, a, um, large, spacious.



Spatiose, & spatiosius, largely, more large.



Spatior, aris, ari, to walke.



Spatium, a space as wel in tyme, as in place.



Specere, among olde writers was taken for
Inspicere, to looke in.



Specialis, le, speciall, peculiar, propre.



Cicero de
re ditu suo



Speciatim, specially, peculyarly, proprely.



Species, ei, a fygure or image, a forme, kind,
beautie, fauour. It is defyned by Logicy­
ens, to be that, whiche is sayde of many
thynges varienge in noumbre: as Homo,
whiche is spoken of Plato, Socrates, Ci­
cero, whyche doo not varye in fygure but
in noumbre. Sommetyme species, doo sy­
gnyfye spyces. Alsoo it is apparaunce.
alsoo a syghte or thynge sene, spices.



Per speciem legationis in Asiam ablegatus
est, Under the coloure of ambassade, he
was banyshed into Asia.
Plin. deuin
ris illustr.


Plautus.



In Speciem esse, to be the honour.



Specificus, ca, cum, partycular.



Specifice, particularly.



Specillum, a smalle Instrumente, where­
with Sourgeons doo serche the deepe­
nesse of woundes and soores. Alsoo to
annoynt sore eyes. It is also a Spectakle
to loke with. also an eare pycker.



Specimen, speciminis, an example, a profe.
also beautie.



Specimen ædere, to shew a proufe .



Speciosus, a, um, beautyfull.



Spectabilis, le, worthy to be sene.



Spectaculum, a thynge to be sene or looked
on. Sometyme the selfe beholdynge. al­
soo the place from whens menne doo be­
holde thynges.
Budeus.


Spectamen, a Sygne or token. Spectamen
bono seruo, id est qui rem herilem procu­
rat, uidet, collocat, It is a token of a good




seruant, that is to saye, whiche attendeth
aboute his maisters busynesse, and dothe
suruey all thynge, and sette it in order.
Plautus in
Merc.


Spectatores, beholders, triers of money:



Spectatus, ta, tum, approued.



Specto, tare, to behold, to approue, to tende
to some conclusion, to compare.



Spectatio, a tryall or proufe of money.



Spectrum, an ymage or fygure in a mannes
ymagynation.



Specula, an hygh hylle or towre, whereon
thynges be espyed far of. also lyttel hope,
a diminutiue of spes.



Specularia, spectakles.



Specularis, re, any thynge, wherby a manne
may see the better.



Speculatio, a beholdynge.



Speculator, an espyall in warres.



Speculor, aris, ari, to see farre, to consyder,
to espye, to serche out.



Speculum, a lookynge glasse.



Specus, cus, & specoris, a denne.



Speluncha, idem.



Spelæum, idem.



Spepondi, for spopondi, I haue promysed.



Sperchius, a ryuer of Thessalia.



Speres, olde wryters vsed for spes, hope.



Sperma, spermatis, seede, mooste common­
ly vsed for the naturall humoure, where­
of all lyuynge thynges be ingendred
and fourmed.



Sperno, spreui, spernere, to despise.



Spero, rare, to hope.



Sperata uirgo, a mayden asked in mariage.



Spes, spei, hope.



Speutici panes, looues of breadde made
in haaste.



Speusippus, a noble phylosopher cousyne
to Plato. 



Sphæca, a waspe.



Sphæra, a fygure in al partes equally round
a speere.



Sphæristerium, a rounde place in a bayne,
where men are exercysed, a tenyse play.



Sph&ecedil;romachia, playenge at tenyse.



Sphennida, a balle made of lether or cloth,
greatter than a tenyse balle.



Sphragide, a stone whiche printeth perfitly.



Sphinx, gis, a monster, whiche had the heed
and handes of a mayden, the bodye of a
dogge, wynges lyke a byrde, nayles lyke
a lyon, a tayle lyke a dragon, the voyce of
a man, which purposed to men subtyl que­
stions. It is also a beaste lyke an ape, I sup­
pose it to be a munkay or babyon.



Sphondilium, a ioynt or knotte of the backe
bone .xii. of them do make the chyne, and
the .v. resydue do make the loynes.



Spica, & spicus, the eare of corn. also a spice
called Spikenarde.



Spica mantica, an eare of corne, hauynge no
berde.



Spicatus, ta, tum, eared, or in eare, as corne is.



Spiceus, ea, eum, that whyche hathe eares
lyke to corne.



Spicifera, the surname of Ceres callid god­
desse of corne.



Spicilegium, glemynge of corne.



Spicilegium facere, to gleme.



Spicio, cire, to shute out in eare.



Spiculatores, they whiche be called of the
kynges garde. Some men do take Spicu­
lator, to be a hangeman, or other persone,
whiche putteth men to deth by execution
of the lawes.



Spiculo, culare, to make any thynge sharpe
atte the poynte.



Spiculum, a darte, also an arrowe.



Spilumenes, a sluttyshe drabbe.



Spina, a thorne, also the backebone.



Spineus, a, um, of thorne.



Spineoli, a wylde fruite callyd Sloes.



Spinosus, a, um, full of thornes.



Spinther, a pynne, also a tache, sometyme a
braselette.



Spinturnix, a byrde whyche was wonte to
comme to the aulters, and carye awaye a
burnynge cole, whyche was taken for an
vnlucky byrde.



Spinus, a plumme tree or damsyn tree.



Spio, onis, idem quod Nimpha.



Spirabilis, le, liuely, or that wherby we liue.



Spiritabile, idem.



Cicero.



Spiraculum, & spiramentum, out of whyche
the ayre or brethe passeth.



Spirarchus, a capitayne in the fore warde.



Spiræ, thynges whyche doo tourne and
wynde in dyuers cerkles lyke a trendell,
or an adder lyeng rounde. Also spira, is an
ornament of a womans heed. also the tur­
ning of cables or ropis, whan they be wound
vp. also the band or lace, wherwith a cappe
or hat is made fast vnder a mans chyn. also
the base of a pyllar. Also a cake made like
a trendell. also a multitude of people.



Spirillum, a gotes berde.



Ennius.



Spiritus, spirite, brethe, wynde.



Spirituale, & spiritale, idem quod spiritus.



Spiro, spirare, to blowe as wynde dothe, to
sende forthe odoure.



Spisse, an aduerbe, signifienge thicke.



Spissigradior, gradi, to go thycke, or make
many feete.



Spissigradus, he that gothe thycke.



Spissitas, thyckenesse.



Spisso, are, to make thycke.



Spissus, a, um, thycke, slowe.






Spissitudo, thyckenesse.



Spithama, a measure of .xii. fyngers brode.
reade after in the table of measures.



Splen, splenis, the splene.



Splendeo, dui, dere, to shyne.



Splendesco, scere, to shyne ofte.



Splendide, an aduerbe sygnifienge clere or
bryghte. also rychely.



Splendidus, da, dum, bryght, clere. Also he
whyche vseth to haue his house rychelye
decked with abundaunce of all thynges,
is called Splendidus, contrarye to Sordi­
dus & auarus.



Splendor, oris, lyght, bryghtnesse, somtyme
honour or noblenesse in lyuynge.



Spleneticus, he that is sycke in the splene.



Splenium, a plaister of cloth or lether made
to lay to the body of him, whiche is sicke.



Spoletium, a citie in Italy.



Spoletini, people of the citie Spoletium.



Spolio, are, to robbe or dispoyle.



Spolior, ari, to be robbed.



Spoliarius, ria, um, that whiche receyueth
spoyle or thynges taken by robberie.



Sponda, the syde of a bedde.



Spondeo, spopondi, spondere, to promyse.



Spondens, a foote in meeter of two longe
syllables.



Spondilus, a wherne, whyche is a rounde
thynge of stone, or wodde, or leadde, put
on a spyndell to make it runne rounde. It
is also o whyte harde thynge in an oyster,
whyche is couered with the fyshe.



Spondium, that whiche cometh of lead like
to soote, whiche is about vessels of brasse,
that do hange ouer the fyre.



Spongia, a spounge, or that wherwith any
thynge is wyped.



Spongiare, to wype cleane a sponge.



Spongioli, mousherons.



Spongiosus, a, um, lyghte, and full of holes
lyke a spounge.



Spongites, a stone lyke a spunge.



Sponsa, a woman despoused or affianced.



Sponsalis, le, pertaynyng to spousage.



Sponsalia, the spousage, or betrouthyng of
a man and womanne, before that they be
wedded.



Sponsio, onis, a promyse, a bargayne.



Sponsus, us, idem.



Sponso, sare, to affyance or betrouthe.



Sponsor, oris, he that promyseth or bargai­
neth. Sometyme a suretie, whiche vnder­
taketh an other mans acte.



Sponsus, sa, sum, promysed.



Sponte, naturally, willingly, of his free wyl.



Spontalis, le, voluntaryly.



Spontaneus, ea, eum, that whiche dothe, or
is done willyngly, naturally, without con­
straynt or helpe.



Spopondi, I haue promysed.



Sporade, yles nygh to Crete or Candy.



Sporta, & sportula, a basket or maunde, some­
tyme money or meate distributed by pryn­
cis vnto the people.



Sportula, & sportella, a littell gyft or almes,
also lyuerey of courte, callydde bowge of
courte, was callyd Sportula. 



Spretus, refused.



Spuma, the fome or frothe of any thynge
lyquyde.



Spumeus, a, um, fomy or frothye.



Spumo, are, to fome or gather vnto fome.



Spumosus, a, um, that wherof cometh a fome.



Spuo, spui, spuere, to spytte.



Spurce, vnkleanly, fylthyly.



Spurcidicus, ca, cum, that whiche speaketh
dishonestly or vnclenly.



Spurcificus, ca, cum, that maketh thynges
vncleane or fylthy.



Spurcitia, & spurcities, vncleannesse.



Spurco, care, to defyle or make vncleane.



Spurcum uinum, wyne myngled with water.



Spurcus, ca, cum, vncleane, fylthye, vnpure,
stynkynge, blouddy.



Spurij versus, verses fayned, the authour
beinge false named or vnknowen.



Spurius, a bastarde. also it was the surname
of dyuers Romaynes.



Sputo, tare, to spytte.



Sputor, tari, to be spytte on.



Sputum, spyttell.

 

¶ S ANTE Q.

SQualla, olde wryters vsed for squalida.



Squalleo, lui, lere, to be filthy, shuttishe,
soiled or stainid with som vnclene thing



Squallidus, da, dum, sluttishe, filthy, causing
one to abhorre the sight ther of. Somtime
it signyfieth spotted. also carrayne leane.



Squallidus ager, grounde out of tylthe. al­
so shynynge.



Squalor, loris, sluttyshenes, fylthynes.



Squalido, dinis, & squalliditas, the same.



Squalus, a fyshe.



Squama, the scale of a fyshe.



Squammosus, skaly.



Squatina, a sole fyshe with a rough skynne,
wherwith fletchers doo make theyr arro­
wes smothe.



Squarosus, a, um, rough and sharpe, lyke to
a thynge whiche is skalye.



Squilla, a certayne herbe, growynge in the
see, also a fyshe, I suppose it 
a prane.



Squinitij, people in Italy callydde Sabelli
and Samnites.

 

¶ S ANTE T.

ST, a voyce of him that commandeth si­
lence, as we say in englishe, husht, whan
we wold haue one to holde his peace.






Stabilimentum, that whiche kepeth a thing
stedfaste.



Sabilio, liui, lire, to make stedfaste or stable.



Stabilis, le, stable or stedfaste.



Stabularæ mulieres, women whiche keepe
vyttaylynge houses, for to refresshe way­
farynge men.



Stabularius, an inholder. Also he that hath
the charge of the howse, where cattayle
is kepte.



Stabulari damas aut ceruos, falowe deree or
redde dere to be lodged or harborowed.



Budeus.



Stabulo, bulare, to stande as cattayle dothe
in a stable.



Stabulatio, standynge or lyenge of cattelle,
also harborowynge or lodgynge of dere.



Stabulum, an inne, where men do lodge or
bayte. Also it is the generalle name of the
place, where cattelle doo abyde, whanne
they come from their pasture. also a stable
wherin horses or mules are kepte.



Stactis, & stacte, the floure of myrre, or fat­
nesse, whiche fyrste distilleth out of it.



Stadium, a place, wherin runnynge is exer­
cysed, as welle of men as of horses. It is
also a furlonge or the eight part of a mile.



Stacteus, a, um, gummye.



Stadiodromos, the place ordeined to run in.



Stadiodromas, he that rounneth in a cours
of rounnynge.



Stagma, an oyntement.



Stagno, are, proprely of water is to stande
and not to flowe.



Stagnum, a standynge water, a poole. alsoo
a certayne mettall called tynne.



Staloginum, a thyng to hange at ones eare,
as Egyptians haue.



Stamen, clothe, whanne it is in the lome or
frame. Also flaxe or woulle, whan it is on
the dystaffe. also stamyne or worstede.



Stanneus, a, um, of tynne.



Stannum, mettall callyd tynne.



Stapedes, styroppes.



Staphyle, a vyne.



Staphylus, he that dyd fyrste myngle water
with wyne.



Staphis, a kynde of vynes, whiche hathe a
blacke stemme and strayt, and hath a fruite
more lyke to a lyttelle bladder, than to a
grape, which be grene, within the which
is a kernelle thre cornerde.



Staphilinus, wylde parsnyppe.



Staphis agria, Stafesagre.



Stata sacrificia, sacrifyce customably doone
at certayne days of an olde ordynance.



Statæ matris simulachrum, an ymage, why­
che was sette vp by the people in euerye
strete at Rome.



Stare, sometyme sygnyfieth to abyde.



Stat mihi, I am determyned.



Status, ta, tum, fyrme, or stable, alsoo ordey­
ned or decreed.



Statarius, a, um, ordynarie.



Stater, teris, a certayne coyne, whiche was
in value foure drammes.



Statera, a beam to way without the balancis.



Staticulum, a certayne wanton meuynge in
daunsynge. somtyme a lyttell cart.



Stati dies, dayes ordynarie, dayes in banke,
for apparance, or for the parties to plede.



Statilinus, was callyd a priuate god, whiche
men supposed to be alway with them.



Statina, an Ile.



Staticulum, a lyttell ymage.



Statiuncula, idem, or a lyttell restyng place.



Statius, a noblepoete.



Statim, anon, constantly, contynually.



Statio, onis, a place, where eyther menne
or warre or shyppes doo abyde or reste
for a certayne tyme.



Stationalis, le, that whyche standeth faste
or abydeth.



Stationarij milites, souldiours, whiche are
assigned to abyde stylle in one place, or to
kepe a towne or fortresse, or the marches
of a countrey.



Statiua, & statiuum, a certayne place forty­
fyed, where men of warre lay at the siege
of a fortresse.



Stator, toris, a seruaunt, whyche is alwayes
redye attendynge aboute an offycer, to be
at commandement. Wherfore in that word
be included pursyuantes, postes, sergean­
tes, baylyffes, and catchepolles. Also Iu­
piter, was called Iupiter stator  of Romu­
lus, bycause he supposed that he made the
Romaynes to tarye whan they fledde, the
Samnites pursuynge them.



Statua, an ymage of mettalle, yuorie, stone,
or tymber.



Statuaria, the crafte of caruynge or yetting
of ymages.



Statuarius, he that carueth or yetteth images.



Statuarius, a, um, pertaynynge to ymages.



Statuere ex &ecedil;quo & bono, to iudge or deter­
myne, accordynge to equitie, lasse than the
rygour of the lawe wolde requyre.



Statuere pretium, to sette a price on thynges
vendible.



Statumen, minis, that whiche is sette vp to
sustayne or beare a thynge, a proppe.



Statumino, nare, to proppe vp, to vnderset,
to make sure.



Statuo, tui, tuere, to ordayne, to determyne,
to set faste, to stable a thinge, to dedicate,
to beate one thynge to an nother. Subli­
mem illum arriperem, & caput primum in ter­
ram statuerem, ut cerebro dispergam uiam,




I wolde lyfte hym on highe, and beate his
heed to the grounde, that I mought scat­
ter his brayne abrode in the hygh waye.



Statura, the stature of a man.



Staturus, a, um, the particyple future of sto,
stas, stare, to stande.



Status, tus, state, it is amonge oratours and
lawyers the case, whiche rysethe in con­
tention, wherin the matter resteth, whiche
muste be replyed vnto, and eyther be de­
nyed, confessed, or trauersed: of Tullie it
is callyd Constitutio causæ.



Status, stata, statum, firme. Stati dies, dayes
appointed.



Steatoma, a gatherynge of greace or fatte
in some place agaynste nature.



Stechades, thre lyttell yles by Marsiles.



Stega, a cabyn of a shyppe. alsoo a cote or
cotage.



Stegnæ febres, feuers in the whiche a man
maye houe neyther syege, nor vryne, nor
sweate, nor none other euacuation.



Stelæ, lyttell pyllars.



Stella, a sterre. also a sterrefysshe, also the
name of a poete.



Stella crinita, a blasynge sterre.



Stellatus, ta, tum, full of sterres.



Stellatura, was an extorcion of capytaynes
in takynge from the souldiours the porci­
ons of vyttayle appoynted vnto them by
the Emperour.



Stellio, a beaste lyke a lysarde, hauynge on
his backe spottes lyke sterres.



Stellionatus crimen, a dysceyte in dyssem­
blynge a thynge, to take profyte of an o­
ther iniustely.



Stellis, a kynd of byrdlyme made in Eubœa.



Stello, are, to shyne or glysten lyke sterres,
or be made lyke sterres.



Stemma, matis, a garlande of floures, alsoo
the stocke or bloudde of a gentylle house.
sometyme the degrees in dynrede. Alsoo
an inscription grauen in a stone.



Stemo, was syster to Medusa. 



Stenobœa, the wyfe of Pretus kynge of
Ephyri, whiche loued Bellorophon, that
vanquysshed the monster callyd Chim&ecedil;ra.



Stentor, toris, was a man, whiche hadde a
voyce as lowde as .xx. men.



Stephanoma, euery herbe that seruethe for
garlandes.



Stephanoplocus, a maker of garlandes.



Stephanus, in greke is a crowne.



Stercoratio, dungynge.



Stercorarius, ria, rium, pertaynyng to dunge
or mucke.



Stercoratus, ta, tum, dunged or mucked, or
compassed.



Stercoro, are, to dunge or compasse.



Stercus, stercoris, dunge, mucke, compasse.



Stercutius, the surname of Saturnus, bicause
he fyrste founde and vsed doungynge of
grounde.



Steresis, priuation.



Sterila, olde writers vsed for sterilis.



Sterilesco, rilescere, to be barrayne or waxe
barrayne.



Sterilia for sterilitas.



Sterilis, le, barrayne.



Sterilis amator, a louer, whyche lackethe
money.



Sterilitas, barraynes, sterilytie.



Steriliter, barraynely.



Sternax, nacis, a steerynge or ploungynge
horse.



Sterno, straui, sternere, to throwe downe, to
spreade, to couer, to lay the table, to make
playne or smothe, to lye downe to reste.



Sternere lectum, to make a bedde.



Sternunt se somno, They layde them downe
to slepe.



Sternuto, tare, to snese often.



Vergilius.



Sternuo, nuere, to snese.



Sternutamentum, sneesynge.



Sternutatio, idem.



Sterquilinium, a dungehylle or myxen.



Sterogonia, a kynde of frankincense callyd
commonly olibanum, or in latin thus masculus.



Sterto, tui, tere, to route whan one slepeth.



Stesichorites, is the numbre of eight in dise,
so called of the sepulchre of Stesichorus
the poete, whiche was made in figure like
to eyght dyse.



Stesichorus, a famouse poete, of whome it
is writen, that whanne he was an infant in
his cradelle, a Nyghtyngale satte on his
mouthe, and dyd synge, sygnyfienge that
he shulde be the sweetest poete, that euer
was afore hym. Also he founde fyrste syn­
gynge of songes in a daunse.



Stibadium, a chaire or couche made of her­
bes wounde togyther: somme doo calle it
an herber or sommer parler.



Stibium, a whyte stone founde in syluer mi­
nes, which stoppeth the runnyng of eies,
and dothe make them seme very fayre.



Stichos, a verseor an order in a thynge.



Stigo, are, to pricke forthe.



Stigma, matis, a marke made with fyre, or
with a hotte yron. Sometyme it sygnyfi­
eth infamy and reproche obiected openly.



Stigmatici, persones infamed.



Stilla, a droppe.



Stilbo, was a philosopher. Vide stilpo.



Stilbon, the sterre of Mercury. 



Stillicidium, the droppynge of a house.



Stillo, are, to droppe.



Stilpo, a phylosopher borne in the cytie of




Megara in Grece, whiche his countreye
beinge burned, and his wyfe and childern
loste in the fyre, escaped, and departynge
alone, whan the kynge Demetrius asked
of hym, yf he had loste any thynge, he an­
swered, I haue loste nothyng: for all that
is myne, I carie with me, meanynge ther­
by, that vertue, whiche is onely the pro­
pre goodes of a wyse man, and may not be
taken from hym, he toke away with hym.



Stilpones, dwarfes.



Stimulo, are, to prycke.



Stimulatio, a pryckynge or feruent mouing
to doo a thynge.



Stimulator, he that prycketh.



Stimuleus, a, um, that whyche is done with
pryckynge.



Stimulus, a gode, wherwith oxen ar driuen.



Stingo, & stinguo, guere, to put out lyght.



Stipa, for stupa, towe.



Stiparius, ia, ium, pertaynynge to stoppyng
or beatynge harde togyther.



Stipatores, they whiche do frayte the shyp,
or lay in suche fardelles or burdeynes as
are to be caryed. Also they whiche be of
the kynges gard, alway about his person.



Stipatus, enuyronned with men, to be defen­
ded, as princis are with their garde.



Stipendialis, le, pertaynynge to wages.



Stipendiarius, a, um, whiche payeth tribute,
of some callyd contributarie, to the fyn­
dyng of an army, or defence of a contray.



Stipendiatus, he that taketh wages.



Stipendiosus, he that hath bene oftentymes
hyred or retayned in warres.



Stipendior, diari, to be hyred or retayned
in warres.



Stipendium, wages proprely gyuen to soul­
diours. Also subsidie payde to princis.



Stipes, pitis, a stake, also a stycke.



Stipo, are, to stop chynkes or clyftes, pro­
prely in shyppes or botes, with towe and
pytche. also to enuyronne to the intent to
defende one.



Stipendia facere, to serue in warres, as a
souldiour.
Ti. Liuius.
lib.34.


Stips, uel stipis, pis, wages to men hyred: al­
so money gyuen to beggars.



Stiptica medicamenta, medycines that doo
bynde or restrayne.



Stipula, holme, erige, or straw, apt to thatch
houses. it is of some taken for the huske
that closeth in the strawe.



Stipulatus, tus, & stipulatio, a bargayne or
promyse, or obligation to pay money, or to
perfourme a thynge, whiche is requyred.



Stipulor, aris, ari, to make a bargayn, to pro­
myse effectually that whiche he is requy­
red to do. It hath both the actiue and pas­
siue signification. Stipulor abs te, I require
of the, or I am requyred of the.



Stiria, an ysykle or droppe of yse.



Stiricidium, & stillicidium, the dropping of a hous



Stirpices, wieders in gardeynes.



Stirpitus, vp by the rote.



Stirpo, are, to pull vp by the rote.



Stirps, stiripis, in the femynyne gender sy­
gnyfyeth a stocke in kynrede, beinge the
masculyne gender it sygnifieth the stemme
of a tree or herbe.



Stitisse vadimonium, to haue brought forth
suretie or pledges.
Gell. li. 2.


Stiua, is that in a plough, which the plough
man holdeth, whan he dothe eare.



Stlata, a brode shyp or bote, callid an hulke.



Stlembus, slowe and heuye.



Stlatarium, any thyng that is borne on the see.



Stlatarius, a maker of hulkes or botes.



Stlitem, old writers vsed for litem, variance.



Stlitibus iudicandis, for litibus iudicandis.



Stlopus, a sowne made with the mouth, whan
the chekes are blowen.



Stlotium, for lotum.



Sto, steti, stare, to stande, to indure or abide.
Stare promisso, to abyde by his promyse.
To be full. Stat ager sentibus, the felde is
full of brembles. Iam puluere cœlum stare
uident, Nowe sawe they the skye fulle of
duste. To bose oute. Hic corpus solidum
inuenies, hic stare papillas Pictor marmo­
reo, Here in this marble stone shalt thou
fynde paynted, the body sounde, and the
pappes imbosed. Also to be immouable,
or alway certayne. Sic stat sententia, so the
sentence abydeth immouable, or is deter­
myned. Also Stat, my mynde is. Stat con­
ferre manum Aeneæ, my mynd is to fight
with Aeneas. Stat, is sette. Omnis in As­
canio chari stat cura parentis, All the care
of the tender louynge father was sette
on Ascanius. Also stare, to coste, Neque
ipse hoc periculum ignoro, expertus non
leui documento, quanti steterit mihi, quod
semel imperata non feci, Nor I am igno­
rant of that daunger, hauyng experience
of no lyght warnyng, howe moch it cost
me, that I dyd not those thynges, that I
was commaunded.
C&ecedil;cilius.Vergil.Lucilius.Vergilius.Vergilius.


Stare firmum, to stande faste.



Stat per me, per te, per illum, whanne I, or
anye other is the cause, that a thynge is
not done. Si poterit fieri ut ne pater per me
stetisse credat, quo minus h&ecedil; fierent nuptiæ,
uolo. I wolde if it may be, that my father
shulde thynke, that it was not long of me,
that this mariage toke none effecte.



Stat a me, he is of myne opinion.



Plautus in
pseudo.



Stat apud te fides parum, Thou arte of a




small credence.
Ter. in Eu.


Statur, I stande here.



Stoecades, foure Iles in the frenche see a­
gaynste Languedocke.



Stoici, a secte of philosophers, which affir­
med, that no griefe moughte happen to a
wyse man: and that felicitie was onely in
vertue.



Stola, a womans gowne, It was also a long
garment, whiche the prynces of Persia
dyd vse, and was the only garment of ho­
nour, as we do cal suche apparell a robe.



Stolatus, he that weareth suche a robe. also
it may be callyd honourable.



Stolide, foolyshely, lewdely.



Stoliditas, foolyshenes, lewdenes.



Stolidius, more foolyshely.



Stolidus, da, dum, foolyshe, lewde of con­
dicions, odyouse.



Stolones, braunches whiche do spryng out
of the stemmes or rootes of trees.



Stomachicus, he that is sick of his stomake.



Stomachor, aris, ari, to haue indignation, to
be vexed in mynde.



Stomachose, angerly, hatefully, disdainously



Stomachosus, dysdaynous.



Stomachus, is the pipe, wherby meate goth
downe. It is also that which is called Ven­
triculus, wherevnto we haue none other
name but the stomacke. sometyme it sygni­
fyeth indignation, vehemente wrathe, ha­
trede, and abhorrynge of a thynge that
lyketh not vs, Sommetyme facylytie or
gentylnesse.



Plinius.



Storax, racis, a swete incense or gumme, whi­
che is also called styrax, whereof be two
kyndes, the one is callyd Storax calamita,
the other is callyd Storax liquida.



Storea, any thynge that is spredde on the
grounde. It is also a matte.



Strabo, he that looketh a squynte, or gogle
eyed.



Strages, a slaughter of men, or a discomfiture.



Stragulum, euery ouermoste garment. Also
a counterpoynte or couerlyd.



Stramen, minis, strawe, lytter.



Stramentum, idem.



Stramentitius, a, um, that whyche is made
of strawe.



Stramineus, a, um, of strawe.



Strangulo, are, to strangle.



Stranguria, dyffycultie to pysse.



Stratagema, a polycie or wyse councille in
warres.



Strategus, a generall captayne of an armye.



Stratia, an hoste or armye.



Stratiotes, a man of warre.



Stratiotes, an herbe, whiche groweth on
waters without any roote.



Stratioticus, ca, cum, warlyke, pertainynge
to warres.



Stratius, idem. Also the name of one of the
sonnes of Nestor. 



Stratumino, are, to paue.



Strator, toris, he that helpeth his mayster to
horsebacke, yeman of the styrope.



Stratum, any thinge that is strawed, Also a
bedde. Strata, all that is layde on the bed.



Stratum, a horse harneyse, a streate or caul­
sey, paued with stone.



Strebula, in the olde tunge of Umbri was
a piece of the flesshe that was offered in
sacrifyce.



Strena, a newe yeres gyfte, or present.



Strenue, valyantly, quyckely, boldly.



Strenuitas, tatis, actiuitie.



Strenuus, a, um, valiant, prompt, actife, bold.



Strepito, tare, to make a noyse often.



Strepitus, tus, a noyse made with the han­
des or fete.



Strepo, pui, pere, to make a greatte noyse,
proprely in goinge or clappynge of han­
drs, sometyme generally.



Strepsiceroti, certayne beastes in Affryke,
hauynge croked hornes.



Stria, a rabat or smal furrowe made in stone
or tymber.



Striata, be also creuyses or small lines, whi­
che are sene in herbes.



Stribligo, ginis, a viciouse fourme in speking
where the wordes agree not, and the par­
tes of speche be out of order.



Striblita, breade made lyke to ropes or cor­
des wounden.



Stricte, straightly.



Strictim, shortly touched one after an other



Strictim referre, to reporte moche in fewe
wordes.



Strictim attondere, to clyppe all at ones.



Strictior, tius, more strayte.



Strictissimus, a, um, moste strayte.



Strictiuella, a foule yll fauoured hoore.



Strictiuæ, olyues gathered with mans hand.



Strictur&ecedil;, sparkes whiche doo issue frome
mettall whan it is taken oute of the fyre,
and beaten with hammers.



Strideo, dui, dere, & strido, dis, dere, to crashe
or make a noyse lyke to cordes, whan they
be drawen.



Stridon, a towne in Dalmacia, where saynct
Hierome was borne.



Striga, a rewe of thynges whanne they be
layde in lengthe. Alsoo a ridge of lande,
wherof commeth strigatus ager.



Striges, shrycheoules, also women whyche
are supposed to come by nyghte into hou­
ses, and sucke the bloudde of chylderne,
some calle them hegges.






Strigia, wyde garmentes made of lether v­
sed in warres.



Strigil, gilis, an horsecombe, alsoo a thynge
wherewith wrastelers bounde theyr bo­
dyes, whan they had wrasteled. Alsoo a
certayne vessell.



Strigiles, were rubbynge combes made of
swete wodde, wherwith in India the men
were rubbed for an exercise. Also kerchi­
fes, wherewith wrastelers after their la­
bours wyped their bodyes. also certayne
vessells. also pieces of fyne golde founde
in mynes, vnmyxt with any other matter.
also lyttell fyshes moste commonly taken
in wynter tyme.
Budeus.


Strigilecula, a diminutiue of strigil.



Strigillo, are, to strayne harde.



Strigium, a spanyshe garment.



Strigmenta, fylthynesse, whiche commethe
from a mans bodye, whan he is wasshed.
also the corruption of oyle.



Strigo, gonis, a well pightman, or well com­
pacte or stronge.



Strigosus, a, um, carrayn leane, it is propre­
ly spoken of horses or routher beastes.



Strimon, onis, a ryuer in Thracia.



Stringo, xi, gere, to strayne or wrynge. Also
to stryke, to make thynne in cuttynge, to
gather, to shaue, to wounde. Stringere en­
sem, to drawe a sworde.



Strio, striare, to make rabattes in stoone or
tymber. Alsoo to make furrowes. It is
proprely whanne beastes in earynge atte
the ende of a furrowe tournethe to make
a newe furrowe. Somme doo calle hit,
to wende.



Striare, is also to plane or to polyshe.



Stritare, to abyde or tarye with an yll wyll.
or with moche payn.



Stritauum, olde writers vsed for Tritauo, my
grandfathers grandfather.



Stritomellus, a sparowe, whiche hauntethe
the see costes.



Strix, strigis, a shryche oule, a wytche that
chaungeth the fauour of chylderne.



Striges, grosse herbes or wortes.



Strobilus, a pyne apple tree. sometyme the
kernels, or fruite.



Strobus, a tree, wherof perfumes were made,
myxte with the wyne of dates, whyche
perfume was swete, but it made the heed
heuy, all be it without any peyne.



Stroma, tis, tapisry.



Strombon, a kynde of Labdanum.



Strombus, a shelle fyshe of the see, whyche
hath a kynge, whom they folowe. It was
thought sommetyme that he whyche had
seene that fysshe, shulde haue good lucke
in his affaires.



Strongyle, & Strongylos, an Ile in the see
called Aegeum, nowe callyd Axos, some­
tyme it was callyd Dia.



Stropha, subtyltie in arguynge.



Strophas, a whirlynge or sodayne turnyng.



Srrophades, two Iles in the grekysshe see.



Strophia, garlandes whiche priestes were
wonte to weare.



Strophiolum, a lyttell garlande.



Strophos, frettynge in the bowelles.



Strophium, a maydens neckerchefe or lyn­
nen partlette.



Structiles columnæ, pyllars made of diuers
pieces.



Structilis, le, made of many pieces, or of di­
uers thynges.



Structor, toris, a caruer of meate at a table.



Structuta, buylding, settynge of thinges in
good order.



Strues, a pyle of wodde, also a cake.



Struices, an ordynaunce of many thynges
togyther.



Strufectarij, they whyche dyd carye cakes
to the temple to be offred, as they do now
carie the holy lofe on the sondaye.



Struferarii, they which dyd sacrifyce at the
trees that were burned with lyghtninge.



Strufetani, they whiche broughte meale to
be offered.



Struma, a swellynge within the throte,
wherin is gathered matter and bloode. some
thynke it to be that, whyche is callyd the
kynges euyll.



Strumosus, he that hath the kynges euylle.



Struo, struxi, struere, to sette in order.



Strumum, a medycyne or playster for the
kynges euyll.



Strupearia, holydayes amonge the people
callyd falisci, at the whyche daye, the peo­
ple do go with garlandes on their heedis.



Struppum, is a lyke holydaye amonge the
people cally d Tusculani.



Struppi, were lyttell wrethes made of lea­
ues putte on the heedes of ymages in the
temples, as nowe superstitious fooles do
sette on images heedes in the churches.



Strutheus, the priuye membre of a man.



Struthia, a certayne kynde of quynces.



Struthiocamelus, an ostryche.



Struthio, idem.



Struthopus, a rounde foote lyke a sparowe.



Struthopedes, they whyche haue lyttelle
rounde feete.



Strychius, an herbe, whiche maketh hym
madde that eateth of it.



Strychium bibit, a prouerbe sygnyfyenge
the man is madde



Studeo, dui, dere, to studye, or to applye the
mynde, or care for a thynge, to endeuour.






Studiosus, studious, dylygent, constant, ad­
dicte or feruently disposed.



Studiose, studiousely.



Studium, studye. sometyme exercyse, wylle,
or appetite, desyre.



Stultitia, foly, it is knowen by foure thyn­
ges, or if he hath not in remembrance that
he shulde haue, or if he hath, he dothe not
retayn it, or doth not folow good council,
or dothe approue yll councill or affections.



Stultior moricho, he that neglecteth his
owne busynesse at home, and applyeth o­
ther mens abrode, It is alsoo a prouerbe
touchynge them, whiche do thynges, that
cause them to be laughed to scorne.



Stultior Chorœbo, a prouerbe applyed to
fooles, whiche wyll assaye to do a thynge
that is aboue their wytte or lernynge: for
Chorœbus, was a felowe, that assayed to
number the wawes of the see, whan, he him­
self coude not tell any number aboue fiue.



Stulte, folyshely.



Stultiloquentia, & stultiloquium, a foolysshe
babblynge.



Stultiloquus, he that talketh or speakethe
foolyshely.



Stultior, stultius, more foolyshe.



Stultissimus, ma, mum, moste folyshely.



Stultius, more folyshely.



Stultorum feri&ecedil;, was a tyme in the monethe
of February, that fooles kepte holy, foo­
les holy daye.



Stultus, he that dothe a thynge vnaduisedly
or without discretion.



Stupa, towe, the cours part of flaxe.



Stuparius malleus, the hammer, wherewith
calkers do beate towe into shyps or botes



Stupefactus, astonyed.



Stupefio, I am astonyed or abashed.



Stupeo, & stupesco, pui, pere, to be astonyed
or dismayde. somtyme to meruayle at.



Stupefacio, cere, to make astonid, or to cause
to meruayle or be abashed.



Stupentia, uel stupida membra, the membres
whiche haue loste all their sence or feling.



Stupiditas, an abashement.



Stupidus, dysmayed, abasshed, also he that
feleth nothynge, or lacketh his sences.



Stupor, poris, abashement, the sodayne pri­
uation of sence or felynge.



Stupre, dishonestly, shamefully.



Stupro, prare, to committe auoultrie or rape
or to defloure a virgin.



Stuprum, auoutrie, or defloration of a virgin



Stura, an yle agayne the mouthe of Tyber.



Styga, a fenne in Egypte not farre from the
citie of Memphis.



Stygeus, ea, um, pertaynynge to Styx, the
greate fenne, whiche is fayned of poetes
to be by the fielde callyd Elysius, whiche
the paynyms dydde suppose to be a place
of pleasure, wherein rested the soules of
good men.



Stylobata, a trowgh of tymber, wherein
water rounnethe, or is conuayed into a
cesterne.



Stylus, a style, whyche qualitie of wordes
in speakynge, sometyme harde, sometyme
easy, sometyme in a meane. also an elegant
fourme or order in writynge or speakinge.



Stymphalus, a ryuer in Arcadia.



Stymphalide, a coppe of fethers, whyche
standeth on the heed of a byrde, as of a
larke, an heron, a pecocke, and other.



Stipticus, ca, cum, that whiche stoppeth or
bindeth, or straineth, if it be eaten or dron­
ken. Also that whiche in tastynge seemeth
to strayne the tunge, as a quynce or redde
wyne.



Styrax, racis, a soote gumme callyd storax,
wherof be two kyndes, the one is callyd
storax calamita, the other storax liquida.



Styx, sygnifieth sorowe or heuynesse, poe­
tes doo sayne, that it is a fenne, whyche
is in helle.

 

¶ S ANTE V.

SVada, callyd in greke Pitho, was callid
the goddesse of eloquence or dylec­
table speche.



Suadela, persuasion, fayre speche.



Suadeo, si, dere, to speake fayre, to intreate
with fayre wordes, to indeuour, to induce
a man into our opinyon, or to beleue vs.



Suadibilis, le, that which may be persuaded.



Suasibilis, idem.



Sualternicum, a kynde of ambre, whiche is
yelowe, whereof beades be made, and is
callyd Laumbre.



Suapte, of his owne nature.



Suarius, a swyne herde.



Suasibiliter, an aduerbe signifyenge, in ma­
ner to perswade.



Suasio, an exhortation, a mocyon or per­
suasyon.



Suasor, soris, he that dothe exhorte.



Suasum, euery colour that may tourne into
an nother colour.



Suauiatio, a swete kyssynge.



Suauiator, he that kysseth swetely.



Suauiloquium, a swete speche.



Suauiloquus, he that speaketh swetely.



Suasorius, a, um, that wherwith a man is or
may be perswaded.



Suatim, lyke a sowe.



Suauior, aris, ari, & suauio, to kysse sweetely
or for ioye.






Suauis, suaue, sweete in taste, soote in odour
or smelle.



Suauitas, & suauitudo, swetenesse.



Suauiter, sweetely.



Suauium sumere, to kysse.



Suauium facere, idem.



Suauium, & sauium, swete harte.



Sub, vnder, by, or aboute. Sub lucem, by
daye lyght. Sub idem tempus, In the same
tyme, or aboute the same tyme. Sub horam
pugn&ecedil;, About the time of the battayl. Sub
eas autem redditæ surit, for they were deli­
uered after theym. Sub sarcinis, with the
trussis or cariage.



Cicer. pro
Planco.



Sub uesperum, in the twye lyghte. Subues­
perum Cæsar portas claudi, militesque ex op­
pido exire iussit, In the twie lyghte Cesar
commaunded the gates to be shutte, and
the men of warre to depart out of the citie.
Cæs. in commentarii.


Subacidus, cida, cidum, somewhat eygre,
or sowre.



Subacidulus, a, um, a lyttell sowre.



Subactus, ta, tum, constrayned, subdewed,
dryuen vnder, kneaded or wrought with
handes, as dowe is, laboured, exercised.



Subæratus, ta, tum, that which is brasse with­
in, and other mettall without.



Subæro, rare, to myngle with brasse.



Subagito, tare, to solycite. Subagito blandis,
& benedicis uerbis, I solicited with fayre
and well spoken wordes. It is also to com­
pany with a woman carnally.
Plautus in
cistell.


Subalaris, subalare, that whyche is vnder
the wynges.



Subalpini, people vnder the Mountaynes
called Alpes, called Peemountaynes.



Subalternatio, a succession by tourne.



Subalterno, nare, to succede by tourne.



Subaquaneus, a, um, & sub aqueus, a, um, that
whiche lyeth vnder the water.



Subaquilus, la, lum, broune of colour.



Subare, is spoken of women, whyche are
as fylthye as swyne in the acte of lechery.



Subire, idem.



Subareo, & subaresco, rescere, to be or waxe
somewhat drye.



Subasper, somewhat sharpe.



Subaudio, dire, to here or perceyue a lyttel.



Subausculto, tare, to harken a lyttell.



Subbasilicanus, he that walkethe vnder the
place, where iugementes are practysed.



Subbibo, bibere, to drynke a lyttell.



Subblandior, diri, to flatter.



Subcalidus, da, dum, somwhat hote, warme.



Subcernicula, a fyne bulter, wherwith the
floure is seuered from the branne.



Subcerniculum, a rangynge sieue.



Subcingulum, a bracynge gyrdell.



Subcineritius, a, um, rosted or baken vnder
the ashes, or axen.



Subcisiua tempora, tymes borowed or spa­
red from seryous busynesse.



Subcisiua opera, warkes done at times stolen
from  ordinarie busines or labours necessary.



Subcollo, lare, to lay a thyng on ones necke



Subcrispus, he that hath a curlyd heed.



Plautus in
milite.



Subcustos, an vnder keeper.



Subcutaneus, a, um, that which is within the
skynne, betwene the skinne and the fleshe.



Subdelego, gare, to commytte to an nother
any matter, whiche is commytted vnto vs
by the kynge or prynce.



Subdialia, thynges whiche doo stande or be
sette abrode out of the house.



Subdialis, ale, abrode in the ayre withoute
the house.



Sub dio, that is not in a howse, or vnder a
couerynge.



Subdititius, ia, ium, whiche is not proprelye
his or hirs, whose it is fained to be. Partus
subdititius, a byrthe fayned of an nother
mannes chylde. 



Libri subdititij, bokes with
fals titles or counterfaite auctours.
This entry displays on the same line as the previous entry.


Subditiuus, a counterfayte chylde.



Subditus, a subiecte.



Subditus, ta, tum, idem quod subdititius. also
put in the place of an other.



Subditus iudex, a iudge which is sette in the
place of a iudge departed.



Plautus in
mostell.



Sub diu, in the day tyme.



Subdo, dere, to putte vnder, to adde to, to
putte in the place of an nother, to putte in
daunger or ieoperdie.
Plautus in
epi stol.&
Plin. in epi.


Subdolus, he that deceyueth craftely, cau­
telouse.



Subdole, craftily cautelously.



Subdubie, somewhat doubtefully.



Subdubitanter, idem.



Subdubito, tare, I doubte somewhat.



Subdubius, somewhat in doubte.



Subdubitatio, a lyttell doubte.



Terent. in
Andria.



Subducere, to deceyue. Etiam nunc me sub­
ducere istis dictis postulas? And yet nowe
wylte thou goo aboute with these wordes
to deceyue me?



Plautus in
Curcu.



Subducere, to steale. Proximo magnum po­
culum ille bibit, caput ponit, cum dormiscit,
ei subduco anulum, At the laste he dranke a
great draught, & layd downe his heed, whi­
les he slepte, I stale his rynge from hym.



Subduco, xi, cere, to take awaye, to remoue,
to lyfte vp, or drawe vp.



Subducere rationes, to make accompt, to go
or steale away priuily.



Subductum omnibus uentis ædificium, a house
in the daunger of euery wynde.



Subeo, iui, ire, to go vnder or in, to take.



Subire mortem, to receyue dethe.






Subductio, a drawynge vp of a shyppe oute
of the water.



Subdulcis, ce, somewhat swete.



Subduro, rare, to make somewhat harde.



Subduror, rari, to be made somewhat hard.



Suber, corke.



Subiaceo, cere, to lie vnder, also to be subiect



Subiacto, tare, & subiecto, to cast vppe, as
corne whan it is fanned.



Subices, subiectes.



Subiecto, tare, to caste vnder often.



Subiector, toris, a forger of testamentes, or
he that bryngeth forthe one testament for
an nother.



Subicito, tare, to company often with a woman.



Plautus in
persa.



Subiculum flagri, a beatynge stocke.



Subigo, egi, igere, to constrayne, to subdue,
to dryue vnder, to whet, to beate or stampe,
sometyme to eare or tylle truely, to digge,
to meddyll with a womanne, sommetyme
to lyfte vp.
Vergil.


Subijcio, ieci, ijcere, to put vnder, to make
subiecte. somtyme to cast vp, to reherse. Si
meministi quod olim dictum est, subijce, If
thou doest remembre, what was ones spo­
ken, reherse it.



Subinde, more ouer, forthwith or anon, of­
ten tymes. Subin, idem.



Festus.



Subingere arietem, to delyuer a shepe to be
kylled for hym that doth sacrifyce.



Ci. Att. 2.



Subinnanis, ne, somewhat vayneglorious.



Subire aleam, to be in daunger or peryll, to
entre into peryll.



Subire periculum, to entre into peryll.



Subijt mihi, it cometh to my remembrance.
also to succede, to resiste, to clymme.



Plinius in
panegyri.



Subire, to take charge of any thynge. Quis
enim curæ tuæ molem sponte subeat? Who
wolde wyllyngly take on hym the greate
weight of thy charge.



Cicer. off.



Subire, to suffre or susteyne. Qui retinendi
officij causa, cruciatus subierit vltro, He that
wyll for the accomplyshement of his due­
tie suffre tourmentes wyllyngly. Alsoo to
growe or sprynge vp. Also to come to re­
membrance. Sera pœnitentia subijt regem,
Late repentance came to the kynges re­
membrance. Cogitationi nostr&ecedil; nunquem subijt,
It came neuer to our thought.
Vergil.


Subit recordatio, I or he remembred.



Vergi. Ae­
nei.x.



Subire, to put vnder. Aeneas subijt mucro­
nem, ipsumque morando sustinuit, Eneas put
vnder his sword, & tarieng, lyfted him vp.



Subire, to succede or come in place. In qua­
rum locum subierunt inquilinæ, impietas, per­
fidia impudicitia, In whose place succeded
newe inhabytauntes, contempt of vertue,
disloyaltie, lechery.



Cic. in di­
uinatione.



Subire, to aunswere or resyste. Poteris ne o­
rationem eius subire? Moughtest not thou
make answere to his oration?



Subire, to clymme or mount vp. Hemi excel­
citas, sex millibus passuum subitur, the height
of the mountayne of Hemus is clymmed
or mounted in syxe thousande paces.



Subhasto, tare, to sell any thynge in tyme of
warres that was praysed. Hasta, a yerde,
whiche was delyuered to hym that was
appoynted to selle anye thynge taken in
warres.



Subsibulum, was a whyte ornamente, foure
square and long, which the nunnes, callid
Vestales, ware on their hedes, whan they
dyd sacrifyce.



Subito, sodaynly.



Subitaneus, & subitarius, a, um, & subitus, ta,
tum, sodayne.



Subiugalis, le, vsed to the yoke.



Subiugo, gare, to make subiecte.



Sub iugum mittere, to brynge in subiection.



Subiungo, gere, to adde or ioyne to.



Sublabor, beris, lapsus sum, labi, to slyppe
awaye.



Sublabro, brare, to put into the mouthe.



Sublatior, tius, hygher.



Sublatus, ta, tum, lifted vp, mounted, aduanced.



Sublegere sermonem, Clam nostrum hunc illæ
sublegerunt sermonem, Priuily they hark­
ned, and bare away all that we communed.
Plautus in
milite.


Sublego, are, to substitute.



Sublego, legi, legere, to steale. also to chese
an other into the place of him that is deed.



Sublestus, ta, tum, fegle, faynt, lyght, of noo
force or value.



Subleuo, are, to helpe, or ayde, to defende,
to lyfte vp, to sustayne.



Sublica, a proppe, a shore, a poste, or other
lyke thynge, to sustayn or kepe a thing vp.



Sublicius, a briege at Rome.



Subligaculum, a nether coyfe or brieche.



Subligar, garis, idem.



Subligo, gare, to vnderbynde.



Sublimis me, high, that which is aboue vs.



Sublimitas, heyght.



Sublimiter, highly, on height.



Sublimo, mare, to sette on high.



Sublino, liniui, nire, to annoynt or touche, to
paynt or stayne.



Sublinitio, the fyrste colour that is layde or
dyed. also staynynge with colours.



Sublitio, onis, the grounde colour, wheron
the perfyte colour is layde, in cloth dyed,
it is callyd grasynge.



Subluceo, cere, to shyne sommewhat, or to
gyue a lyttell lyght.



Sublucide, somewhat lyght.



Sublucidus, da, dum, somewhat lyght.



Subluco, care, to vndershrede boughes, that




that the lyght may come vnder the tree.



Subdialia, places without the house to walk
in without couerynges.



Subducere, to go away by stelthe, that noo
man do perceyue.



Sub iugum mitti, to be subdued, it was pro­
prely whan a battayle was vanquished, the
vanquishers caused thre speares to be set
vp lyke a galowes, and constrayned them
that were vanquyshed to go vnderneth it,
in token that they were subdued, whyche
was the greattest reproche that moughte
be deuysed.



Subluere, to vnderwashe, as water, whyche
runneth lowe vnde a banke or hylle, and
washeth the foote thereof. Also to washe
somewhat cleane.
Cæsar de
bell. galli.
lib. 2.


Sublustris, tre, that hath some lyght.



Subluuies, a disease of cattell, whiche is be­
twixte the cleys of their fete.



Cice. pro
Planco.



Sub manu habere, to haue at hande.



Sub manu esse, to be at hande or redy.



Sub manu, after hande, forthewith.



Sub manus, easily, handsomly. Bono animo
es, negotium omne iam succedit submanus,
Be of good chere, all the matter is come
to passe handsomly. Lepide hoc succedit sub
manus negotium, This mattier commeth
well and easily to passe.
Plautus in
milite.


Sub merum, almoste pure.



Subminia, a womans garment.



Subministro, are, to do seruice vnder one, to
gyue or delyuer any thing that is asked for.



Subministrator, he that serueth vnde an o­
ther man, he that delyuereth any thynge
that is callyd for.



Submissim, & submisse, softely, proprely in
speakynge. also humbly.



Submissus, a, um, humble.



Submitto, tere, to sende priuily or by stelth.



C&ecedil;. de bel.
gall. lib.5.



Submittere, to sende or brynge in the mean
tyme. Also to put or set vnder proprely, as
a calfe, a lambe, or a fole, is sette vnder the
damme to sucke.



Submittere se, to humble hym selfe.



Submittere capillum, to let heare to growe.



Submoneo, nere, to warne one priuyly.



Submordeo, dere, to bite softely, or priuily.



Colum. 5.
Plin.



Submoueo, uere, to remoue or carie a thing
farre of. also to dryue out of a place. alsoo
to discharge a man of his offyce.



Subnecto, tere, to bynde to, or hange to, also
to subscribe.



Subn ego, gare, to denye somewhat.



Subneruo, are, to cut synewes.



Subnexio, a byndynge or hangyng to.



Subniger, nixus, niti, to leane agaynst a thing
to be sustayned vp.



Subnodo, are, to make a knot vnder a thing.



Subnoto, tare, to note or marke.



Subo, are, to brymme as a bore dothe whan
he getteth pygges.



Suboffendo, dere, to offende sommewhat, or
a lyttelle.
Cic. ad Q.
fratrem.


Suboleo, lere, to sauour or smelle a lyttell.



Subopto, tare, to desyre a lyttell.



Subordior, dire, to begynne.



Suborno, nare, to prayse or honour. also to
suborne or brynge in a false wytnesse, or
messanger, or fayne one persone for an o­
ther, to deceyue with.



Suborior, riris, riri, to begynne to sprynge
or aryse, as the sonne dothe, to prayse or
honour one with wordes. also to deceyue
pryuylye.



Subpudeo, dere, to be somewhat ashamed.



Subremigo, are, to rowe vnder.



Subrepo, psi, pere, to steale away or runne a­
waye priuyly.



Subrepere animo, to entre sodaynly or pry­
uyly into the mynde.



Subreptio, theft, or a fals suggestion.



Subreptitiæ literæ, letters stollen oute by a
fals suggestion.



Subreptitius, a, um, stollen or falsly come by.



Subrideo, risi, dere, to smyle or laugh priuily



Subripeo, to steale, to take away secretely.
sometyme to lyfte vp hastily.



Subrisio, & subrisus, a smylyng.



Subrogo, gare, to substitute or subrogate, to
make a deputie in an office, to put in an no­
ther mans roume.



Subrufus, a, um, & subrubeus, a, um, somwhat
redde. Subrumi, lambes that do sucke.



Subrumor, ari, to be souckeled, or putte to
sucke as calfes, lambes.&c.



Subruo, ere, to enter with force, or priuily by
litle and lytle. also to dygge the erthe.



Subsanno, are, to scorne or mocke.



Subsannatio, a mocke with bendynge the
browes, and snuffynge vp of the nose.



Subsannator, a mocker.



Subsarcinis, with trusses or burdeyns.



Subscribo, scripsi, scribere, to write vnder, to
subscribe, to fauour a matter, to assygne a
cause why, to affirme.



Ci. in Ver.
Asco. Ped.



Subscriptores, they whiche in causes iudy­
ciall do fauour the parte of the accuser or
playntyfe.



Subscudes, the vtter table, whervnto other
tables are fastned.



Subseco, care, to cutte vnder or cut a lyttell.



Subsellia, benches, which were vnder higher
seates, they were also benches, on the whi­
che Iudges dyd sytte.



Subsentio, sensi, sentire, to perceiue somwhat



Subsequor, queris, sequi, to folow forthwith.






Subsero, serere, to sowe or set vnder a thing



Subseuio, seuire, to serue, to accord, or agre.



Subsessæ, scoutwatches, wherby hostes of
men are intrapped as they passe.



Subsideo, sedi, subsedere, to sytte vnder, to
laye in awayte for one.



Subsidium, ayde.



Subsido, dere, to fall downe, to auale.



Subsigno, nare, to subscribe or write vnder.



Subsilio, liui, lire, & subsulto, sultare, to leape
a lyttelle.



Subsilles, lytle plates belonging to sacrifice.



Subsimus, he that hath a camyse nose.



Subsipere, to sauour somwhat.



Subsisiuum, that which foloweth or is next.



Subsisto, stiti, sistere, to resyste, to abyde, to
be by hym selfe.



Subsolanus, the easte wynde.



Subsono, are, to sowne a lyttell, to make a
lyttell noyse,



Subsortitio, a deputation, whan one maketh
an other his deputie.



Subsortitus, a substytute.



Substantia, substance. also matter. somtyme
goodes, whyche is also commonly callyd
substaunce.



Substerno, straui, sternere, to strawe or laye
vnder any thynge, as russhes, carpettes,
and flowres.



Substillum, a ryme or fallynge myste, or a
droppynge before and after rayne, It ys
also a sicknes, whan a man may not pisse wel



Substituo, tui, tuere, to substitute in the place
of an nother.



Substo, stiti, are, to sustain or abide constantly.



Substratus, a, um, strawed vnder, or layd vnder



Substrepo, pere, to make a lyttell noyse.



Substringo, xi, gere, to shrinke vndernethe.



Substruo, truere, to vnderpynne a house.



Substructio, vnderpynnynge or groundyng
of a house.



Substupeo, & substupesco, scere, to be some­
what dismayde.



Substupidus, somwhat dismayde or abashed.



Subsulto, tare, to ioumpe.



Subsultim, by iumpes.



Subsuo, suere, to sowe vnderneth.



Subsum, subesse, to be vnder, or within.



Subtal, the holownes of the fote. also the
paulme of the hande.



Subtegmen, minis, the threede, whyche in
weauynge is callyd the woufe.



Subtegulanea, places vnder the eueyse of
howses.



Subtendo, dere, to purpose or diuyse anye
thynge, to deceyue an nother manne, or to
laye any thynge in a mannes waye for the
same purpose.



Subtento, tare, to espye.



Subtepeo, pere, to be somwhat warme.



Subtepidus, da, dum, somewhat warme.



Subter, vnder.



Subterraneus, ea, eum, that whiche is vnder
the grounde.



Subtercludo, dere, to shutte vnder.



Subterduco, cere, to withdrawe, to scape away.



Subterfluo, xi, fluere, to runne or flowe vnder
a thynge, as water vnder a brydge.



Subterfugio, gere, to escape.



Subtergredior, di, to go vndernethe.



Subtero, riui, terere, to broyse, or weare.



Subticeo, cui, cere, to aunswere nothynge to
that which is spoken. Subticesco, scere, idem
Plaut.


Subtondeo, dere, to clyppe vnder.



Subtraho, xi, trahere, to take away, to steale,
Subtrahere se, to draw vnto quietnes. Sub­
trahere famæ, to withdrawe from bruyte.
Subtrahere inuidiæ, to eschewe enuy.
Plin.


Subtristis, te, somewhat heuy or sorye.



Subturpis, pe, somewhat foule, in part foule
or dishoneste, the matter or thinge disho­
neste, couered with cleane wordes.



Subucula, a shyrte. also a cake.



Subueho, uexi, uehere, to beare.



Subuecto, tare, to beare or cary often.



Subuenio, ueni, uenire, to helpe.



Subuerbusta, meate burned on the spytte.



Festus.



Subuerto, tere, to tourne vp so downe. alsoo
to distroy, to subuerte.



Subuerso, sare, to subuerte often.



Subueteribus, was a place in Rome.



Subula, an aulle, that cordyners doo vse for
a bodkyn.



Subulcus, a swyneherde.



Subulo, an harte hauynge hornes without
tynes, callyd as I suppose, a spyttarde.



Subuolo, lare, to flee away.



Suburbanum, a maner or ferme without the
walles of the citie.



Suburbia, the suburbes of a citie or towne.



Suburrana regio, the strete in Rome where
the brothell houses were.



Subuulturius, a, um, that whiche apprehen­
deth men lyke as rauynes do carrayne.



Succedaneus, a, um, that whiche succedeth.



Succedere, to entre. Et nostris succede pena­
tibus hospes, And enter thou my frende
into my howse.



Succedere, to go vnder a thyng. Succedere,
to spede wel, to be at a good poynt. Hac non
successit, alia aggrediamur uia, This way it
spedeth not, let vs go to an other way.



Succedo, cessi, cedere, to succede.



Succendo, dere, to inflame to burne.



Succenseo, ui, ere, to be angry for a good cause.



Succento, tonis, was a certayne garmente,
whiche onely hoores dyd weare.



Succento, tare, to synge a base.






Succentor, toris, he that syngeth a base.



Succenturiatus, he that made vp the number
of the bende of men that lacked.



Succenturio, are, to make vp the number of
a hundred souldiours, or of that company
that was callyd Centuria.



Succerda, swynes dunge.



Succerno, creui, cernere, to raunge meale
in a syeue.



Successio, successyon.



Successor, soris, a successour.



Successore dare, to depose a man of his office.



Successus, a, um, that whyche prosperouslye
happeneth, or spedeth well.



Successus, us, successe, be it good or yll.



Succida, woulle vnwashed.



Succidane&ecedil; hostiæ, beastes for sacrifice, whi­
che were kylled in the seconde place, or
nexte to the fyrste.



Succidaneus, a, um, that whyche folowethe
the fyrste.



Succidia, a piece or flyche of bakon salted.
also larde.



Succido, cidi, cidere, to felle or cutte downe.
also to falle vnder.



Plautus in
Curcu.



Succiduus, a, um, that whiche dothe succede
or folowe. also lowe, redy to falle downe.



Succidus da, dum, moyst, or full of iuyse.



Succingo, xi, gere, to gyrde. Also to enuyron
or compasse. Frustra se terrore succinxerit,
qui septus charitate non fuerit, armis. n. arma
irritantur, In vayne shall he enuyron hym
selfe with terriblenesse, which is not wal­
lyd aboute with the loue of his countreye.
For with vyolence, vyolence is styred.



Succingulum, a swordegyrdell.



Succino, cinere, to make a soft noise, to singe
a base or tenour.



Succincta oratio, a compendiouse or shorte
Oracyon.



Succincte, compendiousely.



Succinctorium, a shorte iackette or ierkyn.



Succinctus, ta, tum, gyrte.



Succinum, aumbre, whereof somme beade
stones are made.



Succinus, na, num, of aumbre.



Succisiuum tempus, tyme of leysure, vacant
from busynesse.



Succlamo, are, to crye softely.



Succollo, are, to putte vnder the necke or
shulders, to beare a thynge.



Succortrila, a small voyce and a shryll.



Succresco, scere, to growe vnder, or lowe, or
a lyttell and lyttell.



Succubo, bare, to lye vnder.



Succubonium, idem quod succuba, she that
lyeth vnder.



Succubi, deuylles, whiche in the fourme of
women, do company with men.



Succulentus, ta, tum, full of iuyse.



Succiplenus, idem.



Succumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be subdued,
to be ioyned to, to falle downe vnder an
heuy burdeyn, to fayle for feblenesse.



Succurro, ere, to help, to com to remembrance.



Suctus, tus, suckynge.



Succus, cus, cui, the suckynge of mylke.



Succus, iuyce or humour, whiche the body
receyueth of meate and drynke, also ge­
nerally all maner of iuyse.



Succussarius, & succussor, a trottyng horse.



Succuso, nis, idem.



Succusso, are, to shake as a horse doth whan
he trotteth. also to trotte.



Succussatio, succussura, & succussatura, the
trottynge or shakynge of a horse.



Succutio, cussi, tere, to shake a thynge.



Succula, a sowe pygge, also a certayn inner
garment. also a certayne company of ster­
res, callyd the .vii. sterres, whiche do ap­
piere the .xii. Calendes of Iune, and be
callyd succulæ & Hiades.



Sudarium, a napkynne.



Sudes, a certayne speare, whiche is burned
at the ende.



Sudo, dare, to sweate, to laboure soore, to
haue moche to do.



Sudor, doris, sweate.



Sudum, the clere parte of the firmamente
betwene cloudes. Also the clere fyrmament
without cloudes.



Suefacio, & suefio, fieri, to be wont.



Suere aliquid capiti, to get a shrewde turne.
Metuo lenonem, ne quid suo suat capiti, I
am aferde of the bawde, leste he gette a
shrewde tourne.



Suesco, sueui, suiscere, to be wonte.



Sueui, a people in high Germany.



Sueuia, a countrey in Germanye.



Suffarcinatus, nata, natum, laded, trussed.



Suffarcino, nare, to lade or bourdeyne, to
trusse vppe.



Suffarraneus, he that carieth meale or floure
to any place to selle in lyttell quantytie.



Suffectus, is he, whyche an offycer beynge
deed, or remoued, is sette in his place.



Suffes, was amonge the Carthaginensis, as
the Consul was at Rome.



Suffibulum, was an attyre, whiche the nun­
nes of Vesta dydde weare on theyr hee­
des, whan they dydde sacrifice, and was
lyke to the tyres, whiche wyues of Lon­
don dydde weare, and becamme theym
moche better than bonettes of veluette
doo nowe, wherwith they mocke ladyes
and gentyllwomenne, and thereby onely
doo gette the name to be callydde Mas­
kynge ladyes.






Suffero, sufferre, to sustayne, to put vnder,
to suffre.



Sufficio, feci, sufficere, to suffyse, to indure,
to minister, to substitute, to stayne.



Sufficit, it suffyseth.



Suffimentum, perfume, or fumigation.



Suffio, siui, fire, to perfume.



Suffiscus, the codde of a ramme, which was
made for a purse, to conteyne money.



Suffitio, & suffitus, tus, a perfume or fumi­
gacyon.



Suffitor, toris, he that bloweth the fyre.



Suffitus, ta, tum, perfumed.



Sufflamen, that wherwith a whiele is retai­
ned or stopped of his course.



Sufflatio, a blowynge.



Sufflator, toris, he that bloweth.



Sufflatus, ta, tum, blowen.



Sufflo, are, to blowe.



Suffocatio, a stranglynge.



Suffocator, he that strangleth.



Suffoco, care, to stop the breth, to strangle.



Suffodio, fossi, dere, to dygge vnder.



Suffossus equus, a stumblynge horse.



Suffragator, toris, a supporter or maintener.



Suffragium, the voyce of people assemblyd
in gyuyng their consent. also helpe or suc­
cour. also a wrecke in the see.



Suffragines, the iointes of the hinder legge
of a beaste, callyd the howx, sometyme it
doth signifie the pasternes, they be alsoo
the yonge sprynges of vynes.



Suffraginosi equi, horses, whyche haue the
paynes or scratches.



Suffragor, garis, gari, to beare fauour.



Suffulcio, cij, cire, to proppe vp.



Suffulcior, cire, to be proppid vp or vnderset



Suffundatum, vnderlayde.



Suffundo, dere, to caste downe or poure ly­
cour on a thynge, to caste abrode.



Suffundo, dare, to buylde or sette vppon a
foundation.



Suffuror, rari, to steale priuily.



Suffusio, a webbe in the eye.



Suffusus, a, um, sprynkled, indewed.



Suggero, gessi, gerere, to mynyster or gyue
a thynge, to sende forthe thynges, wher­
of are plentie.



Suggerere sumptus, to alowe expenses.



Suggestus, uel suggestum, a pulpitte or high
place, oute of the whyche Oratours or
Capytaynes made proposytions vnto the
people.



Suggrundia, the euyse of a house, whyche
defendeth the walles from rayne.



Suggrundaria, buryals of yonge infantes.



Suggrundatio, the eueysynge of a house.



Suggillo, lare, to make a blacke spotte in
the skynne with beatynge. It is alsoo to
scorne, to detracte, or infame, to reproue,
to condempne.



Suggillatus, spotted, mocked, detracted, in­
famed, condemned.



Suggillatio, is a marke in the visage black
or blue, made by some stroke, a mocke, a
detraction, an infamation behynde one, a
condemnation.



Sugo, & sugeo, suxi, sugere, to souke.



Suinus, a, um, & suillus, a, um, of a sowe.



Sulcatim, in furrowes.



Sulco, care, to falowe.



Sulcus, cus, a furrowe. Serere tertio quarto
quinto sulco, To sowe in the thyrde, the
fourthe, the fyfthe falowe.
Sometyme it is put for a dyche. Also any
maner of cuttynge of the erthe. proprely
it signifyeth any thynge that is longe and
sharpe edged. Bisulcum animal, A beaste
that hath the fete clouen with two talons.



Sulla, was a cruell tyrant of the Romayns
callyd also Sylla. 



Sulmo, monis, a towne in the countraye of
Peligna, where Ouidius the poete was
borne.



Sulmonensis, a manne or woman of the citie
of Sulmo.



Sulphuraria, a place where brymstone is
boyled.



Sulphur, phuris, brymstone.



Sulphureus, ea, eum, of brymstone.



Sulphuratus, ta, tum, dressed with brimstone.



Sultanus, a sowdane, whiche was the name
of the kynge of Egipte and Siria.



Sum, I am, es, thou arte, est, he is.



Sumanus, he that alway taketh.



Sum Amphitrionis, I am Amphitrions seruant.



Plaut.



Sunt mihi bis septem pr&ecedil;stanti corpore nym­
phæ, I haue fouretene maydens of excel­
lent beautie.



Sum in mora illi, I make hym to tarie.



Terentius.



Sum in mœtu, I am aferde.



Sum in noxia, I am put in the blame.



Sum, olde wryters vsed for eum, hym.



No. Mar.



Sit uestra benignitas ad audiendum? Pleasith
you to here?
Plautus in
milite.


Sunt septem dies, It is seuen dayes agone.
Howe this verbe Sum, shulde be sette and
construed, rede Calepines vocabuler, also
loke for Est, fuit, and suche other partes of
sum, in their letters before.



Sumanalia, a great cake made lyke a whele,
suche as is made at brydales and churche
goinges.



Summam facere, to summe a booke of ac­
compte.



Sumen, minis, is made of the pappes of a
sowe, cutte from hir the day after that she
hath varowed, ad is powdred with salt.






Cicero.



Sumere, to hyre. Quoad enim peruentum,
quo sumpta nauis est, non domini nauis est,
sed nauigantium, Untylle they come to the
place whither the shyppe was hyred, the
shyppe is not the owners but theyrs, whi­
che are passagers.



Terent. in
phormi.



Sumere, to borowe.



Sumere, to spende or bestowe on one. In ma­
la vxore, atque inimico, si quid sumas, sump­
tus est, On a shrewd wyfe, and an ennemy,
what so euer thou bestowest, is waste.



Plautus in
milite.



Sumere aquam e puteo, to drawe water out
of the welle.



Plautus in
cap.



Sumere confidentiam, to trust, to take corage.



Sumere mutuum, to borowe.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Sumere obsequium animo, to reioyce, to
take comforte.



Terentius



Sumere operam frustra, to labour in vayne.



Sumere optionem, to chuse.



Sumere personam, to counterfaite an other.



Sumere supplicium, to punyshe.



Summa, is a collection of thinges or wordes.
also the principall poynte of a matter.



Summates, the chief persons of a realme or cite.



Summatim, & summate, compendiousely by
euery parte of the matter, summarily. Ad
summum duo, two at the moste.



Summe, excellently, chiefly.



Summenianæ uxores, hoores kepte in the
stede of wyues.



Summenium, a place where bawdrye was
kepte without the walles of a towne.



Summissi, murmurers.



Summissim, & summisse, softly, not lowde.



Summissus, a, um, base, lowe.



Summitas, heyght, or hyghenesse.



Summitudo, dinis, the height of a thynge.



Summitto, misi, mittere, to conuay in priuily,
also to suffre to growe.



Summittere barbam, to lette the berde
growe, to let to departe.



Summœnius, nia, um, that whyche is vnder
the walles.



Summo, are, to make hyghest.



Summo iure agere, to take the rigour or ex­
tremitie of the lawe in suite.
Cice. pro
A. Cæsina.


Summum fastigium imponere, to finishe a thyng
perfitely, to brynge a mattier to a poynt.



Summam manum addere, idem significat.



Summus, a, um, hyghest, extreme, greattest,
or very commendable.



Summum, at the moste.



Sumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take vppon one, to
take generally, to hyre, to consume.
Varro de
re rust.


Sumptifacio, cere, to spende.



Sumpti, for sumptus, plurali numero.



Sumptuariæ leges, lawes made for restray­
nynge of outragious expenses.



Sumptuarius, a, um, that whyche dothe per­
tayne to expenses.



Sumptuose, sumptuously, chargeably.



Sumptuosus, a, um, sumptuouse.



Sumptus, ta, tum, taken, or chosen.



Sumptus, tus, expense.



Sunium, a promontorie or elbowe of the
countrey of Attica.



Suo, sui, suere, to sowe, to ioyne or make fast
togyther.



Suopte ingenio, of his owne propre wytte.



Sup, for super, aboue.



Supellectilis, le, & supellex, household stuffe,
all thynges mouable within the house.



Supellecticarius, a bondman or slaue, why­
che is accompted for chatell.



Super, & supra, vppon aboue.



Super Garamantas & Indos proferet impe­
rium, He shal aduance his empyre beyond
the Garamantians and Indianes.
Vergil.


Super Euclionis filiam, of Eucliones daughter



Super cœnam, at supper.



Plautus in
Aulularia.



Super h&ecedil;c, more ouer than this.



Super Priamus, super Hectore, of Priamus of
Hector. Hac super re scribam ad te Rhegio, Of
that mater I wil write vnto you from  Regium.
Plinius e­
pist.87.
Epist.91.


Super for propter. Nec superipse sua molitur
laude laborem, Nor he takethe the peyne
for his prayse.
Vergilius.


Super, for valde, His accensa super, With those
wordes she beinge kendlyd or styred.
Vergilius.


Superaddo, dere, to putte or adde to.



Superbe, proudely. Superbiter, idem.



Superbia, pryde. Superbio, ire, to be proude.



Superbiloquens, & superbiloquus, he that
speaketh proudely, or hautely.



Superbiloquentia, proude or haute wordes.



Superbos, olde wryters vsed for mortuos,
deed, bycause of the pompe, whiche was
at their burienge. Faciam ego hodie te su­
perbum, nisi hinc abis, I wil kyl the, if thou
gette the not hens.
Plautus in
Amphi.


Superbum bellum, vniust or vnhappy warre.



Vergil.



Superbus, proude, sometyme magnifyke or
noble, also hyghe, ornate, or garnysshed,
ryche, wycked.



Supercido, dere, to falle on.



Superciliosus, soure in countenance.



Supercilium, the ouerbrowe. sommetyme it
sygnifyeth pride, grauitie. It is alsoo the
haunce, whiche is ouer the doore.



Supercilium attollere, to be stately or proude.



Supercilium ponere, to laye aparte pryde or
stately countenance.



Supercresco, scere, to ouergrowe.



Supercubo, bare, to lye ouer.



Superduco, cere, to put or lay on.



Superedo, dere, to eate after a thynge.



Superessit, for supererit, shall lyue, or be left
on lyue. Superest, he lyueth, or is on lyue.






Superest, there is plentie or more thanne
ynough. Aliis quia desit, quod amant,ægre
est: tibi quia superest, dolet, Some bicause
thay lacke the thynge that they loue, be
discontent: and thou arte sorye that thou
haste more than thou nedest.
Terent. in
phorm.


Terent. in
Heaut.



Superesse, to be the reste or resydue. Porro
ausculta quod superest fallati&ecedil;, But yet here
what was the resydue of that craft or de­
ceyte. To defende or pleade for one. Cun­
ctari se, ne si superesset, eriperet legibus reum,
He wolde tary, leste yf he came and spake
for hym, he shulde delyuer an offender.



Superexto, tare, to remayne ouer.



Superficiariæ ædes, houses buylded on the
lande of an nother man than buylded them.



Superficiarius, he that hathe a house of his
owne buylded on an other mans grounde,
and payeth therfore a quyte rent.



Superficies, the ouermost part of any thing.



Superfœtatio, oone conception of a chylde
after an other.



Superfluo, fluxi, fluere, to abounde, or be su­
perfluouse.



Superflue, superfluousely. Superfluo, idem.



Superfluus, a, um, fuperfluous.



Sidonius.



Superforancus, a, um, idem.



Superfundo, dere, to poure vppon.



Supergredior, gredi, to go aboue.



Supera, for supra.



Superiacio, ieci, iacere, to caste on or lay on.



Superiiceo, superieci, iicere, to cast vpon, to
laye vppon.



Superi, they whiche ben in heuen.



Superincido, dere, to falle on.



Superior, hygher.



Superior ætas, the tyme or age passed.



Superlachrimo, to wepe or droppe vpon.



Supermeo, are, to go ouer, or slyppe ouer.



Supernato, natare, to swymme ouer.



Supernati, they which haue the hinder part
of the thighes next the buttockes cut away.



Superne, a hygh, aboue.



Supernia, the inwarde part and hindermost
parte of the thyghes nexte the buttockes
cutte of.



Supernus, na, num, high, or ouer. Superna re­
gio, the high countrey.



Supernumerarius, that whiche is in surplu­
sage, aboue the true number.



Supero, rare, to go ouer. Also to vanquishe
or ouercome. also to ouerlyue. somtyme to
kylle. Quod superat, whiche is more, or is
lefte in a surplusage.



Superpondium, ouerweight, that whiche is
added to the iuste weight.



Supersedeo, dere, to omytte or leaue to doo
a thynge.



Ci. Seruio



Supersedeas hoc labore itineris, take not the
peyne to come nowe, or forbeare the peyn
takyng in this iourney.



Supersede istis rebus, let these thinges alone



Plautus in
Epidico.



Supersede istis uerbis, let these wordis passe,
holde thy tunge.



Plautus in
persa.



Supersedi scribere, I forbare to wryte, I left
vnwriten.



Plin. epist.
102.



Superstes, stitis, he that ouerliueth or remaia­
neth alyue afterthat other be deed, also a­
lyue. sometyme present, olde writers cal­
lyd Superstites, wytnesses.



Superstes, he that is saulfe. Deos quæso, ut
sis superstes, I beseche god saue you, longe
mought you lyue. also present. Superstitem
utrunque monui, ne inuisi abeant, I aduysed
them both, that they shoulde not departe
with dyspleasure.



Superstitio, a superfluous or vayne religion
or deuotion, an honouryng of that which
ought not to be honored, a vaine reuerence
or feare towarde that thing, wherin is no
efficacye or power, but by the illusyon of
the dyuelle: as diuination by the cryenge
or fleinge of byrdes, obseruation of times,
and dreames, and other lyke vanites.



Superstitiosi, they which be tymorous with­
out cause, fearinge that god is displeased,
where there is none offence done: They
were at the fyrste soo callyd, bycause they
contynually prayid and offred to the god­
dis, to preserue theyr chyldern, that they
mought ouerlyue them. Finally euery vn­
discrete or vnreasonable deuocion or reli­
gion, may be callyd Superstition.



Superstito, stitare, to make hoole or recouer
frome deathe.



Supersto, stare, to stande vppon.



Superstruo, struxi, struere, to buylde on.



Supersum, Superesse, to abounde, to remain,
to vanquishe, to be superfluous, to indure.



Superuacaneus, a, um, superfluous.



Superuacuus, a, um, not necessarie.



Superuaganea auis, was of the diuinours or
sothsayers callyd that byrde, which cried
from the toppe of any thynge.



Superuenio, nire, to com vnloked for, to com
vpon or after an other thynge.



Superuiuo, uixi, uiuere, to recouer from pe­
ryll of dethe, or whan a man semeth to be
deade.



Superus, a, um, the highest or ouermost.



Superum mare, the see, which is callid Ma­
re Hadriaticum, wherin standeth the Citie
of Venyce.



Supinus, na, num, vpryghte, the bealye vp­
vpwarde. somtyme it sygnifieth on an hyll
or hygh place.
Horatius.


Suppar, almoste euen.



Supparasitor, taris, tari, to folowe and flatter




for a mans dyner.



Supparium, a clothe or curtayne hanged vp
where interludes were playde.



Supparus, uel supparum, a smocke. it is also a
topsayle of a shyppe.



Suppedaneum, a foote stoole.



Plautus in
Asinar.



Suppedito, tare, to subdue, to minyster suffi­
ciently, also to oppresse.



Suppedito, tare, to endure. Ac stomacho non
queo labori suppeditare, My stomake wyll
not lette me indure the laboure. Alsoo to
furnyshe expenses, to gyue as moche as a
man wolde haue. Nam si illi pergam, sup­
peditare sumptibus Menedeme, mihi illæc
uero ad rastros res redit, Surely Menede­
mus, yf I wold gyue hym as moche as he
wolde spende, that thynge wolde brynge
me to the poynt to rake for my lyuynge.
Terent. in
Heautont.


Suppeditare, to subdewe or treade vnder.
Nunc uideo, in iudicio mecum contendere
non uis, ubi suppeditari turpissimum, supe­
rare pulcherrimum est, Nowe I perceyue
whou wylte not contende with me before
iudges, where it were a great shame to be
subdued, and very moche honestie to haue
the better.



Suppetiæ, & suppetias, ayde or succours.



Suppeto, tii, tere, to aske priuily or craftily.



Suppetit, it is in a redynesse.



Suppetior, ari, to succour or ayde.



Plautus in
Asinar.



Suppetunt dictis data, aut facta. Non suppe­
tunt dictis data, He perfourmeth not that,
that he promysed. Vtinam quæ dicis dictis
facta suppetant, Wold god thou woldest do
as thou sayest, or wolde god thy dedes did
agree with thy wordes.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Suppetit lucrum, there is gayne sufficiente.
Res ita suppetit, the matter so requireth.



Plautus in
Amphit.



Suppetias mihi, Brynge to me succoures,
ayde me.



Suppetias adueni, come and helpe me.



Suppetias ferre, to ayde or succour.



Suppilo, are, to steale vnderhand or craftily.



Supplanto, tare, to putte vnder the foote, to
ouerthrowe, to supplant or deceyue, in pre­
uentynge one to his hynderance or dam­
mage, to vnderplante or set a tree or vyne.



Supplaudo, si, dere, to reioyse priuely.



Supplementum, that whiche supplyethe or
maketh vp that whiche lacketh in quan­
titie or numbre.



Suppleo, plere, to make vp that whiche lac­
keth, to make euyn.



Supplex, plicis, he that desyreth any thynge
knelynge or prostrate.



Supplicatio, a prayer, a requeste.



Supplicassis pro supplicaueris.



Supplicans, tis, he that desyreth a thynge.



Suppliciter, humbly knelynge.



Supplicium, payne, tourmente, or execution
of dethe. sometyme supplicia, are prayers.
Salusti. in
bell. cat.
Iugurt.


Supplitia pendere, to be put to execution.



Supplico, care, to beseche humbly.



Supplimentum, a makynge vp of a number.
whiche lacketh or is minished.



Supplodo, plosi, ere, to stampe or make noise
with the fete. also to reiecte or caste away.
Cor. Taci­
tus lib. 13.


Supplosio, a stampynge or noyse made with
the feete.



Suppono, sui, nere, to put vnder, to put into
the place of an nother, to sette a false or
fayned thynge in the place of that whiche
is the very true thynge.



Supportare, to brynge or carie priuily.



Cæsar de
bell. Gall.
lib.7.



Suppositio, the puttinge or settyng of a fai­
ned or fals thyng in the place of the thing
selfe, as one chylde for an nother.



Suppostrix, she that commytteth that falshod.



Suppositus partus, whan the chylde of one
woman is layde with an nother womanne,
whiche is not the very mother, as though
she had borne it.



Subprædes, countersureties, they whyche
are bounden to the sureties, to saue them
harmelesse.



Suppressus, sa, sum, drowned, beaten vnder.
Victi Persi in naues confugerunt, ex quibus
mult&ecedil; suppressæ, multæ capt&ecedil;, The Persians
fledde vnto their shyppes, whereof many
were drowned, and many taken. Also hyd
or concyled.
Iustinus.


Supprimo, pressi, supprimere, to kepe downe
to kepe secrete, to kepe in sylence.



Supprimere iter, to stay or omitte a iourney.



Cæs. in Commentarii.
de bello ci­
uili li.1.



Suppromo, psi, mere, to drawe out drynke.



Suppromus, a butlar. Bono cella suppromo
credita, The cellar or buttrie was commyt­
ted to a good butlar.
Plautus in
milite.


Suppudet, I am halfe ashamed, thou art half
ashamed, or he is halfe ashamed.



Suppurantia, & suppuratio, matterynge of
a soore.



Suppuratorius, ria, um, that whyche pertay­
nethe to impostumes, or to make a soore
to matter.



Suppuro, are, to matter or be an impostume.



Suppuratio, an impostume or sore that hath
matter.



Supra, aboue, or ouer.



Supra quem, for supra id quod.



Supreme, hyghest of all, or aboue all.



Supremus, ma, mum, the highest or greatest
of all other.



Supus, olde wryters vsed for supinus.



Sura, the caufe of the legge. sometyme the
hole shanke or legge from the kne downe.



Surculaceus, & surcularis, re, that which brin­
geth forth yonge settes or springes of trees






Surculus, a yonge set or slyppe, a nursegar­
den, also a slyppe of a tree or yong greffe.



Surcus, a stake.



Surculosus, a, um, full of slyppes.



Surdaster, he that is somwhat deafe and can
not here.



Surde, deafely.



Surdeo, dui, dere, to be deafe.



Surdesco, scere, to waxe deafe or be deafe.



Surditas, deafenesse.



Surdo, dare, to make deafe.



Surdus, da, dum, deafe, also that which hath
no sauour.



Surrentum, a towne in Campania.



Surrentimus, na, num, of that towne.



Surregit, olde writers vsed for surgit, wher­
of commeth surrectio, a rysynge.



Surrepo, pere, to crepe vnder.



Surreptitius, a, um, that whiche is doone by
stelthe that none other man knoweth it.



Surgo, surrexi, surgere, to ryse, also to growe
or sprynge.
Vergil.


Surrigo, surrexi, surrigere, to lyfte vp.



Plautus in
Amphit.



Surrigere aures, to laye his eare to a thyng,
to harken.



Surripere operam, Clanculum abij a legione,
operam hanc surripui tibi, I departed pry­
uyly from the hoste, this tyme haue I bo­
rowed to do you pleasure.
Plautus in
Menc.


Surripere se, to steale his away. Vt surripuisti
te mihi dudum de foro? O, how diddest thou
steale away from  me late out of the market?



Surripio, ripui, pere, to steale or take awaye
priuily. also to lyft vp on hygh, to preuent.



Surpiculus, a baskette or hamper.



Surrogo, gare, to substitute, or put in an no­
ther mannes place.



Ci. in par­
tition & ora­
toria.



Surrogatio, a substitution.



Sursum, aboue. Sursum uersum, vpwarde.



Sursum deorsum, vp and downe.



Sus, for sursum.



Suscio, scire, for scio, scire, to knowe.



Suscipere fidem, to promyse. Quas partes
impleturum te, secundum susceptam fidem
confido, Whyche parte I truste thou wilt
perfourme, according to the promyse that
thou madest.



Plautus in
milite.
in Ruden.



Suscito, tare, to awake one out of his slepe,
to call one to his warke.



Sus, suis, a sowe.



Sus Mineruam, a prouerbe applyed vnto
hym, whyche presumeth to teache or cor­
recte one, of whome he rather oughte to
be taught or corrected.



Suillus, la, lum, of a sowe.



Susque deque fero, & susque deque habeo, I force
not, I recke not, I care not.



Susa, a great citie in Persia.



Suscipio, scepi, scipere, to take. Suscipere li­
beros, to gette chylderne.



Suscitabulum, a prouocation or sterynge.



Suscito, tare, to styre or prouoke.



Suspecto, tare, to beholde aboue. sometyme
to see benethe, or to loke downe.
Mart.


Suspendeo, dere, to be hanged ouer or on
high, also to appere a lyttell.
Columel.
Cicero.


Suspendiosus, he that is hanged.



Suspensus, a, um, hanged vp.



Suspensus, he that douteth to speake or do.



Suspensa manu, timorously, doubtefully.



Plin. epist.
98. li.6.



Suspenso gradu, Hæc ubi ego audiui, ad fores
supenso gradu, placide ire perrexi,  Whan I
harde those wordes, -I went to the doore
fayre and softly.
Terent. in
phorm.


Suspendium, hangynge. suspensio idem.



Suspendo, sere, to hange vp, to be doubteful
or sorowefull. Suspensus animo, hauynge
doubte, or beinge adradde.



Suspenso gradu incedere, to go softely with­
out makynge noyse.



Suspicio, spexi, spicere, to loke vp, also to ho­
nour, to answere.



Suspicans, he that hath suspicion, suspecting



Suspicor, cari, to haue suspicion, to suspecte.



Suspectus, ta, tum, suspected.



Suspicio, onis, suspicyon.



Suspiciosus, suspecyouse.



Suspiratus, tus, a syghe.



Suspiriosus, shorte wynded, or he whyche
fetcheth his brethe paynfully.



Suspirium, a syghe.



Suspiro, are, to sygh. also to desyre feruently.



Sussilio, lire, for subsilio.



Sustendere insidias, to lay watche.



Sustentaculum, that whiche sustayneth or
beareth vp a thynge.



Sustento, tare, to sustayne or beare vp.



Sustineo, nui, nere, to holde vp, to suffre, to
forbeare, to fede, to refrayne.



Sustollo, tuli, tollere, to lyfte vp.



Sustollere animos, to be proude, or to haue
an hygh courage.



Sustollere æs alienum, to pay dettes.



Plin. de ui­
ris illustr.



Sustollere puerum, to brynge vp a chylde.



Sustulit, is proprely of the father, as pepe­
rit, is of the mother.



Sustuli, I haue had, I haue broughte vp. I
haue lyfte vp.



Susurratio, a whysterynge.



Susurro, are, to whyster.



Susurro, ronis, a whysterer. also he whyche
with fals and secrete reporte maketh dis­
sencyon betwene men.



Susurrus, & susurrium, a whystrynge, or softe
murmurynge, or suche noyse as trees doo
make with the wynde, or a ryuer whan it
runneth, or byrdes whan they chatter.






Sutatis, a seamster or shepster.



Sutela, a subtyltie or craftie warkynge.



Suterna, showemakers crafte.



Sutilis, le, that whyche is sowen.



Sutor, toris, a showemaker.



Sutorium attramentum, soutars bloche.



Sutorius, a, um, pertaining to a showmaker.



Sutrina, a showemakers shoppe.



Sutura, a seame.



Suturnium, an ewer or lauour.



Suum, his owne, his propre goodes.



Suus, a, um, his or hirs. But how this word
shall be most aptely and conueniently vsyd,
rede Valla or Calepines vocabularie. For
it is more abundantly and proprely decla­
red of them, than can be expressid in english.

 

¶ S ANTE Y.

SYades, sterres callid also Hyades, seuen
in number.



Syagros, a wylde bore.



Sybaris, a citie in Grecia.



Sybarita, a man of that citie.



Sybaritica mensa, a prouerbe applied to fea­
stes and bankettes, whyche doo excede
in delycatenesse.



Sybaritici libelli, wanton bokes.



Sybaritici ludi, playes whyche are wanton
and costly.



Sybariticum carmen, a verse or poeme con­
taynynge wanton matter.



Syboti, peple in the north part of the world.



Sychæus, a mans name.



Sycion, he that fyrste founde garlandes.



Sycomorus, a great tree lyke a fygge tree,
whiche hath abundance of mylke, whose
fruite commeth not oute of the toppes of
the bowghes, as fygges doo, but oute of
the same boughes, and swete like to a wild
fygge: the graynes therof be les than the
graines of figgis, & they be neuer ripe, ex­
cept they be scrapid with an instrument of yron.



Sycophanta, he that falsly accuseth an inno­
cent. Also a bearer of tales, or a complayner.



Sycophantia, a fals accusation, deceite.



Sycophantias struere, to deuyse, or inuente
falsehoode.



Sycophantor, tari, idem.



Sycophantisso, are, idem.



Sycophantiose, deceytefully by crafte.



Sycon, olde wryters callyd a fygge.



Sycosis, a dysease in the fundement, which
maketh a warte lyke to a fygge.



Sycosis, where within the eie lyd groweth
a lyttell wart or other lyke thynge.



Sydera, the plurell number of sydus.



Syderatio, a spyce of the fallynge euyll in
men, but in trees it is taken for blastynge.



Sydus, syderis, a sterre.



Syene, a citie in the confynes of Egypte
and Ethiope.



Sygeum, a promontorie of Troye.



Syla, a mountayne in Lucania, & a wod in it.



Sylla, a great tyrant of Rome, whiche was
of an vnsaciable crueltie.



Syllaba, a syllable.



Syllabatim, by syllables.



Syllabicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to sillables.



Syllanion, a famous maker of images, whi­
che was neuer taught.



Syllepsis, a fygure, where the plurell num­
ber and the synguler are ioyned togyther,
as socijs & rege recepto.



Syllogismus, a perfyte argumente, whyche
hath a necessarye conclusion.



Sylua, a wodde or place ouergrowen with
wedes. also any matter hastily writen with­
oute studye.



Syluanus, was callyd the god of woddes.



Syluaticus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to woddes.



Syluecula, & syluula, a lyttell forest or wod.



Syluesco, scere, to waxe or growe into wod­
des or bushes.



Syluester, syluestris, tre, of a wodde or forest,
woddy, wylde.



Syluicola, he that dwelleth in a foreste or
wodde.



Syluius, a mannes name, whiche was borne
in a foreste.



Syma, a cytie in Asia.



Symbolum, a collation. also a token gyuen
by one to an other vpon certayn appoint­
mentes, generally a signe or mark to know
a thynge by.



Symbolus, a signet or sele, or a signe manuel.



Symbulus, a wyse and good counsailour.



Symmachia, ayde in battaile, or leage made
amonge men of sondry countreys, to fight
agaynst the other parte.



Symmachus, a mannes name.



Symmetria, a concorde in measure, where
sondry thynges be of equall proporcion.



Sympathia, a mutuall combination of thyn­
ges naturallin the operation of theyr po­
wers and qualities, as water in coldenesse
dothe participate with erthe, in moysture
with the ayre, the ayre with the fyre in
heate, with water in moysture.



Symphitum petreium, an herbe callyd bugle



Symphitum magnum, comfrey.



Symphonia, a consent in tune, also harmony.



Symphoniacus, a syngynge boye.



Symphonio, are, to agree or accord in one.



Symphonesis, colysion of vowelles.



Sympinatic&ecedil;, women addicte to ceremonies
or deuocion.



Sympinium, a cup seruing for wyne in sacrifice.






Symplator, a frende of hym that is maried,
whiche accompanieth hym to feastes.



Symplega, warkes, in the which wrastlers,
and they whyche contende in fyghtynge,
are beholden.



Symplegades, two yles in the grekyshe see.



Symplegma, an imbracynge togyther.



Symposiastes, he that makith a fest or banket



Symposium, a bankette.



Sympotria, a woman whyche kepeth com­
pany at drynkynge.



Symnista, a secretary, or one of the pryuye
councylle.



Sympsalma, a concorde in syngynge.



Sympudearia, funerals or playes, wherein
playes were made.



Synada, a cytie in Asya.



Synæresis, a contraction of two wordes, as
Bigæ, for biiugæ.



Synagoga, a congregation, specially of iewes.



Synalephe, a collision of vowels.



Synanche, a syckenesse in the throte, callyd
the squynce.



Syncere, purely, vncorruptly.



Syncerus, ra, rum, sincere, pure, vncorrupted
symple without dissimulation.



Synchronos, of one tyme.



Synciput, syncipitis, the forepart of the heed
Also a swynes heed sowcyd.



Syncopa, a fygure, where a letter or sylla­
ble is taken away, as compostus, for compositus.



Synecdoche, a fygure, where parte is vsyd
for the hole, or the hole for part.



Syndicus, an aduocate.



Syndipnium, a soupynge togyther.



Synechon, contynent.



Synephites, a stone, whyche is callyd alsoo
Leucongra.



Syngrapha, syngraphus, & syngraphum, the
wrytinge or dede, made or signed with the
hande of hym that maketh a bargayne or
couenaunte.



Synochitides, a stone, wherwith nygroman­
cers do call vp dyuels.



Synodus, an assembly of men, or general council.



Synonimum, whiche in dyuers wordes sy­
gnifieth one thyng, as Ensis, Gladius, both
do sygnifie a sworde. Occidit, interfecit, ne­
canit, do signifie, he kylled.



Synopis, synoper or redde leade.



Synstratiotes, companions togither in warre.



Syntagma, a treatie, an ordinaunce.



Syntaxis, order in construction.



Syntexis, lacke, or weakenes, whiche hap­
neth by longe syckenes.



Synteresis, the pure parte of conscience.



Synthema, a token gyuen to souldiours.



Synthesis, a short cote or ierkyn. also a ves­
sell made of many vessels.



Syntomon, for circumcisum.



Sypharium, a curtayne hanged before min­
strels whan they synge.



Syphax, was the kynge of Numidia.



Syracusæ, a famouse citie in Sycile.



Syracusius, & Syracusanus, of that citie.



Syria, a great realme in Asia, whiche hathe
on the east the ryuer of Euphrates, on the
weste the myddell see, and the realme of
Egipte, on the northe Cilicia and Cappa­
docia, on the south Arabia.



Syriacum, a kynde of swete radyshe.



Syriacus, ca, cum, of Syria.



Syrict&ecedil;, people whiche receyue their meat
in oten redes.



Syricum, a color mixt with sinoper & ruddel



Syrium, wyne boyled to the thyrde part.



Syrinx, a pype or recorder.



Syris, corne kepte in holes in the grounde.
and couered with chaffe.



Syrisca, a woman of Syria.



Syrissus, a, um, of Syria.



Syrma, tis, the traine of a womans gowne.



Syrnia, a shryche oule.



Syrophœnix, the see coste of Syria.



Syrtes, quycke sandes or shelpes in the wa­
ter made by the dryfte of sande or grauel.



Syrtites, a lyttell stoone founde in the blad­
der of a wolfe.



Syrupus, a syrupe.



Syrus, a man of Siria, also an Iland belon­
gynge to Grece.



Syssitia, feastes, and companyes assembled
at feastes.



Sysymbrium, an herbe callid winter sauery.



Syzigiæ, synewes, whyche do come frome
the brayne to the eyes, so that he, whiche
cometh from the lefte syde, gothe to the
right eye, and that whiche commeth from
the right syde, goth to the left eye, so that
the synewes do crosse eche other.


 


¶ T ANTE A.

T##sp##A##sp##B##sp##A##sp##N##sp##V##sp##S, a flie, whi­
che hath foure wingis,
& byteth a man or beest.



Tabefacio, ere, to corrupt



Tabella, a lyttell table.



Tabellarius, a caryer of
letters, an auditour.



Tabellio, lionis, a scriue­
ner that writeth commune instrumentes
and dedes.



Taberna, euery vyle habytation, also a shop
or tauerne, where wares be solde, and all
thynge that is vendible, as wyne, oyle, or
any other thynge.



Taberna meritoria, an ynne.






Tabernaria fabula, a comedie or Interlude,
wherein are base personages, and no per­
sones of dignitie or state.



Tabernaculum, a pauyllyon or halle.



Tabernarius, he that sellethe any maner of
wares. also a tauerner.



Tabes, bis, corruption in the body. also ex­
treme leannesse, by a longe consumynge
syckenesse. It is also matter and corrupte
blode myxte togither. Also the impostume
of the lunges, procedynge of humoures
descendynge frome the heed into the sto­
make, and so woundynge and corruptyng
the lounges.



Tabesco, bui, scere, to languishe or consume,
to be extremely leane, to be corruptid.



Tabidus, da, dum, corrupted, consumed.



Tabificabilis, le, that whiche may be corru­
pted, or falle into a consumption.



Tabificus, ca, cum, that whyche maketh one
corrupted, or consumeth the body.



Tablinum, was a wynter parlour, wherein
were painted tables and bokes of stories.



Tabo, a consumption, wastynge, or putrifa­
ction of thinges.



Tabor, a mountayne in the countrey of Ga­
lilea, where Christe was transfigurate.



Tabula, a table. In the plurell numbre tabu­
læ, dothe signifie a testament, or any com­
mune instrument or writynge. Also tabula
is a table to play on with dise or chesse men.



Tabulæ nouæ, were whan detters were not
constrayned to pay their dettes, that they
dyd owe, and the olde oblygations were
dissolued, and newe were to be made for
that whiche shulde newely be borowed.



Tabularia, ar places, where euidences and
writynges be layde.



Tabularium, a cheste, in the whiche euiden­
ces and recordes are put.



Tabulata, walles made of square stones, as
if they were bourded. They be also the
boughes of trees and bushes, whyche do
growe streyght forth and not vpwarde.



Tabulatus, ta, tum, made of bourdes. Also
tabulata, are walles sylded with bourdes,
or made of stone playne lyke to bourdes.
They be also the boughes of trees, why­
che do leane playne outwarde, and do not
growe vpwarde.



Tabulo, are, to make a thing with bourdes,
or to ioyne bourdes togyther.



Tabulatio, a ioynynge or closynge of bour­
des togyther.



Taburnus, an hyll in Campania, wherin do
growe many olyue trees.



Tace, egomet conueniam iam ipsum, Lette
aloone, I my selfe wylle commune nowe
with hym.



Tacenda, those thynges whiche are not to
be spoken.



Taceo, tacui, tacere, to kepe sylence, to be in
reste, to be quyete, to be sure.



Tacito pede, softely, by stelthe.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Tacitum est, not a worde is spoken of it.



Taciturnitas, tatis, sylence.



Tacitus, he that holdethe his peace, and is
secrete.



Tacitus, citius audies, be styl, thou shalt here
the sooner.



Tacite, without speakynge one worde.



Tactus fulmine, somwhat burned or blasted
with lyghtnynge.



Tactus, tus, feelynge.



Tædet, it weryeth me, it yrketh me, I am
werye of it.



Tædium, werynes, or heuynes of mynde.



Tædulus, an olde dotarde, of whom al men
are wearye.



Tænarus, a darke place at the fote of the hil
callyd Malea, by the citie of Sparta, whi­
che was supposed to be an entry into hell.



Tænia, the edge of a fyllette. also a womans
fyllette, or that whyche nowe they calle
rolles: proprely it is a kerchiefe, whyche
maydens do weare on their heedes. Also
a whyte stoone, whyche in the water she­
weth longe lyke a kerchiefe. It is alsoo a
vyllage betwene Mirenas & Corinthum.



Tænon, a citie in Laconia, an other in Arcadia



Tagasta, a citie in Affrike.



Tagax, acis, a felon, whiche happeneth on a
mannes fynger.



Tages, was he, whyche taughte fyrste the
Thuscanes the crafte of diuynation, cal­
lyd Aruspicium.



Tago, gere, olde wryters vsed fo tango.



Tagrus, an hylle in Portyngale, where, as
it is wryten, that mares doo conceyue of
the wynde.



Tagus, a ryuer in Spayne, wherin hath ben
founde grauell of golde.



Taigete, is the name of oone of the seuen
sterres, whiche soo appiereth, as it maye
scantly be perceyued, which sterre is also
called Maia, & Electra.



Talaria, were showes, whyche Mercurius 
dyd weare, wheron were set whynges.



Talaris, re, that whiche commeth downe to
the ancley, as Toga talaris, a longe gowne
to the ancley.



Talarius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to dyse, as
Lex talaria, a lawe agaynst dyse playenge.



Talassio, was a songe contayned in certayn
verses, sungen at weddynges. It was also
a certayne exclamation or crie vsed at ma­
riages, the begynnynge whereof beganne,
whan Romulus and the Romaynes rauys­




shed the maydens of the Sabines, amonge
whom was one of excellent beautie, whom
whan many of the Sabines wold haue res­
kued, they whyche caried her toward Ro­
mulus, to thintent that she shulde not be ta­
ken from them, cryed Talassio, whiche was
the name of a noble prynce of the Sabines,
as if they wolde haue brought hyr to hym
and by that meane they escaped, & broughte
hir to Romulus. And afterwarde they vsed
at mariages to crie Talassio.



Talea, a stocke sette in the erthe, whereon
men doo graffe. Also a truncheon, a staffe,
a byllette.



Talentum, was a poyse, whyche after the
countreye, wherein it was, it was dyuers.
One was callyd talentum Atticum, whyche
contayned .lx. poundes of Athenes, callyd
Minas, or Mnas, and, lxxii. poundes of Rome
callyd libras: and this was also called talen­
tum minus, the other was callyd Talentum
maius, & Euboicum, which contayned .lxxx.
poundes of Athenes, callid Minas,& .lxxxiii.
poundes & foure ounces of Rome weight.
Loke before in Libra, et Pondo. Talentum At­
ticum uel minus, was in value after the rate
of olde poyse grotes .Clxvi. li. xiii. s. iiii. d.
after .lx. to the pounde, after the newe gro­
tes, tenne to the once .CCviii. li. vi. s. viii. d.
Talentum maius, of olde grotes. Clxxxx. li.
xiii. s. iiii. d. of newe grotes .CCxvii. li. x. s.



Talgæ, an Ile in the see callyd Hircanum,
where groweth plentie of corne and fru­
tes without culture.



Talia, the blade of an onyon or chyboll.



Talio, onis, an equall peyne in recompence
of a hurte, as for the cuttynge of a mans
hande, to lose a hande, or for puttinge out
of an eye, to lose an eye.



Talior, ari, to be cutte: it is proprely spoken
of wodde, whiche we nowe calle tallynge
of wodde.



Talipedo, dare, to go on the pasternes.



Talis, tale, suche.



Taliter, in suche wyse.



Talitrum, a fyllyppe gyuen with ones fyn­
ger or nayle.



Talpa, a molle or want.



Talpa cæcior, blynder than a molle, a pro­
uerbe applyed to them, whiche lacke iuge­
ment in thinges that are playne.



Talum reponere, to refourme that, whiche
was negligently done, with more diligence.



Talus, the ankle aboue the foote. It is also
the pasterne bone of a beaste, Also a dye,
or dyce.



Tam, as well. also, as, soo. Tam bonus, as
good. Tam sum amicus republicæ, quem qui maxi­
me, I am so frendely, or as moche frende
to the publyke weale, as he that is moste.



Tama, whan with moche trauaile the blode
commeth downe to the legge, and causeth
it to swelle.



Tam magis, for tanto magis.



Vergil.



Tamarindi, a fruite growynge in India, the
tree wherof is like to a palme or date tree,
the fruite sower, lyke grene damsins, whi­
che is medicinable in asswagyng the heate
of cholere.



Tamarit&ecedil;, people in Asia, not farre frome
the see callyd Caspium.



Tamarix, ricis, an herbe, whyche bearethe
floures twyse in one yere.



Tamen, not withstandyng. also yet. Tamen
a malicia non discedis, Yet wylte thou not
departe from thy malyce. Sommetyme it
signifieth forthewith, at the laste, soo that.
Quod potero, faciam, tamen ut pietatem co­
lam, I wyll doo that I maye: soo that not
withstandynge I omytte not my duetie to
my father.



Tametsi, all be it, alwaye.



Taminia, a wild grape, growing in woddes.



Tam ne, olde wryters vsed for eousque, vn­
tyll that.



Tanager, a riuer in Lucania, betwene Cam­
pania and Calabria.



Tanagra, a towne in Perside.



Tanais, a great ryuer in the northe parte of
the worlde, whyche dyuydeth Europa
from Asia.



Tanaquil, was wife to Tarquinius Priscus,
the kynge of Romaynes.



Tanaus, was kynge of Siria.



Tandem, at the laste, sometyme at the laste
waye, also vneth, not withstandynge.



Tandiu, so longe.



Tango, tetigi, tangere, to touche, to meue, to
vnderstande, or perceyue, to come to.



Tangere ulcus, to rubbe on the galde place,
to speake to one of a thynge, whiche gre­
ueth hym to here it.
Turpilius.


Tangere, to deceyue.



Tetigit aures meas, It came to myn eares.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Tanis, the principall citie of Egypte, where
Moyses dyd shewe meruayles.



Tanos, a stone of the kynde of Emeralde,
grene and blacke.



Tanquam, as it were, lyke.



Tantalides, the progenie of Tantalus. 



Tantali horti, a prouerbe sygnifienge good
thynges to be at hande, whiche not with­
standynge a man may not vse.



Tantalus, a kynge, whom poetes do faine to
be turmented in hell with hunger & thyrste.



Tanti, for so moche. This worde doth per­
tayne to byenge and sellynge. Tantidem,
at that pryce. Tandidem idem.






Tanti æstimo, tantifacio, tanti pendo, I sette
so moche by, or I so moche esteme it.



Tantillus, la, lum, & tantulus, a, um, the dimi­
nutiue of tantus.



Tantisper, so longe.



Tantopere, so moche, so vehemently.



Tantum, onely.



Tantum non, almooste.



Terent. in
Heautont.



Tantum sat habes? arte thou content?



Tantummodo, all onely.



Tantundem periculum, so great dangier.



Tanuina, a wylde vyne callyd also Labrusca.



Tanto, an aduerbe, sygnyfienge so moche,
as tanto magis, so moche more, tanto peior,
so moche worse.



Tantum abest, it is soo farre frome, or soo
moche vnlyke.



Plautus in
pænulo.



Tantundem, euen so moche.



Tantumnum, also, ye also.



Tantus, ta, tum, suche, so metyme so moche,
or so greatte.



Taos, a stone of the colour of a pecoke.



Tapetia, hangynges of houses, or clothes
wherwith pauementes are couered.



Tapetum, tapes, petis, tapisrye, or clothes,
wherin are wrought diuers pictures with
thredes of sondry colours.



Taphiæ, & taphus, an Ile by Grecia, where
dwelled the people called Telebois.



Taphius, a citie in Egipt, the people wher­
of were callyd Taphnii.



Taphos, in greke, is a sepulchre or tumbe.



Tapinosis, a fygure, wherby a great thyng
is basely described.



Taposiris, a citie in Egipte.



Taprobana, a noble Ile in the Indiane see,
whiche yle is dyrectly agaynste this parte
of the worlde, and there is abundance of
all maner of spyces. And the people there
lyueth aboue an hundred yeres.



Tapsus, an Ile by Sycile not farre frome
Syracuse.



Tapulla, a lawe made for feastes.



Tapyri, people in Parthia, whyche vse to
gyue theyr wyues in mariage to other men,
after that they haue hadde foure or fyue
chyldren by them.
Fest. pom.


Taracina, a towne in Campania.



Taraconia, a countraye callydde nowe
Aragon.



Taracon, the chiefe citie therof.



Tarandrus, a beaste in body lyke to a great
oxe, hauynge a heed lyke to a harte, and
hornes full of branches, the heare rough,
of the colour of a beare, I suppose it to be
a rayne dere.



Tarantula, a kynde of the beastes callydde
Stelliones, lyke to a lysarde, of whose by­
tynge no man dieth, onely it stonieth hym
that is bytten.



Taras, the sonne of Neptunus, who buyl­
ded Tarentum.



Taraxis, whan the eyen do bolne out moch,
and be redde.



Tarchesius, was a myscheuous kyng of the
people callyd Albani.



Tarchon, a duke in Hethruria, whiche was
also a greate diuinour or southsayer.



Tardatio, a tarienge.



Tardigradus, that whiche hath a slow pase,
or gothe slowely.



Tardatio, a tarienge. Tarde, slowe, late.



Tardiloquentia, a slowe speche.



Tardiloquus, he that draweth his speeche
in lengthe.



Tardior, slower.



Tardissimus, moste slowe, or slowest.



Tarditas, & tarditudo, & tardicies, slownesse.



Tardius, more slowely.



Tardiuscule, somewhat slowely.



Tardiusculus, somewhat slowe.



Tardo, dare, to tary, to be slowe.



Tardus, slowe, rude, somtyme well during.
also thycke or grosse.



Tarentinus, a, um, of the citie of Tarent in
Calabria.



Tarentum, a noble citie in Calabria.



Tarentum, a citie within the realm of Naples.



Tarmes, a wourme, whiche eateth flesshe,
a magotte.



Tarpeius, an hylle at Rome.



Tarquinus superbus, was the laste kynge of
Romaynes, whiche was expellyd oute of
Rome for his pride and crueltie.



Tarracina, a towne in Campania callydde
also Anxur.



Tarsus, the chiefe citie of Cilicia, where
saynt Paule was borne.



Tarsis, a region in Iudea.



Tartaria, a greate countray in the northeste
parte of the worlde.



Tartarus, a place in hel. also a man of Tarta­
rie.



Tartarum, the lyes of wyne.



Tartareus, ea, eum, of helle.



Tartarinus, rina, num, olde writers vsed for
horrible or terrible.



Tartesii, a people in Iberia, amonge whom
be cattes of excedynge greatnesse.



Tartessus, a citie in the vttermoste parte of
Spayne, on the see syde by Gades, nowe
callyd Cales, where Columella the moste
eloquent and perfyte husband, was borne.



Tascaneum, a whyte claye or marle.



Tasimenes, seu tasmenes, one of the sonnes
of duke Nestor. 



Tata, dady, which chyldren call their father.



Tatæ, a wanton worde, wherwith one aun­
swereth to an nother.






Tateus, a kynde of salt whyche cometh out
of Phrigia, & is medicinable for the eies.



Taura, a barrayne cowe.



Tatianus, a mans name. Tatius, a mans name.



Taurarij, people in Scythia.



Tauria, a scourge made of neates lether.



Taurica Chersonesus, a contray in the north
parte of Europa.



Taurici, people of cruell maners that offe­
red strangers in sacrifyce.



Taurilia, were playes made in the honoure
of infernall goddis.



Taurinus, na, num, of a bulle.



Taurius, one of the goddes of the see.



Taurominium, a mountayne in Sicile, soo
callyd for the plentie of neate, whiche fed
theron. Also there was by it a citie of the
same name.



Taurominitanus, na, num, of the citie of
Taurominium.



Tauroscythæ, people of Scithia, dwellyng
by the mountayne callyd Taurus.



Taurus, a bulle, sometyme a stronge oxe, It
is also one of the .xii. celestiall sygnes, also
a great mountayne towarde India.



Tautologia, a fygure, where one thynge is
twyse spoken.



Plautus in
persa.



Tax, a stroke.



Taxa, a kynde of bayes or laurell, where­
with herbars are made.



Taxatio, a settynge of a taxe or subsidie.



Taxatores, they whiche doo rebuke oone
an nother.



Taxim, softely, scantly touched.



Taxis, olde wryters vsed for tetigeris, thou
shalte touche.



Taxilli, small dyse.



Taxo, nis, a gray or brocke, or badger.



Taxo, are, to touche often. alsoo to taxe, or
cesse a thynge at a certayne value. also to
reproue one an other.



Taxus, a tree lyke to fyrre, whiche beareth
bearyes, wherin is mortalle poyson. It is
also callyd ewe, wherof bowes be made.



Taygetus, a hylle, vnder the whiche is sette
the cities of Sparta and Amycle.

 

¶ T ANTE E.

TEarus, a riuer of Thracia, at the heed
wherof Darius kynge of Persia, whan
he went into Scithia, pighte his pa­
uyllyons, and there abode thre dayes. And
delytynge at the mooste pleasaunt water of
that ryuer, he sette in the same place a piller
grauen with letters of greke, declaryng his
being there, with commendation of the water.



Techna, a craft, also a wyle, or subtyl meane



Techines, were they, whiche also were cal­
lyd Corybantes, and were feined to be the
sonnes of Minerua and Sol. 



Technicus, ca, cum, artificiall, inuentiue.



Technides, a craftes man.



Technophyon, a settynge forthe of crafte.



Tectorius, a, um, pertaynyng to couerynge.



Tecum, with the.



Tector, toris, a periettour.



Tectorium, the playstrynge or pariettynge
of a house.



Tectorium opus, perietting or plastring wark



Tectum, the roufe of a house. sommetyme
all the house.



Tecum oro & quæso, I pray & byseche the.



Plaut. in
milite.



Tecum sentio, I am of thyn opinyon.



Teda, a tree, out of the whiche sweateth a
lycour, whan it is hette.



Tædulus, of whom al men be wery. somtime
it signifieth him, which is wery of som thing.
Fest. pom.


Teg&ecedil;um, a citie in Archadia.



Teg&ecedil;ates, men of that citie.



Teges, gitis, a course blanket or couerlyd,
whiche lyeth on poore mens beddes. It is
alsoo a matte.
Varro.


Tegeticula, the diminutiue of teges.



Tegillum, a lyttell couerynge.



Tegmen, & tegimen, & tegmentum, a coue­
rynge or couer.



Tego, texi, tegere, to couer, to hyde, to de­
sende or kepe.



Tegula, a tyle. Tegulum, a couerynge.



Teium, a citie in Paphlagonia, where Ana­
creon the poete was borne.



Tela, the clothe, whiche is spoken as welle
of sylke as of lynnen clothe or wollen.



Tellan&ecedil;, a certayne kynde of fygges.



Telamones, ymages, whiche do beare vppe
pyllers or postes.



Telemachus, the son of Ulisses & Penelope. 



Teleboæ, people in Grece.



Telepluum, an herbe callyd Orpyn.



Telephus, the sonne, whiche was nourished
with an hynde. 



Telina, a certain garment.
This entry displays on the same line as the previous entry.


Telonarius, & telo, lonis, a collectour or ga­
therer of tributes. 



Telonium, the place
where taskes or tributes are payde.
This entry displays on the same line as the previous entry.


Telos, in greke is an end, honour, a legion,
a tribute or pencion, it is also the name of an
ile, where the ointment callid telina is made



Telpussa, a citie in Arcadia.



Tellus, li, a mans name whom the wise Solon
iuged to be more fortunate than the rich king
Cresus.



Tellus, luris, the erthe.



Telum, al thynge whiche maye be throwen
or cast with the hand, be it stone, wod, or iron
it is also the generall name of al that, wher­
with a man doth fyght, callyd weapon. some­
tyme it is taken for a sworde.



Temerarius, a, um, more hardy than nede, or
wysedome requyreth, folehardey. somtime
dredefull, or to be dradde.






Temeritas, atis, & temeritudo, folehardines



Temere, vnaduysedly, foolyshely, aduentu­
rously. sometyme it sygnifieth almoste. al­
so without cause.



Temerius, more folyshe, or vnaduysedly.



Temero, rare, to vyolate.



Temetum, wyne.



Temulentus, ta, tum, drunke of wyne.



Temulentia, drunkennes.



Temno, tempsi, temnere, to sette lyttell by.



Temo, monis, the beame, whiche contay­
neth the yoke.



Tempe, a place in Thessalia wonderful ple­
saunt, hauynge trees and medowes mer­
uaylous delectable, wherin byrdes of dy­
uers kyndes, doo synge contynually with
excellent melody. Therof al plesant wod­
des haue the name of Tempe. 



Temperamentum, a moderacion.



Temperanter, temperately.



Temperantia, temperance, which is a firme
and moderate gouernance of reson against
sensualitie and other vycyouse affections
of the mynde.



Temperantior, temperantius, more temperate.



Temperatura, a temperance or moderation,
in the mynglynge of thynges togyther.



Temperies, temperatenes, proprely in heate
or colde. sometyme it is vsurped for tem­
peramentum, and for temperantia.



Temperior, oris, more tymely.



Tempero, are, to temper or moderate in or­
der or measure. Temperamus stylum, cala­
mum, appetitum, whan we keepe in oure
wrytynge a meane fourme, or do eate noo
more than is nedefull.



Tempsa, a cytie in the countrey called now
Calabria.



Tempestas, tatis, sygnifyeth sometyme the
same tyme, somtyme tempest, sommetyme
wether, sometyme a fayre wether.



Tempestiuus, ua, um, that whyche is done in
conuenyent tyme.



Tempestiuitas, tatis, season or tyme conue­
nient, oportunitie.



Tempestiue, in season or tyme conuenient.



Tempestum, olde writers vsed for tempestiuum.



Tempestuosum, tempestuous or stormy.



Templum, a temple or churche. sometyme
it sygnif yeth heuen. Alsoo the principall
beame of a house. also a sepulchre.



Temporalis, le, that whiche duryth vntyll a
certayne tyme.



Temporaneus, a, um, that whyche is doone
sodaynly, and at a tyme.



Temporarie, temporanie, & temporaliter, vn­
tylle a tyme.



Temporarius, ria, rium, that whiche dureth
or contynueth for a tyme. also that whiche
pertayneth to tyme.



Temporius, an aduerbe sygnifieth in tyme,
or by tyme.



Tempus, poris, tyme, also the state of tyme.
sometyme the temples of the heed.



Tenatia, & tenacitas, hardenes in sparynge
of expenses, nygardshyp, perseueraunce,
retaynynge, or kepynge.



Tenatior, & tenacissimus, the comparatiue
and superlatiue degree of tenax.



Tenacissimæ memori&ecedil;, of mooste sure re­
membraunce. Tenaciter, fastly, surely.
Colum. I.


Tenasmus & tenesmus, a desyre to go often
to the stoole, and may do nothynge, with a
burnynge and sometyme a bloody siege.



Tenax, nacis, that whiche holdeth faste, as
glue. somtime sparyng or nygarde, to mo­
che constant, hard to be moued.



Tendere, to assay, to holde vp. Paruumque pa­
tri tendebat Iulum, He helde vp lyttell Iu­
lus vnto his father. Also to prepare, to go
towarde a place.



Tendicula, a nette or snare to take byrdes
or beastes.



Tendo, tetendi, tendere, to extende or stret­
che, to lay a snare, to dwelle, to go. Tende­
re insidias, to lay in wayte.



Tendutes, olde writers callyd them, whych
had great teethe.



Tenebr&ecedil;, the lacke of lyght, darkenes.



Tenebresco, scere, to be darke.



Tenebricor, caris, cari, to make darke.



Tenebricosus, a, um, that maketh darke.



Tenebriones, lyers and crafty knaues. Also
they whiche wyll not be seene abrode by
day tyme.



Tenebrosus, a, um, darke.



Tenedos, an Ile in the see callyd Aegeum,
betwene Mitelene and Hellespontum, not
farre from Troye.



Tenedia bipennis aut securis, a quick or sharp
axe: a prouerbe applyed to iudges, which
be hasty and cruell in their sentences.



Tenellus, a, um, tender.



Teneo, nui, nuere, to holde, to apprehende,
to possede, to holde or kepe in, to couer, to
vnderstande, to kepe backe, to performe.



Teneor, neris, neri, to be bounden, to be be­
holden to one.



Tener, ra, rum, tender, mercyful. Also a gel­
dyd manne.



Teneritas, & teneritudo, tendernes.



Tenerasco, scere, to be tender or mercyfull.



Tenere consilium, to do by councill Pr&ecedil;cipe,
ut teneat consilia nostra, Gyue hym aduyse
that he may do by our counsayle.
Plautus in
milite.


Tene, tene, tary, tary, Redi, quo fugis nunc?
tene, tene, Tourne agayne, whither runn­
nest thou nowe? tary, tary.






Plinius in
panegyri.



Tenere consensum, to agree or consent vn­
to other.



Terent. in
Hecyra.



Tenet me amor, loue meueth me moche.



Tenere insaniam. Sed hoc primum expurgare
tibi uolo, me insaniam neque tenere, neque mi
esse ullum morbum, nisi quod seruio,  But
fyrste I wyll declare my self vnto the, that
I am neyther out of my wyt, nor haue any 
sycknes, but that I am bonde.
Plautus in
cap.


Plautus in
Amphit &
Epidico.



Tenere ius, to knowe the lawe.



Tenere legem, to be vnder a lawe.



Tenere memoria, to remembre.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Tenere medium, to kepe a meane.



Plautus in
mercatore



Tenere modum, to kepe a measure.



Tenere se, to take hede of hym selfe.



Plautus in
truculen.



Tenere aliquem mendatij, to take oone
with a lye.



In Menec.
Sueton. in
domitiano



Tene tibi, take it as thyne owne.



Tenere causam, to vanquyshe or recouer a­
gaynste one in a matter.



Teneri desyderio, to desyre moch or feruently



Plin. epist.
83.



Teneri ludo, to take pleasure in game.



Teneri furti, to be giltie of felonye.



Tenera ætas, youthe.



Teneris annis, in yonge yeres.



Tenere, & teneriter, tenderly, louyngly.



Tenni, olde writers vsed for tenui.



Tenit&ecedil;, were callyd goddesses of lottes.



Tenontes, the greate and stronge synewes,
whiche do kepe the necke vpryght. Also a
broode synewe, whyche gothe frome the
hamme downe to the heele.



Tenor, noris, an order, a contynuaunce of
a thynge.



Tenos, an yle in the greke see, one of them,
whyche is callyd Cyclades.



Lucretius.



Tenta, stretched.



Tentamentum, temptation.



Tentigo, tiginis, a styffenesse.



Tentipellium, a showe with an yron soole,
wheron the ouer lether is stretched.



Tento, tare, to attempte, to assay or proue,
to tempte one to do euyll.



Tentorium, a tent or pauylyon.



Tentum, a mans priuye membre.



Tentyra, a citie in Egypte.



Tentyri, uel tynterit&ecedil;, a venymous beaste in
an Ile on the ryuer of Nilus, whose voice
the cokodryll dothe feare.



Tenué, & tenuiter, poorely, symply.



Tenunculus, la, lum, very symple, or lyttelle
in estimation.



Tenui filo, with a small threde, applyed to
style in wrytynge, whyche is not elegant,
but playne.



Tenuis, nue, lyttell or symple in estimation,
smalle in quantitie, poore.



Tenuitas, tatis, smallenesse, pouertie.



Tenuo, are, to make smalle, to make leane,
or feeble.



Tenus, ni, a snare. Beinge an aduerbe, hit
sygnyfyeth vnto. Tenus urbem tendit, It
extendeth vnto the cytie, or noo further
than the cytie.



Tenus, a preposition, sygnifieth nyghnesse,
or vntyll a thynge.



Tepifacio, cere, to make warme.



Tepefio, fieri, to be warme.



Tepeo, & tepesco, tepui, pescere, to be warm
or hotte.



Tepidarium, a vesselle, wherein water is
made temperate, also a chaumber, where­
into men do go out of a bayne.



Tepidus, tepida, tepidum, meane betweene
hotte and colde, warme. Also kolyd from
heate Somtyme noyfull or vnprofytable.



Tephrites, a stoone, whyche hathe the fy­
gure of a newe moone, in colour blacke, or
asshe colour.



Tepidior, colder.



Tepidissimus, a, um, moste warme.



Tepidulus, tepidula, tepidulum, a dymynu­
tyue of tepidus.



Tepocon, a forme of wrytyng downwarde.



Tepor, oris, & tepiditas, tatis, warmthe, or
warmenesse.



Ter, thryse.



Terapne, a contray in Lacedemonia, where
the fayre Helene was borne. also an Iland
no we callyd Corsica.



Terebinthus, a tree, the wodde wherof is
blacke and harde lyke boxe, oute of this
tree rounneth a gumme, callyd common­
ly Turpentyne. All be it the common tur­
pentyne is not it, but an nother, whyche
is as cleere as glasse, and is a soueraygne
medycyne to clense the stomake of putry­
fyed humours.



Ternarius, & ternus, terna, num, the thyrde
in number.



Tertius, tia, um, the thyrd. Tertio, & tertium,
the thyrde tyme.



Terdenus, na, num, the thyrdtenth.



Terebellum, a wymble or percer.



Terebratio, a borynge with a wymble.



Terebræ, siue terebrum, an awgour, where­
with holes are boored.



Terebro, brare, to bore or make an hole.



Teredo, dinis, a lytel worm that eteth wod.



Terentius, the mooste eloquente wryter of
comedyes. Terentianus, of Terence. 



Terentum, a place in the fyelde by Rome,
callyd Campus Martius, wherein was an
aultar of Pluto and Proserpyne. 



Teres, teretis, longe and rounde, lyke a tree
or a pyller. Teretrum, an instrument, wher­
with a thynge is made rounde.



Terga dare, to run away, proprely in bataile.






Tergemini, three chylderne borne at oone
bourdeyne. Tergestes, a citie in Italye.



Terginus, na, num, that whiche is made of a
beastes hyde.



Tergiuersatio, a nonsuite in the lawe, whan
the pleintife gyueth ouer his suite.



Tergiuersor, aris, ari, to turne back, to deny,
in the lawe it sygnifieth to be nonsuite.



Tergo, & tergeo, tersi, tergere, to wype or
make cleane.



Tergum, the backe of man or beaste, or of
any other thynge. sommetyme it sygnify­
eth a hyde.



Tergus, tergoris, a hyde of a beaste.



Terma, matis, the extremitie, the ende of a
thinge, also the sole of the fote.



Termentarium, a lynnen clothe, wherewith
the body is couered.



Plaut.
Fest. Pom.



Termentum, for detrimentum.



Termes, a braunche plucked of a tree with
the fruite on it. also a worme, whyche ea­
teth the fleshe.



Termile, a mountayne in Lycia, callyd al­
so Chim&ecedil;ra.



Ter milies, thre thousande tymes.



Termillum, a potte for wyne, whyche was
alway sette on the table, that euery manne
mought take as moche wine as he wolde.



Terminalia, was a certayne holy day, at the
latter ende of the yere.



Terminalis lapis, a mere stone, laid or pight
at the ende of sondry mens landes.



Termino, nare, to ende or fynyshe.



Terminus, a sygne whiche declareth oone
mans lande from an other, or one contrey
or territorie from an other. also it signify­
eth the buttynge.



Terminus deus, was an ydoll, whiche was
supposed to haue preemynence ouer the
boundes of lande, whose temple had euer
an hole in the roufe, for as moche as they
thought it to be vnlefulle that boundes of
lande shulde be couered or hydde.



Termo, onis, old wryter vsed for terminus.



Ternarius numerus, the number of thre.



Ternus, na, num, the thyrde.



Ternundenum, the thyrtenthe.



Vide com.



Tero, triui, rere, to rubbe, to breke or broise.
Terere iter, to go his way. Terere tempus,
to consume tyme. Terere otium, to lyue idelly.



Terpander, dri, an olde musytian, whyche
added .vii. strynges to the harpe.



Terpsichore, one of the nyne musis.



Terra, erthe: sometyme all the worlde, also
a prouynce, a territorie, a countrey, land.



Terraceus, a, um, of erthe.



Terraneola, a byrde lyke to a larke, whiche
we calle a buntynge.



Terrefacio, facere, to make aferde.



Terræ filius, he that is come vp of nought,
and no man knoweth his kynrede.



Terr&ecedil;motus, erthequake.



Terrenum, a felde.



Terrenus, na, num, of erthe, or lyuynge on
erthe, erthely.



Terreo, rui, rere, to make aferde.



Vide com.



Terrestris, tre, erthely.



Terreus, rea, reum, of erthe. Vas terreum,
an erthen vesselle.



Terribilis, bile, terryble, that whyche is to
be feared.



Terricola, he that dwelleth in the lande.



Terricrepus, he that rebuketh one terribly.



Terriculamentum, a feare, or a fearfull thyng.



Terrificus, ca, cum, terryble, or that whiche
induceth feare.



Terrigena, begotten on the erthe.



Varro de
ling. latin.



Terriones, ploughmenne.



Terripauium, & terripudium, for tripudium,
daunsynge.



Territo, tare, to make aferde.



Territorium, the fyeldes or countraye ly­
enge within the iurisdiction and boundes
of a citie, a territorie.



Terror, roris, feare.



Tersus, sa, sum, cleane, pure.



Tersus dies, of olde wryters was taken for
a fayre daye.



Tertiata uerba, wordes not perfytely pro­
nounced: as whan one is in feare or drede
of hym, to whome he speaketh, he trem­
blynge in speche, vnethe pronounceth the
thyrde worde that he wolde saye.



Tertiarum, is a mixt mettall, wherin are two
partes of leade, and one of tynne.



Tertio, are, to do a thynge the thyrde tyme,
or to make the thyrde tylth in earynge.



Tertio Consul, where two haue bene Con­
sules before hym. Tertium Consul, he that
hath ben thryse Consul. So that Tertio si­
gnifieth the third in order, and place, two
goynge afore. Tertium sygnifieth the tyme,
where t wyse gothe afore. The lyke is of
Secundo, quarto, and other numbres.



Tertio pedato, at the thyrde retourne or
comynge agayne. Tertius, a, um, the third.
Cato.


Tertius decimus, the thyrtenthe.



Tertullianus, a famous and eloquent autor.
whyche for dyspleasure and malyce felle
into heresye.



Teruncium, a poyse or coyn of thre ounces.



Tesca, a place where misticalle ceremonies
were exercysed.
Varro.


Tesqua, places harde or difficile to come vp
to, where the Romaynes dyd practise their
diuinations by fleing of birdis, callid auguria



Tessellatus, ta, tum, that whiche is wrought
with smal pieces of stone, wodde, or bone,




as in playenge tables or counterbourdes.



Tessella, a greffe.



Tessera, that whiche is in euery part square
as a dye. also it is a dye. more ouer a watch
worde or priuie token gyuen to souldiours.
Also a token of warre and peace, a token
gyuen to people to receyue corne of the
kinges almes. Also a taile, wheron is sco­
red or marked the numbre of thynges re­
ceyued, whiche is also called Tesserula.



Tesseradecas, fouretene.



Tesserarius, he that giueth the watcheword



Tesserul&ecedil;, lyttell pauynge tyles.



Tesso, tessi, tessere, to dispoyle or pulle of a
garment or harneis by vyolence.



Testa, a sharde of a potte or tyle. also an er­
then pot. also all maner of shellfyshe.



Testaceus, a, um, that whiche hath a shelle.



Testeus, idem.



Testaceum flagellum, a prouerbe applyed to
sodayn alteration of thinges, or of banish­
ment vnlooked for.



Testamentarius, a forger of testamentes.



Testamentarius, ria, ium, pertaynynge to te­
stamentes.



Testamentum, a testament.



Testatim, in pieces or shardes.



Testatio, & testimonium, wytnesse.



Testator, toris, he that maketh a testament.



Testatus, he that is deed, and hathe made a
wyll. also openly knowen of all men.



Testiculor, cularis, lari, to putte the male to
the female. Testillor, idem.



Testiculus, of a knowen sygnification.



Testificatio, a wytnesse bearynge.



Testificator, & testificatrix, he or she that be­
reth wytnesse.



Testificor, caris, cari, to beare wytnesse.



Testimonium, & testatio, wytnesse borne of a
thynge done.



Testis, he that beareth wytnes.



Testes, be also a mannes genitours.



Testor, aris, ari, to beare wytnes, to calle to
wytnes, to pray god.
Contestor.
Protestor
Varro.


Testu, olde wryters vsed for testa.



Testuaceum, that whiche is boyled in an er­
then potte.



Testudinatum tectum, a roufe, which is ho­
lowe in foure partes.



Testudo, dinis, a snayle. Also an engyne of
warre to beate downe walles, whiche was
made of bourdes, and couerid with lether
or other thinges, which wold not bourne.
Within it was a piece of tymber, that had
a great hoke of yron at the ende, whyche
piece mought be plucked backe, and putte
forthe with the strength of men, and ther­
with plucke stoones oute of the walles of
townes besyeged. It is alsoo the roufe or
vaulte of a howse.



Testus, tus, is a panne, wherin tartes, and o­
ther lyke thynges of paste are baken.



Tetanicus morbus, idem quod Tetanos.



Tetanothra, a medycine, wherwith the face
of a man or woman is made smothe with­
out wrynkles.



Tetanos, whan the synues are styffe, so that
a man can nat bowe some part of his body



Tetarmorion, the fourth part of the zodi­
ake cirkle, wherin are the .xii. signes. It
is also that, whiche astronomers do calle
the quadrate aspecte of planettes.



Te te, the selfe.



Teter, tetra, tetrum, foule, stynkyng, cruell.



Teterrimus, a, um, moste foule or stynkyng,
or cruelle.



Teterrime, moste abhomynably.



Fest. Pom.



Tethys, the wife of Neptunus, callid god­
desse of the see.



Tetinierit, for tenuerit.



Fest. Pom.



Tetinus, for tenus.



Tettigoniæ, lyttell grassehoppes.



Tettigometræ, the mother of grasshoppes.



Tetracinus, a coyne, whyche was in value
foure dragmas, or olde poyse grootes, of
viii. to an ounce.



Tetracolon, a sentence hauyng .iiii. membres.



Tetradoron, of foure hand dbreth.



Tetragonus, a, um, a thynge hauynge foure
corners.



Tetragrammaton, the name of god, whych
the Iewes do call Ineffabile, that is to say,
vnspeakable.



Tetragrammaton, in greeke, sygnifyeth of
foure letters.



Tetrametrum, a kynde of metre, hauynge
but foure fete.



Tetrarcha, the rule of the fourthe parte of
a royalme.



Tetrasyllabum, of foure syllables, as,
Im pe ra tor.



Tetre, sharpely, cruelly, wyckedly.



Tetrices, water, wherwith gardeynes are
wateryd.



Tetricus, a sowre felowe, & alway vnplesant.



Tetrinno, are, to swymme lyke a ducke.



Tetritudo, crueltie or sharpenes.



Tetrius, more sharpe or cruell.



Tetro, trare, to make fowle, to pollute, to
make bytter.



Tetulit, for tulit.



Teucer, & Teucrus, the name of a kynge of
Troianes. also of the sonne of Telamone
the valyant Greke.



Teucer, Teucra, crum, idem quod Troianus,
of Troye.



Teumesus, a lyttell hylle in Bœotia.



Teumesus leo, a Lyon, whyche Hercules




dydde flee, whan he was a chylde, and of
his skynne made hym a cote.



Teurion, the herbe whiche is also callydde
Tripolium.



Teuta, a quene of Illiria, which lyued euer
chaste, and vanquyshed many noble capi­
taynes, and diuers hostes of the Romains



Teutates, was in olde time among the french
men taken for Mercurius.



Teuthania, a piece of the countrey of Troy.



Teutones, people nowe callyd Almayns.



Texo, texui, texere, to weaue or wind threde,
Also to make to builde, to write, to gather,
to ornate.
Vide com.


Texta, an hearelace, wherwith the heare is
bounden vppe.



Textilis, le, that which is weaued or wounden



Textim, an aduerbe, sygnifieng in weauing
or wyndynge vp.



Textor, toris, & textrix, tricis, he or she that
weaueth or wyndeth.



Textrina, & textrinum, the place where thin­
ges be weaued or wounden. also the craft
of weauynge.



Textrix, & textricula, a woman, whiche war­
keth in a frame or stole.



Textura, the weauynge.



Textus, & textum, the texte.



¶ T ANTE H.

THalamus, a chamber where the hus­
bande and the wyfe do lye togither.



Thalassicus, chamblette.



Thalassio, uide Talassio.



Thassus bonorum, a prouerbe applyed to
them that promyse great thynges, as a man
wolde say, a worlde, a countray of welthe.



Thalassomeli, is a lycour made of honye,
salte water, and rayne water, and is put in­
to a vessell rased with pytche.



Thales, a philosopher, whiche was one of
the seuen wyse man of Grecia.



Thalestris, was quene of Amasones, whi­
che came to kynge Alexander with three
hunderde womenne with her, to the in­
tente to haue issue by hym and his menne:
and whanne she perceyued, that she and
her ladyes were spedde, they departed
home agayne.



Thali, are in lyekes, garlyke, and oynyons,
whan they do growe, the myddell stalke
betwene the blade and the heed or rote.



Thalia, one of the graces, whiche the aun­
cent poetes dyd suppose to be one of the
doughters of Iupiter, and gyuers of di­
lectable speche, and plesant pronunciation.



Thamaras, was he, whiche fyrste playd on
a harpe, without syngynge therto.



Thamnos, in latine arbustum.



Thanatos, mors in latyne.



Thapsus, an yle by Sicile.



Thapsia, an herbe lyke to fennell, and hathe a
yelowe flowre, and a flatte rounde sede.



Tharia, pyckelle, wherein fysshe is salted,
and kepte.



Tharsos, a citie in Cilicia.



Thasia, an almonde.



Thasia nux, callyd also græca.



Thasij, menne of the Ile callyd Thasus in
Egypte.



Thasium, a certayn wine, which is in Egipt.



Thauma, in greke is a meruaile or myracle.



Theatralis, le, & theatricus, ca, cum, that whi­
che pertayneth to theatrum.



Theatridium, a diminutiue of theatrum.



Theatrum, a place made halfe round, wher­
in the people assembled to beholde playes
and sondrye sbatementes, sometyme it sy­
gnifieth the multitude that beholdeth.



Thebœ, arum, Theba, be. & Thebe, bes, the
name of cities, wherof one was in Egipte,
builded by Busirides, an other in Bœotia,
buylded by Cadmus: an nother in Cilicia,
where Andromaches, the wyfe of Hec­
tor was borne.



Thebaicæ, & thebaides, dates of the beste
sorte.



Thebais, idis, & idos, a countraye of Egipt.
it is also the name of a boke made by Sta­
tius the poete.



Thebanus, na, num, a man of Thebes.



Theca, a case, a shethe or scaberde, a boxe.



Theleboæ, people of an yle callid Capreæ,
whiche lyeth agaynst Naples.



Theleboij, people of the Ile Capreas.



Thelephus, a kynge, whyche camme in the
ayde of the Troyanes, and was slayne
by Achylles. 



Theligonium, an herbe, whyche hathe be­
ries lyke to an olyue.



Thelphusa, a citie in Arcadia.



Thelephussium, uel thelphossion, a cite in Bœo­
tia, where Pyndarus praysed Bacchus. 



Thelypteris, sheferne, or the female ferne.



Thema, matis, a thynge purposed to be dis­
puted or resoned. it is also a figure, wher­
in astronomers doo write the state of he­
uen, in placinge or settyng the planettes in
suche signes and degrees, as they be in at
the tyme of a mans natiuitie, or whan any
thynge shall happen that they serche for.



Thembinacha, a contrey called also Nemia.



Themes, an olde towne in the ile of Cipres
where brasse was fyrste founde.



Themis, one of thes ysters of Iupyter, she
was callid the goddesse, whiche commanded
men to aske that whiche was leful. There




was an other woman callyd Themis, whi­
che was called also Carmentis, it was som­
tyme taken for fas, lefull.



Themiscyra, a cite in Capadocia, afterward
callyd Cæsaria.



Themisones, people by Licia.



Themistius, a philosopher which wrate com­
mentaries on Aristotels warkes.



Themistocles, a noble capitain of the Athe­
niensis, whiche beinge expelled out of his
countrey, and commen to Xerxes king of
Persia, was sent by hym with a great ar­
mye agaynste the Athenienses, but whan
he perceyued his countrey in peryll to be
distroyed, he dranke poyson, and chase ra­
ther to dye, than eyther to be vnfeythfull
to Xerxes, or els to distroy his countrey,
although it were vnkynde towarde hym.



Thensa, a halowed carte or chariot.



Theocritus, a poete of Grecia, which wrate
Bucolica, or the contention of herd men.



Theologia, diuynitie.



Theomenia, the wrathe of god.



Theonino dente rodere, to rebuke a manne
shamefullye.



Theophrastus, a noble phylosopher, and of
excellent eloquence.



Theos, in greke is god.



Theorochos, the mother of god.



Theorema, speculation.



Theoria, speculation, vnderstandyng.



Theopolis, the chiefe citie of Syria, callyd
also Antiochia.



Thera, a cytie by Athenes.



Theramnum, a citie in Thessalia.



Theriace, ces, seu theriaca, tryacle.



Thereotrophion, a place where wylde bea­
stes are kepte, as a forest, or parke.



Therioma, a soore of the priuye members,
wherby all the partes therabout, are cor­
rupted, and therof issueth blacke and stin­
kynge humour.



Theristrum, a thynne vayle, which the wo­
men of Palestina dyd weare.



Thermæ, are bathes of hote water.



Thermefacio, cere, to chaufe or make oone
hotte with outragious eatynge and dryn­
kynge of hote thynges.



Thermopolium, a place where meates and
drynkes were solde, wherwith men were
made hote or warme in cold wether.



Thermodoon, a ryuer in Cappadocia.



Thermodontiacus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to
that ryuer.



Thermopoto, tare, to drynke hotte or warm
drynke.



Thermopylæ, a mountayne in Greece, ha­
uynge a narowe entrie or passage, where
two thousand Lacedemoniens, with their
capytayne Leonidas, faught agaynst fyue
hundred and .xxviii. thousande Persyans,
and resysted them two dayes, vntylle the
sayd Lacedemoniens were all slayne.



Thersites, was a prynce that came with the
grekes to the syege of Troye, whyche in
persone and condicyons was of all other
moste defourmed.



Thesaurizo, are, to gather treasure.



Thesaurus, & thesaurum, treasure.



Theseus, a noble and valyant kyng of Athe­
nes, company on to Hercules. 



Thesis, a clause in writyng or spekyng, whi­
che contayneth a sentence.



Thesmophoria, the ceremonyes of Ceres,
the goddesse of grayne.



Thesmophoros, was a name of Ceres. 



Thespia, a free towne in Bœotia.



Thessalia, a region in Grece.



Thessalicus, ca, cum, of Thessalia.



Thessalonica, a citie in Macedonia.



Thetis, tidis, the mother of Achilles. 



Theucitis, a rushe growynge in Nabachia,
whiche hath the taste of sharpe wyne.



Theositas, for sodalitas.



Fest. Pom.



Theutones, & theutonici, people in Germa­
nye, callyd Duchemen.



Thirromachus, one of the sonnes of Hercu­
les by Megara. 



Thiasias, he that is burste or broken in his
stoones.



Thideus, was the name of the father of
Diomedes. 



Thieum, for succinum, aumbre.



Thita pr&ecedil;sigere, for condemnare.



Thymelici, mynstrelles retayned with no­
ble menne.



Thoa, one of the nymphes.



Thoas, the name of two kynges, oone of
Taurica, the other of Lemnos.



Thoes, be wolfes in Ethiope, Arrianus doth
calle them tygres in India.



Tholos, a scochen or small tergate. also the
syldynge of a house, or a round house.



Thomices, lyches of hempe, wherwith hal­
ters are made, they be also lyttel bolsters,
whiche men do weare whanne they carye
burdeynes, for frettynge of theyr neckes
and shulders with cordes or ropes.



Thon, nis, he that fyrste brought phisyke in
the fourme of a scyence, amonge the E­
gyptians.



Thoota, the daughter of Phorcus, on whom
Neptunus gate Polyphemus. 



Thoracatus, he that wearethe curettys or
breste plates.



Thorax, racis, is proprelye the hole boulke
of a man from the necke to the myddelle,
it is also curettes or breste plates.




sometyme it signifieth a towre.



Thous, a duke of Troye.



Thracia, a region of Europa, wherin is the
citie of Constantinople.



Thraceas, uel Thrassias, a northwest wynd.



Thrasimedes, the sonne of Nestor. 



Thrasomenus, a ryuer in Italye nyghe to
Perusia.



Thrax, acis, a man of Thracia.



Threces, idem quod gladiatores..



Threnodia, a mournyng songe.



Threnos, a lamentacyon, whyche was vsyd
at buryenge.



Thressa, a woman of Thracia.



Throni, be one of the .ix. orders of angels.



Thronus, the seate or chayre of an Empe­
rour or kynge.



Thrulla, a trewell, whyche masons, tylers,
and pargettours doo vse for layenge of
morter.



Thrullisso, are, to laye on morter.



Thryallis, an herbe callyd in Italye Strella
& Bipinella.



Thryps, a mowthe.



Thule, an Ile beyonde Scotlande.



Thunnus, a fyshe, callyd Tuny.



Thuribulum, a sensar.



Thuringia, Thuryn in Fraunce.



Thurini, a people in Italye.



Thuriferus, ra, rum, that whyche bearethe
Frankynsence.



Thurifico, to make a perfume, or to sence.



Thurius, ria, rium, of incense.



Thus, thuris, frankyncense.



Thuscana, a cytie in Italye.



Tusculani, a people by Rome.



Thusculum, a diminutiue of thus. Also a cite
in Latium.



Thyas, a sacrifyce made to Bacchus. 



Thyasus, a daunce dedycate to Bacchus. 



Thiella, a storme.



Thyestes, whome his owne brother Atreus
causyd to eate his propre chylderne.



Thymbra, an herbe callyd sauerye.



Thymele, es, a woman, whyche fyrst taught
daunsynge in open places.



Thymelici, maye be callydde daunsers of
Morysdaunces.



Thymiama, matis, a swete perfume.



Thymus, an herbe called tyme.



Thymum, a wart, which is as great as a bean.



Thynnus, a fyshe callyd Tuny.



Thyridion, a wycket or lyttell doore.



Thyrsus, the stalke of letyse and of other
herbes, whiche may be eaten. somme doo
take it for a speare with a sharpe heade,
whiche hadde boughes and leaues of yuy
wrapped aboute them: suche speares dyd
Bacchus and his flocke of drunken har­
lottes, beare in theyr handes. Lucretius
the poete taketh thyrsum, for furye or an
ardent mocyon.



Thysus, the stalke of euery herbe, specially
of letyse. It is also a staffe wounde about
with yuy, whiche was borne of them that
dyd sacrifyce to Bacchus. 
Elyot declared this duplicates the previous entry. The Corrections state: put out all, for as moche as
it is afore declared in Thyrsus.
 

¶ T ANTE I.

TIara, an ornament, which the women
of Persia dyd weare on their hee­
des, whiche was rounde, and coue­
red onely the hynder parte of theyr hee­
des. Princis & pristis vsed also to weare it.



Tiatura, a cytie in the countray of Misia.



Tibareni, people in Scithia, being in Asia.



Tibia, the leg, proprely the shanke or shinne
bone, it is also an instrument callid a shalme.



Tibialis, le, pertaynyng to shaulmes.



Tibiale, lis, pluraliter tibialia, gieues or legge
harneys.



Tibicen, & tibicina, he or she that blowethe
a trumpette or shalme.



Tibicen, is alsoo any thynge, whereby any
thynge in buyldynge is susteyned, as a
shore or proppe.



Tibi, to the.



Tibicis, a ryuer in Scythia.



Tibin, a baskette or coffyn made of wickers
or bulle rushes, or barke of a tree: suche
one was Moyses put into by the daugh­
ter of Pharao. 
Origenes
super Ex.


Fest. Pom.



Tibilustria, were dayes whan menne wente
with trumpettes, as it were in processyon
aboute their lambes.



Tibini, tunes made with shalmes.



Fest. Pom.



Tiburtes, people in Italy nigh to Rome.



Ticinum, a citye in Lumbardye nowe cal­
lyd Pauia.



Tigillus, a rafter.



Tignarius, faber, a Carpentar that maketh
a house of tymber.



Tignus, & tignum, a rafter of a house, whi­
che beareth the roufe. It is also general­
ly all the tymber, which serueth to a hous.



Tigrane, a riuer in the countray of Media.



Tigranes, the propre name of a kynge of
Media, of the greatter Armeny.



Tigris, a beaste of a wonderfull swyftenes,
it is also one of the foure ryuers, whiche
commeth out of Paradyse.



Tigurini, people of Germanye, whiche do
inhabyte the fourthe parte of Heluetia,
or Swyzerlande.



Tile, an Ile beyonde Scotlande, callydde
also Thule.



Tilia, a tree, whyche some do thinke is cal­
lyd quyckebeame.






Tilium, a citie in the weste parte of Sardi­
nia, on the see syde.



Tilos, an yle in the Indian see, wherein is
plentie of perle, and trees of dyuers frui­
tes, and the leaues of trees there gro­
wynge do neuer falle. also wolle groweth
on trees there, whiche do beare gourdes
of the greatnes of quynces, and beynge
rype do open, in the whyche doo appiere
the wolle, wherof are made fyne and pre­
cious clothes. About that place dothe be­
gynne the mountain of Caucasus, whiche
dothe passe through a greate parte of the
worlde.



Timalos, an herbe and flower growyng in
waters, callyd commonly of potycaries
Nenufer.



Timæus, a noble phylosopher of Pytha­
goras secte.



Timanus, a ryuer in Italy besides Aquileia.



Timens, he that feareth for a tyme.



Timidus, he that alway feareth, callyd ty­
morouse.



Timeo, mui, mere, to feare or dreade.



Timeo te, I feare the as myn ennemy, leste
thou shallt do me harme.



Timeo tibi, I am aferd of the as my frende,
leste thou shuldest haue any harme.



Timeo mihi abs te, I am afrayde that thou
wylte do me harme.



Timeo furem pomis, I am afrayde that one
wyll steale myn appulles.
Iuuenalis.


Timeo moriatur, I am aferd that he wyl die



Timide, fearefully.



Timiditas, feare.



Timiopilæ, ingrossers or regraters of mar­
kettes, whiche doo bye moch corne or vi­
tayle togyther, to make it scarse and dere.



Timor, moris, & timos, feare of some euyll
commynge.



Timotheus, was the name of a noble capy­
tayn of the Athenienses, who for the good
fortune that he had in battayle, was payn­
ted lyenge aslepe, and hauynge by hym a
nette pytched, wherin fortune was taken.
Also a cunnynge musitian, whiche vsyd to
take of his scholers, which had lerned be­
fore, double salarie, that he toke of other,
whiche neuer lerned, sayeng, that he toke
with them double labours, that is to saye,
to make them to forgette that which they
hadde lernyd afore, and thanne to teache
them perfytely.



Tin, olde wryters vsyd for Eum.



Tina, & Tinia, a greatte bolle, whiche be­
ing ful of wine, euery man mought drynke
therof as moche as he lysted.



Tinctor, ctoris, a dyer.



Tinctilis, le, that whiche is dyed.



Tinctura, dyenge.



Tinea, a mothe, they be also wormes in the
bealye, also wormes breding in bee stalles.



Tineosus, a, um, full of mothes.



Tinge, a promontorie or elbowe of Affrica.



Tingitana, a parte of Mauritania or Bar­
baria agaynste Spayne.



Tingo, xi, gere, to deepe a thynge into ly­
cour, to dye colours.



Tinnio, nire, to rynge or make a sounde as
mettall dothe, sometyme as in a mans eare.



Tinnimentum, a ryngyng in the eare of a man.



Plaut. in
ruden.



Tinnunculus, a byrd, which maketh a sharp
ryngynge noyse, and is of the kynde of
haukes, and in some place dothe brede in
houses, whiche with his voyce dryueth a­
way other hawkes, and therfore the byr­
des of hym are kepte in erthen pottes co­
uered with claye, and hanged vp in doue­
houses, whyche causeth culuers meruay­
lousely to loue their house.



Tinnulus, la, lum, sharpe in sounde, as that
which is made by beatinge on metall.



Tintinaculus, he that beateth with roddes,
a transgressour of a lawe.



Tintinabulum, a lytle bell.



Tintino, nare, to ringe lyke a bell.



Tiphernum, a towne in Italy.



Tiphis, an excellent carpentar, the whiche
founde first the meane to gouerne a shyp,
a rother.



Tipula, a wurme, whyche runneth on the
water as other wurmes doo on the lande,
and hath sixe fete.



Tiresias, was kynge of Thebes, who had
the knowlege of thinges whyche shoulde
happen, and was blynde.



Tirius, a ryuer in Grecia: also the contray
where Hercules was borne in Pelopo­
nesso, now called Morea.



Tirinthius, was a surname of Hercules. 



Tirinthis, a famouse olde citie in Grecia.



Tis, for tui, the genitiue case of Tu.



Tisiphone, one of the furies of helle, which
was supposed to tourment homycydes, or
sleers of men.



Titan, & Titanus, was the brother of Sa­
turne, and is taken for the sonne, and Ti­
tanis, for the moone.



Tithimallus, an herbe callyd werte worte,
wherof the mylke woll take away wartes.



Tithymalus, an herbe whyche is commonly
callyd Spurge.



Titillo, are, to tyckle, to prouoke or meeue
pleasantly.



Titio, onis, a fyrebrande or wodde, whiche
hath ben in the fyre.



Titiuillitium, sygnifyeth nothynge.



Titubantia, stammerynge.






Titubo, are, to stacker in speking or going,
as a man beinge drunke or sycke.



Titulotenus, no further than his title.



Titulus, the title or inscription of a warke
or acte. sometyme dignitie, also a monument
or other remembrance.



Titus, the name of a man.



Titus Liuius, the moste excellent hystorien
or writer of stories, in whom was the foun­
tayne of the mylke of pure eloquence.



Tlepolemus, was the kyng of the Rhodes,
whiche camme to the battayle of Troye,
with nyne shyppes.



Tityus, the sonne of Iupiter, whom poetes
fayned to be slayne by Apollo, bycause he
wolde haue rauysshed Latona his syster.
And therfore lyeth in helle, hauyng an egle
alwaye eatynge his lyuer. And it is alsoo
sayde, that his bodye was in lengthe nyne
furlonge. Wytnesse Tibulle, whiche was a 
poete, and also a greate louer, and therfore
coulde not lye.

 

¶ T, ANTE M.

TMolus, a mountayne in Lidia, wher­
on dyd growe great plentie of saffron
and vynes. It is also a lyttell busshe,
whiche beareth floures of saffron coloure.

 

¶ T ANTE O.

TOdi, lytell byrdes, I suppose it be the
byrde, whyche is callyd a tytmous.



Toga, the common garmente of men
and women, callyd a gowne. And bycause
the Romaynes specially dydde weare that
garment in the tyme of peace, Toga was ta­
ken for peace, as arma was for warre.



Toga prætexta, a garment whiche the Ro­
mains dyd weare afore that they were of
the age of .xvi. yeres. Afterwarde it was
worne of them, whiche were in auctoritie.



Toga polymita, a garment made with thre­
des of sondrye coloures, as motleye or
bauldekyn.



Togata Comœdia, a comedye or enterlude,
wherein the maners of the Romaynes,
were expressed.



Togata Gallia, the countrey nowe callydde
Lumbardy.



Toga candida, was a garment, whiche they
dyd weare, that sued for any great office in
the citie of Rome.



Togati, apparayled in gownes.



Togatus, he that weareth a gowne.



Tolerantia, sufferance.



Toleranter, paciently.



Tolles, a waxynge kernell.



Ti. Liuius.



Tolleno, nonis, that wherein any thynge is
put or layde to be drawen vp. sometyme a
buckette wherwith water is drawen vp.
Vegetius.
Budeus.


Tollenon, an engyne to drawe vppe water,
whiche hath a great poise at the one ende



Tolero, rare, to suffre, to endure, to beare,
to lyue poorely, or nyghly.



Tolerare uitam, to lyue, or to maynteyne
his lyfe.



Tolerabilis, rabile, that whiche maye suffre
or beare.



Tollo, sustuli, seu tetuli, tollere, to lyfte vppe,
or sette vppe.



Tollere clamorem, to crie oute.



Tollere cristas, to sette vp the crest, applyed
to them that be proude or arrogante, & do
stretche vp their browes with a dysdayn­
full countenaunce.



Tolle digitum, hold vp thy fynger, confesse
thy selfe vanquyshed.



Tollere gradum, to sette forthe, or to mar­
che forthe.



Tollere, to take away. Tolle hanc patinam,
take away this dyshe.
Plautus in
milite.


Tollere, to haue a chylde by a woman.



Tollere, to nouryshe. Verum quod erit natum,
tollito, What soo euer is borne, putte it to
nouryshynge.
Plautus in
Amphit.


Tollere, to deferre or prolonge, Omnes tol­
lo ex hoc die in alium diem, I put them all
of from one day to an other.
Plautus.


Tollere minas, to thretten or menace.



Tolutarius, & tolutaris equus, an aumblynge
horse.



Tolutiloquentia, a swyfte or faste speche.



Tolutim, an amblynge pace.



Tolutim loqui, to speake faste oone worde
after an nother.



Tomacul&ecedil;, Tomacula, & tomacla, a certayn
sorte of pouddynges, proprelye swynes
pouddynges.



Tomentum, floxe, which is shorne of wollen
cloth. also lockes clypped of white wolle.



Tomices, hempen cordes, also colers, whi­
che are put on carthorses, for hurtynge of
their neckes.



Tomos, a pece of a boke, or a warke vnper­
perfyte. Alsoo a citie in the countraye of
Ponthus.



Tomyris, was a noble queene of Massage­
tis in Scithia, agaynste whom whan Cirus
the great kynge of Persia came, and hadde
slayne her sonne, she pytchynge a fylde a­
gaynste hym, and of purpose hauing great
plentie of vytayles in her pauyllyons, af­
ter a lyttell skyrmyshe she and her host fled.
And whan Cirus had a whyle folowed the
chace, and blowen to the retraicte, he came
to her campe, and fyndynge greate plentie
of vytayle, he and his people dyd so moche




fyll theym selfes therwith, that fallynge a­
slepe, they were all taken by the quene, and
slayne, and she causynge a great vessell to be
fylled with the bloudde of Cirus, and the
Persyans, dyd caste his heed therinto, say­
inge, Bloode thou haste thyrsted, and nowe
drynke therof thy fylle.



Tonarion, a certayne shaulme with a softe
sounde, on the whiche in the old time some
oratours vsed to haue, to playe by theym,
whan they pleaded, that by the tunes of
the shalme, the oratour mought moderate
and order his pronunciation.



Tondeo, totondi, tondere, to clyp or sheare.



Tonesco, tonui, tonescere, to thunder.



Tonimus, for tonamus.



Ennius.



Tonitrus, & tonitru, & tonitruum, thunder.



Tonitruo, are, to thunder.



Tonitus, thunder.



Tono, nare, to thunder, to make a greatte
sounde or noyse, to speake loude.



Tonsæ, shepe, which be shorne or clypped.
also ores of botes or shyppes.



Tonsilis, le, that which is shorne or clipped.



Tonsilla, a poste, hauynge the one ende ar­
med with yron, whiche is pitched into the
erth, to thende that shippes or botes may
be tyed therat.



Tonsillæ plurali, a dysese within the chekes
and mouthe lyke to great kernels.



Tonsi montes, hilles without woddes.



Tonsor, et tonstrix, tricis, he or she whyche
clyppeth or sheareth.



Tonsorius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to clyp­
pynge.



Tonstrix, tricis, a woman barbar.



Tonstricula, idem.



Tonstrina, a place where thy do vse to clip
or a barbers shoppe.



Tonsus, a, um, shorne or clypped.



Tonus, a tune or accent. alsoo the space or
distance, whiche is betwene the erthe and
the moone.



Toparcha, he that hathe the gouernaunce
and charge of one onely countrey.



Toparchia, the rule of one countray.



Topazion, & topazius, a preciouse stone of
the colour of golde.



Tophus, a kynde of stone, whiche is soone
resolued into sande.



Topiarium, a warke made of trees, bushes,
bryers, or herbes, for pleasure, and con­
tayned places to sytte or walke in, as it is
vsed nowe with boxe, eglantine, iacymine,
and other lyke trees or thornes, that be
flexible, or wyll be wounden.



Topiarius, he that maketh suche warkes.



Topiaria, the warke.



Topica, warkes in that part of logike, whi­
che declareth the places, out of the whi­
che argumentes maye be inuented, that
moste proprely pertayneth to oratours.



Topographia, the description of a place, as
of a countrey or citie.



Topper, the olde wryters vsed for soone,
shortly, or quyckely.
Festus.


Toral, & toralium, in plurali numero, toralia,
euery thynge that lyeth on a bed, as shetis
blankettes and couerlyds. In the old time
it were certaine floures and swete herbes
wounden togyther in ropes, and hanged
before the place, where men dyd lye. Like
as nowe they vse in London at Mydsom­
mer to hange afore their doores.



Torcular, aris, & torculare, & torculum, a presse
for wyne, syder, or vertiuyce.



Torcularius, a, um, bylongynge to a presse.



Toreuma, matis, & tereumatum, grauen or
polyshed warke.



Toreutis, a grauer.



Toreutice, ces, the crafte of grauynge.



Tormen, minis, frettynge or tourmente in
the bealy and guttes.



Tormina, idem.



Tormentum, tourment, or an engyn to tur­
ment men, generally all ordinance pertay­
nynge to warre.



Torminosus, he that hathe tourmentes or
frettynge in his guttes.



Tornacum, a towne callyd Tornay.



Tornatilis, le, that whiche is tourned with
a whele.



Torniamen, may be nowe taken for a tour­
nayment or iustes.



Torno, are, to torne or warke with a whele,
as tourners done.



Tornus, the instrument or whele.



Torpedo, dinis, slouthefulnes. also a fysshe,
whiche in the takynge maketh the handes
of theym that doo drawe, to be stonyed or
deed for the tyme.



Torpeo, & torpesco, pui, torpere, uel torpe­
scere, to be astonyed, or slowe.



Torpor, poris, a debilitation or feblynge of
mynde, an vnaptnes to do any thynge.



Torporo, rare, to astonye, or make astonied.



Torquatus, a rynge doue, or stocke doue. it
is he also that weareth a colar or chayne.



Torqueo, torsi, quere, to wynde in, to whirle
aboute lyke a whiele, to sustayne or beare
vp, to tourment.
Vide com.


Torquere telum, to throwe a darte or iaue­
lyn, that he runne rounde.



Vergilius.



Torquere saxa, to tourne great stones.



Vergilius.



Torquere, to spynne.



Torques, a colar, chayne, or bye of gold or
syluer, suche as is worne by knyghtes or
esquiers about their neckes.






Torrefacio, cere, to broyle or rost at the fire,
or by the heate of the sonne.



Torrens, tis, a streame, that cometh downe
of hylles, whiche is caused by moche rayne
or snowe. Torrens, a particyple, sygnifieth
flowynge with a great swepe. Torrentior,
more flowing, with a greatter violence.



Torreo, rui, rere, idem quod torrefacio.



Torresco, re, to be broilid or rosted, or dried.



Torrid&ecedil; zonæ, are two girdels imagined in
the firmament on euery side of the equino­
ctial line, vnder whiche gyrdels the people
whiche inhabyte there, are burned with the
feruent heat of the sonne, bicause the sonne
abideth longest in those .ii. places & ar also na­
med Tropicus cancri, & tropicus Capricorni.



Torridus, da, dum, dried or burned.



Tortilis, le, that whiche is bent or bowed.



Torris, a stycke of fyre.



Tortiuum vinum, wyne of the laste presse.



Torto, tare, to tourment vehemently.



Tortor, toris, a tourmentour, or he that ca­
steth a stone with a slynge.



Tortum, an engin, to throw great stones with.



Tortuosus, a, um, wounden or turned many wais.



Tortus, ta, tum, crooked.



Torue, toruum, torua, toruiter, proprely in behol­
dyng sowerly or grymly.



Toruinus, an apparell of a womans heed.



Torus, a bedde, it was somtyme made with
herbes wounden togyther.



Tori, the brawnes of the armes and leggis,
or the fleshe myxte with synewes.



Torosus, a, um, myghty or stronge in braw­
nes of the legges and armes.



Torsio, sionis, Theodorus, Gaza, & Longo­
lius supposed to be a sturgion. Paulus Io­
uius is of a contrary opinion.



Torulus, a lyttell bedde.



Torue, sturdyly in looke.



Toruitas, tatis, sturdynes.



Toruus, ua, uum, cruel and sturdy in loking.



Tostus, a, um, tosted or rosted.



Totidem, verily so many, euen as many.



Tot, as many. Toties, 
so many tymes.


Totus, ta, tum, all, the hole, euery whyt.



Toxicum, venym or poyson.

 

¶ T ANTE R.

TRabales, a certayne tourment.



Trabalis, le, pertayning to a beame.



Trabalis clauus, an yron pin or gret nail
wherwith bemis ar made fast to the rafters



Trabea, a cerklet or kyrtell worn by kynges
vnder theyr mantell.



Trabica nauis, a shyp made with gret bemes



Trabs, & trabes, a beame of a house.



Trachale, the ouer part of a fishe callid Mu­
rex, of whom purple colour is made.



Trachea, the weson or pype of the lunges.



Trachelum, the midle part of the
sayle of a ship



Trachelus, the chine of a man or beast, from
the heed to the haunche.



Trachida, Trachina, & Trachurus, I suppose
is a banstykle.



Trachinia, a kynde of roses, not perfytely
red, lyke to them, that we call french roses.



Traconia, a roughnes within the eie liddes.



Traconitidis, a parte of Iudea.



Tractabilis, treatable, that may be intreatid.



Tractare, to handell.



Tractim, on length, a longe tyme or space.



Tracto, tare, to intreate. H&ecedil;c arte tractabat
uirum, She handlid the man craftely, or of
that sorte. alsoo to vse or exercise, to order
or gouerne.



Tractorium, a windlas to draw vp heuy thingis



Tractus, us, a space, a countrey.



Trado, didi, dere, to delyuer, also to teache,
to commytte in trust to an other man.



Traditio, a tradition.



Traduco, duxi, ducere, to brynge from oone
place to an other, to brynge ouer, to tran­
slate oute of one language into an nother,
Traducere tempus, to passe the tyme, to
brynge vp or nouryshe.



Traduces, vynes or trees translated frome
place to place.



Tragelaphus, a beaste in parte lyke a harte,
in parte lyke a gote.



Tragemata, that whyche are commonlye
callyd bankettynge dyshes.



Tragite, cruelly, in the maner of a tragedy.



Tragicum tueri, to loke grymly.



Tragicus, a wryter of tragedyes.



Tragœdia, a tragedye, whiche is an enter­
lude, wherin the personages do represent
somme hystorie or fable lamentable, for the
crueltie and myserye therin expressed.



Tragœdus, he that exercyseth some part in
a tragedye.
Plin.38.
cap.13.


Tragonis, siue Tragion, a tree growynge in
Candy, lyke to Iunyper, the iuyce wher­
of is lyke to mylke, and waxethe thycke
lyke gumme.



Tragum, is lyke a tyzan made of wheate, it
is also a fyshers nette callyd a dragge.



Tragonia, an herbe nowe callid Taragon,
late sene in this realme, whiche hath a tast
lyke gynger: whiche herbe layde to the
lefte syde, consumeth the splene.



Tragopa, a byrde in Ethiopia, greatter than
an egle, & hath on his hed horns like a gote.



Tragopogus, a fyshe callyd a barbyll.



Tragoriganon, an herbe whiche I suppose,
is callyd Peny royalle, growyng wylde.



Tragula, a iauelyn with a barbyd heed.



Tragurium, an ile in the see callyd Hadriaticum,



Trigon, is a fyshe callyd a thornebacke.






Tragulam inijcere, to practise deceyte.



Traha, a dray or slyd drawen without wheles.



Trahax, acis, a couetous persone, the whi­
che draweth all thynge vnto hym.



Vergilius.



Trahere diem, noctem, tempus, to passe the
day, the nyghte, or the tyme.



Plautus in
trinummo



Trahere, to tary. Atque egomet me adeo cum
illis una ibidem traho, And I my selfe ta­
ryed as longe with them. Trahere, to liue.
Et uosut tutam tranquillamque fortunam traheretis,
mea perfeci uigilantiam. And by my vygilan­
cy I brought to passe, that ye shulde lyue
in a sure and quiete prosperitie.
Cic. antequem
iret in exi­
dium.


Traho, xi, here, to draw, to leade, to deferre,
or delay, to extend, to remoue, to prolong.



Traiicio, ieci, ijcere, to leade ouer, to carye
ouer, to brynge ouer, to stryke through.



Traiectitia pecunia, money caried ouer the see



Traiectus, tus, a passage. Traiectio, idem.



Trallis, a citie in Lidia, an other in Phrigia.



Trallianus, a man of that citie.



Tralucidus, da, dum, clere, that a man maye
loke through.



Trama, an vnder garment.



Trames, mitis, a crosse waye.



Trano, nare, to swymme ouer.



Tranato, tare, to swymme ouer.



Tranquille, softely without noyse.



Tranquillitas, tranquillitie, rest, quyetenes.



Tranquillo, lare, to make quiete.



Tranquillus, la, lum, quiete, in rest, peasible.



Tranquillum est, it is fayre wether.



Plautus in
casina.



Tranquillus locus, a good place to reste in,
a place of quietenes.



Trans, ouer, from one place to an other.



Transactio, an agrement vpon communication.



Transactus, a, um, passed, longe agone, achiued.



Transalpina Gallia, Fraunce on this syde
the mountaynes.



Transalpinus, a, um, ouer the mountains of alpes



Transcendo, dere, to go ouer, to excede.



Transcindo, scidi, scindere, to cut on sonder.



Transcribere, is to giue or deliuer. Turne tot
incassum fusos patiere labores. Et tua Darda­
neis transcribi sceptra colonis? Wilt thou Tur­
nus suffre thy labours to be lost, & thy realm
to be giuen to the inhabytantes of Troy?
Vergilius.


Transcribere, the transposition of a possessi­
on from one to an other.
Agretius.


Transcribo, psi, bere, to write out of a copie,
sometyme to translate.



Transcurro, rere, to runne forthe.



Transcurrit æstas, the sommer is passed.



Transcursus, us, a course. In transcursu, In
passynge forthe.



Transenna, a loupe to loke out at. also a win­
dowe, or casement. alsoo a rope stretched
out, a snare or trappe.



Transeo, siui, & sii, sire, to go forthe, to passe
ouer, to passe. Transire domum, to go home.



Transeunter, passynge by or ouer.



Transfero, tuli, ferre, to cary or bryng from
one place to an other, to translate from one
langage to an other, or from ones possession
to an others. Translatus, a, um, the participle.



Transfigo, xi, gere, to thruste through.



Transfuga, he that departeth from his own
people or capytayne vnto the parte of the
ennemies, or of theym that are suspected
in tyme of truce.



Transfodio, dere, to dygge through.



Transfossus, a, um, digged or striken through.



Transfiguro, rare, to transfourme, to turne
into an nother fygure.



Transfretatio, a passage ouer the see.



Transfreto, tare, to passe ouer the see.



Transfugere ad hostes, is to goo and yelde
hym to the contrary parte.



Transfugium, an yeldynge to ennemies.



Transfulgeo, re, to shyne through.



Transfundere, to translate frome one to an
other. Libentius omnes meas laudes (si mo­
do sint aliqu&ecedil; me&ecedil; laudes) ad te transfuderim,
I haue more wyllyngly tourned my prayse,
(yf I haue any prayse) vnto you.
Ci. Dolo.


Transfugio, gere, to fle from place to place.



Transfundo, fudi, fundere, to poure oute of
one vessell into an nother.



Transgredior, deris, di, to passe or go ouer
or beyonde, to excede, to transgresse a law
or commaundemente.



Transgressio, is a figure of retorike, where
a man leaueth the principal matter, & entreth
into an other thing, & after returneth to his
matter. We commonly call it, a digression.



Transgressus, us, a passing ouer the see.



Transigere uitam, to passe his or their lyfe.



Salust.



Transigere, is also to perfourme.



Plaut. in
Amphit.



Transigo, egi, igere, to dryue furth, to treate
a mater, to agree or condescende, or come
to a point: as hapneth betwene men, which
do contend for somwhat.
Terent. in
Andria.


Transilio, siliui, & silii, ire, to leape ouer.



Transitio, situs, a passing ouer, a going forth.



Transitorius, a, um, that which shortly passeth.



Translatio, a translation, or brynging from  one
place to another. Translego, ere, to rede ouer



Transluceo, cere, to shyne through.



Transmarinus, na, um, that whiche commeth
from beyonde the se.



Transmigratio, a departinge or goynge from 
one place to dwell in another.



Transmigro, grare, to go further, to dwell
further of, to transpose my dwellynge.



Transmissio, a going or sending further or ouer



Transmittere mare, to passe ouer the see.



Plin. epist.
173.
Epist.183.
Epist.161



Transmittere tempus, to passe the tyme.



Transmittere discrimen, to escape a danger.



Transmitto, misi, mittere, to sende from one




place to an other, to go or runne quickly, to
send shortly or quickly to passe ouer a water



Transmoueo, êre, to remoue from one place to
an other. Transnato, are, to swym ouer.



Sueton. de
claris gram­
maticis.



Transnomino, nare, to chaunge his name.



Transpareo, rere, to be sene thrugh a thinge.



Transpicio, spexi, spicere, to loke through.



Plautus in
mercator.



Transquietus, a, um, in quiet or rest from  hensforth



Transtra, transoms which do go ouerwhart
a house. also the seates, wheron they do syt,
whiche do rowe in a shyppe or bote.



Transtyberinus, rina, num, that whiche is or
dwelleth beyonde the ryuer of Tyber.



Transuado, are, & trausuador, ari, to waade
ouer a shalowe place of a ryuer.



Transueho, uexi, uehere, to carye ouer.



Transuerbero, are, to stryke through.



Transuersum agere, to tourne hastily away
from the purpose which a man went about.



Transuersum unguem non discedere, not to
go a nayle bredth from it. A prouerbe sig­
nifieng a litle distance. Transuersum digitum, idem.



Transuersus, a, um, ouerthwart, not straight
or direct. Transuerto, tere, to turne awry,
or out of the right facion or way.



Transuideo, dere, to se through a clere thing.



Plautus in
capt.



Transulto, tare, to leape ouer.



Transumptum, that which is writen out of a re­
cord, and approued vnder the kinges seale,
or the sygnynge of the iudge. In the com­
mon lawe they calle it an exemplifycation.
Some do also call it a Transumpte.



Transumptio, a figure callid also Metalepsis,
wherby one signification is gathered of an
other: as of Nox atra, a blacke nyghte, is
gathered Nox tenebricosa, a darke nyght.



Transuolo, are, to flye ouer, or leape ouer,
or to go or runne beyonde a place.



Transumo, umpsi, sumere, to take of or from
an nother, to remeue from one to an other



Transuo, ere, to sowe through.



Trapetes, petum, a myl wherin oyle is made



Trapeza, a table, wheron an exchanger doth
tel money. Trapezita, an exchanger or banker



Trapezus, zuntis, a citie in the countrey of
Pontus. Trapezuntius, a man of that citie.



Festus



Trapit, olde writers vsed for vertit.



Traston, a certain rosine or gumme, the best
of that which is callyd gummihamoniacum.



Traulius, he that spekith with gret difficulti



Trebellicum vinum, seu Trebulanum uinum, wine
growing about the riuer of Trebia, in Lum­
bardye, the Italions do call it Trebiana.



Trebula, an olde towne nygh to Rome.



Trebulani, men of that towne.



Treceni, thre hundred. Trecenti, & trecentum, idem



Trecentenus, na, num, the thre hundreth.



Trecentesimus, ma, mum, idem.



Trecenties, three hundred tymes.



Tredecim, thyrtene.



Tremebundus, he that trembleth moche.



Tremefacio, feci, cere, to make to tremble or
quake. Tremisco, scere, to tremble.



Tremo, ere, to quake as one doth in a feuer.
also to feare. Tremulus, he that quaketh for
feare. Tremor, oris, quakyng, also feare.



Trepidatio, tremblyng, feare.



Trepidanter, fearefully, tremblyng.



Trepido, dare, to feare, to make haste.



Trepidus, da, dum, fearful, also he that doth
a thing hastily. Trepondo, thre pound weight.



Tres, thre. Tressis, thre pounde.



Treueris, a citie in Germany callid Tryre.



Treueri, people callyd Treues.



Triambi, were thre which spake togither in
a tragedy. Triangularis, re, hauing. iii. corners



Triangulus, la, lum, thre cornerde.



Triarchus, a master of a shyp with .iii. tops.



Triarij, soudiors that be set alway in the rere
warde, which were the strongest men, they
faught standing, bowing their knies, as they
wold rather dy than remeue from  their places



Triatrus, a festiuall day kept after the third
Idus of euery moneth.



Tribaces, they which be worne with stripes



Tribrachus, a fote in meter of .iii. short silla­
bles. Tribula, & tribulum, a flayle or other
lyke thing, wherwith corne is threshed.



Tribulis, a kynnesman that commeth of the
same stocke that I do.



Tribulor, aris, ari, to be troubled with heuy­
nes of mynde. Tribulus, a bremble.



Tribunal, the place where a Iudge sytteth
in iudgement.



Tribunatus, the office or dignite of a tribune



Tribunus, was an offycer amonge the Ro­
mains, hauinge chiefe iurisdiction amonge
the communes, also a capytaine in warres,
hauynge auctoritie ouer soudiours, to view
and see that they were welle armed and ex­
ercysed. Tribunitius, a, um, pertaynynge
to the Tribunes.



Tribuo, buere, to gyue, sommetyme to sette
moche by. Also to fauour.



Tribus, bus, a part of the people, somtime di­
uided into thre partis. It semeth that it was
somtime taken for a family or particular iu­
risdiction among the people, and therof co­
meth tribulis. And therfore the partition of
the people of Israel were into .xii. Tribus.
hereof be sondry opinions. rede Calepine. 



Tributarius, he that payeth tribute.



Tributim, by sondrye families or partes of
the people. Tributum, tribute.



Tric&ecedil;, fethers in the fete of chykens & py­
geons, whiche do let them to go, and ther­
fore all thinges which do let a man ar callid
Tric&ecedil;. Vide extrico, & intrico.






Tricaptum, a garment, whiche was so fyne,
that it semed to be made of smalle heares.



Tricenus, na, num, cometh of triginta, thir­
tie. it is sometyme taken for tricentenum.



Tricentuplus, a, um, thre hundred folde.



Triceps, cipitis, hauynge thre heedes.



Tricerberus, a great hell hounde.



Trichiæ, be fyshes callyd Sardynes.



Trichila, a vessell hauynge thre lauers, oute
of the whiche water is poured.



Trichomanes, an herbe callid Maidenhear.



Triclinium, a parlor to sup in, wherin were
thre tables and thre beddes. For in the old
tyme they vsed to lye, whan they dyd eate.



Triclinarius, the seruaunt, which doth serue
in the parlour.



Triclinarius, a, um, pertaynynge to the par­
lour or dynynge chaumber.



Triclinarium, idem quod triclinium.



Tricolon, hauynge thre membres.



Tricones, men hauynge foure couuntenan­
ces, and that be neuer or seldome sene to
laugh. Also pykers of quarels.



Tricongius, was oone whiche dranke or he
rested, thre mesures of wine, callid congii,
whiche as I suppose, was thre galons and
a pynt of our wyne mesure. Wherfore Ti­
berius the Emperoure promoted hym to
honour, and at the last made hym Consul
of Rome.



Tricornium, that whiche hath thre hornes.



Tricubitalis, le, of thre cubytes in mesure.



Tricubitus, ta, tum, idem.



Tricus, a stone, which although it be black
yet sheweth he at the roote blacke, in the
myddell sanguyne, at the toppe whyte.



Tridacna, an oyster so greate, that a manne
must make of hym thre morsels.



Tridens, tis, euery instrument, toole, or we­
pon, hauynge thre tethe.



Triduanus, a, um, of thre days continuance.



Triduum, the space of thre dayes.



Triennalis, le, of thre yeres.



Triennium, the space of thre yeres.



Triennis, ne, thre yeres olde.



Triens, tis, a coyne whiche is the third part
of a pounde, it is also a cuppe cuntaynyng
that poyse.



Trientalis herba, an herbe, whiche hath lea­
ues as great as the coyne callyd triens.



Triental, a vessel containing the thirde part
of that mesure, which was named Sextarium.



Trierarchus, the capytain of a shyppe, whi­
che is callyd trieris.



Trieris, a greate shyppe, whiche hathe in it
thre orders of seates for the rowers.



Trietericus, ca, cum, for triennalis, that whi­
che hapneth to be done euery thirde yere



Trieteris, the space of thre yeres.



Trifariam, in .iii. partes, or thre maner of wais.



Trifarius, a, um, of the same signification.



Trifaux, faucis, hauynge thre chekes.



Trifax, & triforum, a weapon of thre cuby­
tes longe.



Trifer, fera, rum, that which bryngeth frute
thryse. Triferus, a, um, idem.



Trifera, is a medycyne and other delycate
spyces, to expulse easily corrupt humours



Trifidus, da, dum, dyuided into thre partes.



Trifinium, the buttyng of thre feldes, whi­
che ioyne togyther.



Trifolium, maye be taken for the generalle
name of all herbes hauynge thre leues. Al
be it there is one herbe callid so proprely.



Trifur, furis, more than a thefe, three tymes
wars than a thefe. Semblably tri, ioyned
with any thyng, signifieth more.



Triga, a carte drawen with thre horses.



Trigarium, a certain course with such cartis



Trigamus, he whiche hathe or hath hadde
three wyues.



Trigarius, a place by campum Martium, at Rome



Trigemini, thre chyldern at one byrthe.



Trigeminus, na, num, idem quod tres, three.



Columel.
3. cap.19.



Trigemmis, a plant or slyppe hauynge thre
ioyntes and thre buddes.



Trigesimus, ma, mum, the thirtieth.



Trigesies, thyrty tymes. Triginta, thirty.



Trigla, a fyshe, I suppose it to be a sore mul­
lette, suche as are taken in Deuonshyre
and in Cornewall.



Trigles, a stone whiche is of the colour of
a soore Mullet.



Trigo, gare, to bynde or to drawe a thynge
close togyther.



Trigon, gonis, a balle. also a turtyll.



Trigonia, the thirde age.



Trigonalis, le, that whiche is thre cornerde,
hauyng thre lynes.



Trigonus, na, num, thre cornerde.



Trilinguis, he that speaketh thre langages.



Trilix, licis, a garment with thre diuers thredis.



Trimatus, tus, the tyme of thre yeres.



Trimembris, bre, hauyng thre members.



Trimestris, tre, of thre monethes.



Trimetrum, a verse of thre fete.



Trimma, a wyne made with spices, as that
whiche is callyd ypocras.



Trimorion, is named of .iii. signes in heuen,
whiche contayne .lxxxx. degrees or porci­
ons. Wherfore Timorion, is in calculation
of natiuities from the time of the birth or
conception, the .lxxx. & tenth part or degree.



Trimus, ma, mum, of thre yeres.



Trimulus, the diminutiue of Trimus.



Trimyxos, a lampe or candellstycke, bea­
rynge thre lyghtes.



Trinacris, & trinacria, the contrey of Sicile.






Trinepos, potis, he which is thre discentes
lyneall from my chyldes chylde.



Trineptis, a woman in lyke degree of blode
as trinepos is.



Trinitas, trinitie, the number of thre.



Trinoxius, a, um, three nyghtes.



Trinundinum, the thirde faire or markette,
whiche was wont to be proclaimed, to the
intent that it shuld be the better remembrid.



Trinus, na, num, thre.



Trioboli homo, & triobolaris, a man worthe
thre halfe pens, of lyttell value.



Triobolus, thre halfe pens, or worthe three
halfe pens.



Triones, plough oxen. Alsoo they be seuen
sterres beinge in the northe.



Triophthalmus, a lyttell stone, hauynge in
hym the fygure of thre eyen.



Triorchis, a kynde of hawkes, hauynge
three stoones.



Triparcus, a greatte nygarde.



Tripartior, tiri, to dyuide into thre partes.



Tripartito, an Aduerbe, sygnyfyenge in
three partis.



Tripartitus, ta, tum, dyuided in thre partis.



Tripedaneus, a, um, hauyng thre fete.



Tripes, pedis, with thre feete.



Trifolium, thre leaued grasse. Triphillon, idem.



Triplaris, thryse as moche.



Triplex, plicis, three folde, treble, a table
with thre leaues.



Triplicitas, treble.



Tripliciter, three folde.



Triplico, are, to do or fold a thing .iii. times.



Triplium, a vessell lyke a baskette.



Triplus, a, um, treble.



Tripolis, a countray in Affrica, an other in
Syria, the thyrde in Phenicia.



Tripolium, an herbe.



Tripondium, thre pounde weight.



Tripontium, a towne in Umbria in Italy, so
callyd bycause it hath thre brydges.



Triptolemus, a man whiche founde the vse
of grayne in the countray of Athenes.



Tripudium, daunsynge.



Tripus, podis, euery thynge that hath three
feete. Tripodes, were alsoo tables in the
temple of Apollo, of golde.



Triquetra, a fygure three cornerde. It was
also a name of the Ile of Sicile.



Triquetrus, tra, trum, hauynge thre corners.



Triremis, a galeye.



Tris, three or thryse.



Trismegistus, the name of Mercurius, in
latyn Ter maximus.



Tristegum, a chamber in the third storye or
floore of a house.



Hirtius in
commentar.



Tristimonia, heuynesse or sorowe.



Trissis, thre pounde weight.



Tristis, is also taken for doctus, Iudex tristis
& integer, A iudge welle lerned and of a
good conscience.



Tristis, agaynste his wyll, not well content.



Tristitia, sorowe, or heuynes.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Tristis, sorowfull, heuy, also cruelle, of mo­
che grauitie, bytter, more difficile or hard,
sometyme angry.



Tristo, tare, to make heuy or sorowfull.



Trisulcus, ca, cum, hauynge thre edges.



Trisulcum telum, a weapon hauyng thre edges.



Trisyllabus, ba, bum, hauyng thre sillables.



Tritauia, my great grandfathers mother.



Tritauus, my great grandfathers father.



Tritheles, an herbe whiche hathe thryse in
the yere flowres.



Triticeus, a, um, of wheate.



Triticum, wheate.



Trito, tare, to breake or beate smalle.



Triton, one callyd god of the see.



Tritonia, the name of Minerua. 



Trituro, rare, to threshe corne.



Tritura, threshynge. Trituratio, idem.



Trites, ta, tum, worne.



Triuenefica, a great sorceresse.



Triuia, a name of Diana. 



Triuialis, le, commune or of smalle estima­
tion vsed or taught in hyghe wayes, alsoo
rude, not elegant.



Triuialis lingua, a homely forme of speche.



Triuium, where ways do mete, also a place
where commune recourse of people is.



Triuialiter, communely, in the vulgare or
ho mely facyon.



Trium literarum homo, was spoken in scorn
of hym, that wolde seeme to be a gentylle
man, where he was none, whyche worde
was made by this occasyon, that amonge
the olde Romaynes gentylle men vsyd to
wryte theyr names with three letters, as
Q, F, M, for Quintus Fabius Maximus. Al­
so this prouerbe was spoken of them, whi­
che were theues, bycause that Fur, con­
tayned but thre letters.



Triumphalis, le, belongyyng to triumphes.



Triumphator, he that tryumpheth or hathe
triumphed for vaynquishyng his enmyes.



Triumphalis uir, he that hath triumphed.



Triumphatus, ta, tum, of the whiche oone
hath tryumphed.



Triumphatus, tus, a triumph. Triumphatio, idem.



Triumpho, are, to triumph, to reioice excedingly



Triumphus, a triumph, whiche is a solemne
pompe or ceremonie, where a prince, a con­
sul or principal capitayn of an armye, hath
had vyctorie of the ennemies of his coun­
tray, & therfore is brought home & recey­
ued with al reioycing & honor that may be
deuised of the people. The order & forme




therof ye may se in Titus Liuius, Apia­
nus, and Iulius Capitolinus. 



Triumuir, one of theym whyche is in anye
office, wherof be thre in like auctorite.



Trium uiralis, le, pertaynynge to an office or
auctoritie, wherin be thre persones.



Triumuiratus, is an offyce in the pubylque
weale, wherin thre men haue equall iuris­
diction togyther. Triumuiratus, the office
or auctoritie of triumuir.



Triuncis, & triuncium, thre ounce weight.



Trixalis, a worme lyke to that which is cal­
lyd Locusta, but he hath no wynges.



Troas, adis, the citie of Troy, and the coun­
trey aboute it callyd the lasse Phrigia.



Trochæus, a foote in meter, whiche is of
two longe syllables, and one shorte.



Trochilos, a lyttell byrde, whiche is callyd
kynge of byrdes.



Trchiscus, a lyttell whele. Alsoo trochisci,
be of phisitians callyd, lyttell balles flatte
at bothe endes, whiche be made of sondry
poulders.



Trochum, a certayne stoole or chaire, whi­
che wyll be tourned aboute.



Trchus, a top, wherwith childern do play.



Troclea, & trochalea, a poley wherin the cord
runneth, wherby any thynge is drawen vp.
it is also the gyn, whiche is callid a crane.



Troezenë, a citie in the parte of Grece, cal­
lyd Peloponesus. It is also a countraye in
the lasse Asia.



Troglotidæ, people in Ethiopia.



Troia, the citie of Troy. also the countrey
wherin Troye stode.



Troianus, na, num, of Troye.



Troianus ludus, was a playe of chylderne
on horsebacke.



Troicus, ca, cum, for troianus.



Troiugena, idem.



Troius, a, um, of Troye.



Tropeus, he that dothe a shrewde tourne,
and runneth away whan he hath done.



Trophæum, was a marke or token of tym­
ber or stone, sette in the place where ene­
myes were vanquyshed or put to flyghte,
sometyme it is taken for vyctorie.



Tropicé, fyguratiuely.



Tropice, ces, a kynde of bulle russhes, the
sede wherof wyll make one to slepe.



Tropicus, ca, cum, fyguratiue.



Tropei uenti, wyndes, whyche doo comme
from the see.



Tropologia, a figuratiue speakynge.



Tropus, a fygure, a maner or facion, an al­
teracion of a worde or sentence from his
propre signification.



Tros, troos aut trois, a Troyane. alsoo the
name of a kynge of Troianes.



Trossulum, a citie in Italye.



Trossulus, in the olde tyme was taken for a
horsman or man of armes. It is also a per­
son delycate, well fedde or fleshy.



Troximi, grapes to be eaten.



Trua, idem quod trulla.



Trucido, dare, to slee cruelly.



Trucidatrix, she that kylleth one.



Truciter, cruelly.



Truculente, idem.



Trucitas, crueltie.



Truculentia, crueltie.



Truculentius, more cruelly.



Truculentissime, moste cruelly.



Truculentitas, idem quod truculentia.



Truculentus, cruelle in countenaunces or
menaces.



Trudo, trusi, trudere, to thruste oute with
vyolence.



Truella, a vessel wherwith water is throwen
into the synke.



Trulla, a treye wherin meate is put whan it is roste
or sodden. It is alsoo a pyssepotte, of
somme it is taken for a great cuppe, brode
and deepe, suche as greatte masers were
wonte to be.



Trulla, a trewell, wherwith masons, tylers,
and pariettours do lay morter.



Trulleum, a bolle.



Truncatio, a cuttynge in pieces.



Truncatus, ta, tum, cut in pieces.



Truncator, & truncatrix, he or she that cut­
teth in pieces.



Trunco, are, to cutte of.



Truncus, a piece of from the resydue
specially of a tree.



Truncus, a, um, cutte of.



Truo, onis, a byrde callyd also Onacratalus,
and is lyke to a swanne.



Trusatilis, le, that whiche maye be tourned
and dryuen about with a mans hande.



Trusatiles mol&ecedil;, a querne, suche as malte is
grounde in, or mustarde is made in, and is
tourned with ones hande.



Trutina, a wayenge balance. sometyme it is
taken for iudgement.



Trutino, nare, to waye or examyne.



Trux, trucis, cruell, horryble.

 

¶ T ANTE V.

TV, tui, tis, tibi, thou, of the, to the.



Tuatim, after thy facyon or custome.



Tuba ductilis, a brason trumpette.



Tuba, a trumpette.



Tuber, beris, a puffe growyng on the ground
lyke a musheron or spunge. It is alsoo ge­
nerally euery swellynge in a mans bodye
or vysage. It is alsoo in a tree lyke to a




greatte knotte.



Tubercula, a lyttell swellynge or pushe.



Tubero, are, to swelle.



Tubicens, cinis, a trumpettour.



Tubulus, a lyttell pype, wherin water run­
neth from a sprynge. it is also a riede.



Tubus, a pype, wherin water is conuayed
to a cundyte.



Tuburcinor, aris, ari, to eate hastily.



Tubus, & tubulus, the pype of a cundyte. it
was also a thynge, wherewith they made
walles hote, before there were chymneis.



Tucetum, a meate made with choppid fleshe
lyke to a gigot or alowe. also a sausage.



Tudertum, a citie in Italye.



Tudicula, a ladell, a pryntynge yron, wher­
with vessell is marked.



Tudiculo, are, to steere, to prynte a marke.



Tuditantes, they that trauayle in busynesse.



Tuditanus, the name of a man, so callyd by­
cause he had a heed as bygge as a betyll.



Tuditis, a mallette.



Tudito, tare, to labour for aduantage.



Tuor, êris, eri, to defende. alsoo Tueor, tue­
ris, to see.



Tugerium, a house of husbandry.



Tuguriolum, a cotage.



Tu ipse, thou thy selfe.



Fest. pom.



Tulit, he broughte.



Tullii, some suppose them to be ryuers, som
flowinges of bloudde out of sondry mem­
bres or ioyntes.
Festus.


Tullianum, a dungeon within the common
pryson of Rome.
Salust.


Tum, than, whan he gothe before cum, it
sygnifieth as welle.



Tumba, a holowe place in the grounde, a
sepulchre.



Tumdemum, fynally.



Tumefacio, feci, to make to swelle.



Tumeo, & tumesco, scere, to swelle.



Tumet, thou thy selfe.



Tumidus, da, dum, swollen.



Tumor, ris, swellynge.



Tumulo, are, to make the grounde holowe,
to burye.



Tumulor, ari, to be buryed.



Tumultuare, in haste, withoute moche ad­
uysemente.



Tumultuarius, a, um, that whyche is doone
without aduysement, or in haste.



Tumultuo, are, to make rumour.



Tumultuose, troublously, or without study.



Tumultuosus, a, um, troublous, or makynge
rumoure.



Tumultus, tus, a rumour.



Tumulus, a lyttell hylle or barowe, somme­
tyme a tombe.



Tunc, thanne.



Tunc temporis, at that tyme.



Tundo, tutudi, tundere, to smyte, to braye or
beate as in a mortar.



Tunetum, a citie in Affrica callid now Tunise.



Tungo, gere, olde writers vsed for Nosco,
nosce, to knowe.



Tunica, a iackette.



Tunica pallia propior, my iackette is nerer
than my gown. a prouerbe applyed where
we wyll signifie that all frendes are not to
be lyke estemed or made of.



Tunico, care, to put on a iackette.



Tunicatus, he that weareth a iackette.



Tuopte ingenio, of thyne owne wytte.



Tuor, eri, to beholde, all be hit that worde
is not in vse.



Turarius, a strete at Rome.



Turbatio, trouble.



Turba, a multitude or assemblye of people.
Quid illec turba est? nunnam ego perij? What
a multitude is yonder? am not I vndoone
for euer? Also it signifieth trouble. Propter
eam hæc turba atque abitio euenit, For hyr
sake is all this trouble or dissension.
Terent. in
Eunucho.Terent. in
Heautont.


Turbasis, sterche.



Turbella, a lyttell trouble.



Turbide, troublousely.



Turbidus, troublous, not clere.



Tuubinatus, ta, tum, rounde and sharpe, lyke
a toppe.



Turbino, nare, to make sharpe at the ende.



Turbistum, is a thynge myxte with the ly­
cour, wherwith woulle is dyed, which ma­
keth the dye to synke into the woull, wher­
by the colour is made perfyte.



Turbo, bare, to trouble, to stere.



Vide com.



Turbo, binis, a boystouse wynde, whyche
dothe blowe downe trees and houses, also
a toppe, wherwith chyldern do play. It is
generally all thynge, whiche is round and
brode aboue, and sharpe benethe.



Turbulentia, trouble.



Turbulentus, troublous, angry, full of con­
tention.



Turdetania, a contray now callid Granado.



Turdetani, & turduli, peple of that contray.



Turdus, a byrde, whiche is delycate in ea­
tynge, a thrustell or blacke byrde, alsoo a
fyshe callyd an hadocke.



Turgeo, êre, & turgesco, scere, to be swollen.



Turgidilus, la, lum, sommewhat swollen or
bollyd oute.



Turgidus, da, dum, swollen.



Turiones, the tendrelles of trees.



Turma, a companye of souldiours, contay­
nynge .xxxii. horsemen.



Turmatim, in order of battayle.



Turpis, pe, fowle, dishoneste, cruelle. Al­
soo greatte.
Vergilius.





Turpiter, shamefully, dishonestly.



Turpissime, most shamefully or dishonestly.



Turpitudo, dishonestie, vyllany, deformitie,
sometyme rebuke.



Turpo, pare, to defyle, dyshonest, or brynge
out of good facyon.



Turreus, rea, reum, lyke a towre.



Turrifico, care, to cense.



Turris, a toure or any thing made like to it.



Turricula, a lyttell towne. also a boxe, oute
of the whiche dyse are throwen.



Turriger, that whiche beareth a towre, as
an Elyphaunt.



Turritus, ta, tum, high, also towred, or fulle
of towres. also the name of the ydol, whi­
che was callyd mother of goddes.



Turtur, turis, a byrde callyd a turtelle. It is
also a fyshe.



Turundæ, pellettes of bread or past, wher­
with capone or other foules ar crammed.
Also a tente whiche surgeons doo put in­
to a wounde.



Tus, turis, frankyncense, it is alsoo wrytten
whith h, as thus.



Tuscia, a countrey in Italye, wherin be the
cities of Florence, Sene, Luca, and Pise.



Tusculum, a lyttelle piece of frankincense.
also a citie by Rome.



Tusculanus, na, num, of that citie.



Tuscus, ca, cum, of the countrey of Tuscia.



Tussedo, dinis, the cowghe.



Tussicula, a lyttell coughe.



Tussilago, ginis, an herbe, whiche puttethe
away the cough. some men suppose it to be
coltes foote.



Tussio, siui, sire, to cough.



Tussis, the coughe.



Tutanus, was supposed to be a god, whiche
had the custody of men.



Tute, thou thy selfe.



Tutela, the wardshyp or custody of infantes.



Tutelarius diuus, the saint whom we do take
for our speciall aduocate to god.



Tutelina, was callydde a Goddesse, vnder
whose custodye was corne, whyche was
in barnes or rykes.



Tutissime, mooste sure.



Tutius, more sure.



Tuto, withoute perylle.



Tuto, tare, to defend. Tutor, taris, tari, idem.



Tutor, a garden, he that hath the warde of
an infante.



Tutorius, a, um, pertaynynge to a gardeyn.



Tutulus, a top of the heare wounden with
a purple lace on the crowne of a womans
heed, whiche was only worne of her that
was wife to the great priest at Rome, cal­
lyd Flamen Dialis. 



Tutus, ta, tum, sure, defended from peryll,
out of daunger.



Tuus, a, um, thyne.

 

¶ T, ANTE Y.

TYber, a gret riuer, which is by Rome



Tyberinus, of Tyber.



Tyberius, the name of an emperoure
of Rome.



Tybur & tyburtum, a citie by Rome.



Tyburtinus, na, num, of the cite of Tyburtum.



Tyburs, burtis, & tyburtis, hoc tyburte, of
Tyber.



Tydeus, the father of Diomedes the noble
capytayne, whome Venus dyd wounde at
the battayle of Troy.



Tyle, callyd also Thule, an ile within one
dayes iourney of the frosen see.



Tylus, a worme, whyche lyeth vnder sto­
nes and tyles, whiche haue lyen longe on
the grounde, and is somewhat blacke and
scalyd, and hath many legges, whych be­
inge touched, closeth hym selfe rounde as
a pease, and is moste commonlye callyd a
cheselyppe.



Tymbra, a great felde in the countreye of
Troy, through which the ryuer of Tym­
ber runneth into the riuer of Scamander.



Tymœtes, one of the sons of king Priamus. 



Tymolus, idem quod Tmolus.



Tympanista, he that playeth on a drumslade
or tymbrell.



Tympanistria, a woman that playeth on a
tymbrell.



Tympanites, a kynde of dropsy, wherin the
bealy swelleth great, a tympany, whereof
wynde is the chiefe occasyon.



Tympanizo, to play on a tymbrell, tabour,
or drumslade.



Tympanotriba, idem quod tympanista.



Tympanum, a tymbrel, a tabour, or drumslade.
Seruius calleth it a couered charyotte or
carte, other doo suppose it to be the strake
of a carte whele. I suppose that it may be
taken for that, whyche is callyd the corse
of a charyotte or horselytter, made with
bayles or bourdes ioyned, whiche is not
moche from the opynyon of Seruius. 



Tympanum, is also a great whele, wherein
men do goo and drawe vp water. It is also
a platter, whiche serueth for meate.



Tymphei, people in Etholia, whyche is in
Grecia.



Tyndarus, the father of the fayre Helene,
for whom Troy was destroyed, and alsoo
of Castor and Pollux. 



Typhon, & Typhos, was a great gyant, the
sonne of Tytan. It is also a greate puys­
saunt wynde.






Typhonæ, be certayne impressyons in the
ayre lyke globes of fyre or dartes.



Typhis, was a carpentar, whiche fyrst dyd
fynde the way to gouerne a shyppe.



Typus, a fygure, an example, or a fourme, a
lykenes or shadowe of a thyng.



Tyrannice, cruelly, tyrannousely.



Tyrannicus, ca, cum, of a tyrant.



Tyrannis, nidis, a cruelle or violente rule or
gouernance for a priuate commoditie, and
not for a publyke weale.



Tyrannicida, he that sleeth a tyrant.



Tyrannicidium, the kyllynge of a tyrant.



Tyrannus, a tyraunt.



Tyranthina, a garment of purple colour.



Tyranthinus color, purple colour.



Tyrius, a, um, of the yle callyd Tyrus, Also
vyolette or purple colour.



Tyro, ronis, a yonge souldiour or manne of
armes. Also he that fyrst entreth into the
experience of any science, art, or exercise.



Tyroniacus, ca, cum, of a younge souldiour
or lerner.



Tyrocinium, the fyrst exercise in any thing.



Tyros, a cite in Phenicia. also an yle, where
the colour of purple was fyrste founden.



Tyrunculus, a veraye younge sowldiour or
yonge lerner.



Tyrotarichus, a sawce made with chese.



Tyrrheni, the people of Thuscane.



Tyrsis, the circuite without the walles of a
town, wherin men may walk for their solace.

 



¶ V ANTE A.

V##sp##A##sp##C##sp##C##sp##A, a cowe. Also
a citie in Numidia.
Salusti. in
Iugurt.


Vaccinus, vaccina, cinum, 
of a cowe.



Vacerra, madde, without
wytte, percloses or rai­
les, made of tymber,
within the whych some­
thynge is inclosyd.



Vacillo, are, to moue inconstantly, to wagge
or waue, to be vnstable, or vnsure.



Vacinium, the flowre, whiche is also callyd
Hyacinthus, and hath longe leaues, a round
roote, a stalke of a spanne longe and more,
hauynge on it many purple floures, wher­
with in some places they do dye pourple.
I doubte whither it be the flowre whiche
is callyd Hartis ease, or Swete Wyllyam.



Vacillatio, a waggynge or wauerynge and
inconstant meuynge.



Vacillantes literæ, letters wrytten crokedly
or out of order.
Ci. Tyro.


Vacillans testis, a wytnesse, whiche incon­
stantly dothe varye in report or deposition.



Vacat, it serueth to no purpose, it is super­
fluous. Also it sygnyfyeth, I am at good
leysure, or withoute busynes. sometyme it
sygnifyeth to care or force. Et cui esse de­
serto vacat, And who careth to be wel spo­
ken or eloquent.



Vacatio, vacation, or tyme whan a man is
out of his common busynes.



Vaco, care, to applye wytte or studye. Vaco
sapienti&ecedil;, I applye my study to wisedome.
Vaco rei diuin&ecedil;, I apply my wytte to god­
des seruyce. Also to be emptye or voyde.
Fac uacent ædes, cause the house to be voi­
ded. Vacat occupatione, He is without oc­
cupation or ydell. Somtime it signifieth to
be superfluous, or vnprofitable.



Vacuæ aures, Date mihi vacuas aures, dum
eloquor, Gyue your eares oonely to me,
whyle I speake, or here nothyng els.



Vacuefacio, cere, to empty or auoyde.



Vacuo, are, idem.



Vacuus, a, um, voyde, emptye, or withoute a
thynge.



Vacuus animus, a mynde withoute care or
solycitude.



Vacuna, was callyd a goddesse, vnto whom
husbandmen after that haruest was cleane
done, dyd sacrifyce, as to the goddesse of
quyetenes after labour.



Vacuitas, emptynesse.



Vadimonium, suretie to appiere at a daye
assygned.



Vadis, & uas, uadis, he that vndertaketh fo
an nother.



Vadium, suretie.



Vado, dere, to go forth. also to fynd suretie.



Vado, dare, to wade.



Vador, aris, ari, to fynde sureties.



Vadimonio obstrictus, let to bayle or main­
pryse, whan a man is bounden to appere at
a day assigned by a iustyce.



Vadimonium obire, to appiere at the daye
assygned.



Vadimonium deserere, to make defaute at
the day, and not to appiere.



Vadimonium missum facere, to discharge the
recognisance or sureties that were bounden.



Vadimonium differre, to gyue a longer day
of apparaunce.



Vadosus, a, um, ful of fordes or shalow places.



Vadum, & vadus, a fourde or shalow place
in a water, where menne and beastes may
goo ouer.



V&ecedil;h, an interiection, wherwith we do curs.



Vafellus, he that is somewhat crafty.



Vafer, fra, frum, subtyll, crafty, slye.



Vaframentum, subtyltie or crafte, slynesse.



Vafre, craftily, fynely in deceyuyng.






Vagabundus, a wanderer aboute.



Vadigabar, an hebrewe worde, whyche in
latyne is Numeri,  one of the fyue bookes
of Moyses. 



Vageni, a people dwellynge amonge the
mountaynes callyd Alpes.



Vagina, a shethe or scaberde.



Vaginula, a lyttell shethe.



Vagio, gire, to crye as a chylde.



Vagitus, tus, the crienge of a chylde.



Plaut. in
milite.



Vago, gare, for vagor, to wander.



Vagor, aris, ari, idem.



Vagus, ga, gum, wandrynge and abydynge
in noo place.



Vah, an interiection, wherwith we wonder
at a thynge, also of reioysynge.



Plautus in
casina.



Vaha, an Interiection of reioysynge or
lawghynge.



Valacchia, a countrey beyonde Hungarie.



Valde, very moche.



Valdius, for validius.



Vale, farewelle.



Valens, puissaunt, hole, stronge.



Valentia, puissance, habilitie.



Valentior, ualentius, more puissant or strong.



Valentissimus, moste puissant, or stronge.



Plautus in
casina.



Valentulus, somewhat stronge.



Valeo, lui, lêre, to be able, to be hoole. Male
ualeo, I fare yll, I am yll at ease.



Valere, to be stronge or puyssant, to may do,
or be of force or power. Neque tam impe­
rita, ut quid amor ualeat, ne sciam, I am not
suche a foole, but I knowe what loue may
do, or of what power loue is.



Valere a morbo, to be recouerid fro sicknes



Valere, also signifieth to be worthe.



Valeat, farewel he, I care not for hym. Imo
hab eat, ualeat, uiuat cum illa, Well lette him
wedde her, I care not for him, moch good
do it hym with her: or let hym haue her,
god be with hym, lette hym make merye
with her. Si deus talis est, ut nulla gratia,
nulla hominum charitate teneatur ualeat, If
god be suche oone, that he hathe neyther
fauour nor loue to mankynde, I care not
for hym. Valeant, qui inter nos dissidium
nolunt, They that wyl haue vs at variance
let them get them hense.
Terent. in
Andria.Cicero.Terent. in
Andria.


Valesco, scere, idem quod ualeo.



Valeria, the sister of Messala, wyfe to a no­
ble man callyd Seruius, who beinge deed,
whan she was asked, why she dyd not ma­
rye agayne, she answered, that she alwaye
lyued by Seruius her husbande.



Valerius, a mans name.



Valesius, for Valerius. 



Valetudinarium, a place where men do lye,
whan they be sycke, as the fermerye in a
monasterye.



Valgium, an instrument to make flores smoth.



Plinius.



Valgulatio, a question in rebuke of one.



Valgustus, a croked staffe.



Fest. Pom.



Valgus, he that hathe his legges or feete
bowed inwarde.



Valetudinarius, a, um, nowe and than sycke,
oftentymes sycke.



Valitudo, & valetudo, dinis, sometyme signi­
fieth sickenes, sometyme helthe.



Valide, valyantly, myghtyly.



Validus, da, dum, valyant, myghty.



Validior, validius, more myghty.



Validissimus, mooste myghty.



Validitas, tatis, myghte.



Vallecula, a lyttell valey.



Vallaris, re, pertaining to a trench in a feld.



Vallaris corona, a garlande gyuen to hym,
whyche fyrste entred into the trenche of
the enemyes campe.



Vallescit, olde writers vsed for perierit, he
is loste or peryshed.



Vallis, a valey or dale.



Vallo, are, to inclose, to fortifye.



Valonia, was callyd the goddesse of valeis.



Vallum, & vallus, a trenche, which is made
in a felde to defende an hooste, within the
whiche pauilions are pytched. Also a post
whervnto vynes are bounde.



Valor, oris, value or price.



Valuæ, dores whiche be shut on two partis.



Valuulus, the codde of a beane or pease, or
other lyke thynge.



Vanans, olde wryters vsed for fallens, de­
ceyuynge.
No. Mar.


Vandalia, a countray in the northe parte of
the worlde.



Vané, vaynely, foolyshely, lyengly.



Vanesco, scere, to vanysshe, to be broughte
vnto noughte.



Vanidicus, a lyer or teller of folyshe tales.



Vaniloquus, idem.



Vaniloquidorus, idem.



Vaniloquentia, vayne speeche.



Plautus in
Persa.



Vanitas, tatis, vanitie, lyghtnes, lefyng, foly.



Vanitudo, vanitie.



Vanno, are, to vanne corne.



Vannus, a vanne.



Vanus, a, um, voyde or empty. Also folisshe
or enuyous, a maker of lyes.



Vapor, oris, & vapos, a vapour, or hot breth
issuynge out of a thynge.



Vaporarium, a place made hotte to sytte in
in the wynter tyme.



Vaporo, rare, to hete or make warm a place



Vappa, wyne, whyche hathe loste his ver­
dure. It is sometyme taken for a manne, in
whome is no wytte or perfyte reason.



Vapo, onis, a beast that fleeth.



Vapularis, he that is beaten.






Vapulo, lare, to be beaten.



Variabilis, le, variable.



Variantia, varietas, & variatio, varietie, dy­
uersitie in thynges.



Varices, & varicæ, variculæ, ar vaynes whi­
che do swelle excedyngly.



Varicosus, he that hath such vaynes swollen.



Varicor, aut varico, to transgresse, to passe
ouer a thynge neglygently.



Varicus, an aduerbe, whyche sygnyfyethe
strydynge.



Varæ manus, croked handes.



Vari, spottes in the face.



Varie, dyuersely.



Variæ, for Panther&ecedil;, bestes of diuers colors.



Variegatus, a, um, painted or garnished with
sondrye colours.



Varius, a fyshe callyd a troute.



Vario, are, to make dyuerse.



Variol&ecedil;, measylles.



Varius, a, um, dyuers, vnlyke, inconstaunt,
varyable.



Varolus, a deuourer. also a pycker.



Varro, ronis, was a noble Romayne, of all
other moste excellently lerned.



Varus, whose legges are croked inwarde.



Varus, a ryuer, whiche dyuydeth that part
of Fraunce, that is callydde Narbonensis,
from  Italy. Also it was the name of a poete



Vas, vadis, a suretie, he that vndertakethe
for an other man. also a pledge.



Vas, vasis, a vesselle.



Vascones, Gascoynes.



Vascularius, a potter.



Vascularius, a goldsmythe, the whishe ma­
keth plaate.



Vasa conclamare, to crye to trusse vp cary­
age and baggage, as whanne an armye
dothe remoue.



Vasculum, & vascillum, a small vessell.



Vastatio, destruction.



Vasterna, a horselytter, or any thynge borne
by two horses.



Vastescant, old writers vsid for inhorrescant.



Vasto, are, to waste or distroye.



Vastus, a, um, great, huge, somtime desolate.



Vastitas, tatis, vastitudo, & vastities, greatte­
nes, also destruction.



Vasum, a vesselle.



Vates, a prophete, a poete.



Vatesco, scere, to be distroyed, to be dryed
vppe, to be forsaken.



Vaticanus collis, a hylle by Rome.



Vaticinor, aris, ari, to prophecie, or tel what
shall happen, to coniecte.



Vaticinium, a prophecye, a coniecture.



Vaticinatio, idem.



Vatidicum, for propheticum, that whiche is
spoken in a prophecye.



Vatius, idem quod valgus, he that hath cro­
ked legges outwarde.



Vatrax, & vatricosus, he that hath ylle leg­
ges from the knee downewarde.

 

¶ V, ANTE B.

VBer, & huber, a womannes breaste.
Vide Huber.



Vbi, where, in what place. somtyme
whan, after. Vbiloci, idem.



Vbique gentium, in all countrayes.



Vbique, in all places, euery where, in all.



Vbique loci, in euery place.



Vbilibet, where ye wylle.



Vbicunque, in euery place. Vbicubi, idem.

 

¶ V ANTE D.


Vdus, da, dum, moyste.



Vuidus, da, dum, moyste inwarde.

 

¶ V ANTE E.

VE, idem quod Væh, Alsoo it is putte
for uel, or que.



Vecors, dis, madde.



Vecordia, madnesse.



Vectabulum, wherin any thynge is caryed.



Vecticularia uita, to haue moche to day, and
nothynge to morowe, sodaynly ryche, and
as sodaynely poore.



Vectigal, a tribute, a pencion, a rent, a yere­
ly reuenewe.



Vectigalis, le, he that payeth trybute, pen­
cyon, or rente.



Vectis, a barre. also a leauer, wherwith thin­
ges be lyfte, or borne by men.



Vecto, are, to carye. Vectito, idem.



Vectatio, caryage.



Vector, toris, he that is caryed, sometyme
he that caryeth.



Vectorius, a, um, apte to carye.



Vectura, caryage, also the hyre or moneye
gyuen for caryage.



Vegeo, gere, to be in helthe.



Veget, for uegetat.



Vegetius, a noble man that wrate of marci­
all doctryne.



Vegeto, uegetare, to recreate, to quycken,
to conserue.



Vegetus, ta, tum, hole, stronge in helth, quick.



Vegrandis, lyttell.



Vehea, for via.



Vediouis, & veiouis, was callid a god which
had no power to do good, but onely harme.



Veheare, olde wryters vsed for vehere.



Vehemens, tis, vehemente, greate, vrgente,
fyers, sharpe.



Vehementia, vehemency, myght.






Vehementer, vehemently, sharply, mightily.



Vehementior, tius, more vehement or sharp.



Vehementissimus, ma, mum, mooste vehe­
mente or sharpe.



Vehes, a carte or wayne.



Vehia, in the old Tuscane tonge was a cart.



Vehiatura, for vectura, caryage.



Vehicularius, a carter.



Vehicularis equus, a cartehorse.



Vehiculum, a generall name to all th ynges,
whyche serueth for caryage.



Veho, uexi, uehere, to carye.



Veios, a cytie in Hetruria.



Veientes, people, with whom the Romayns
had longe t yme warres.



Veientanus, na, num, of the citie of Veios.



Veij, the people of Veios.



Veiouis, uide ante Vediouis.



Vel, or, sommetyme also, chiefely, namely,
at the leste.



Velabrum, a place in Rome. It may be also
callyd a tent, whiche craftes men do sette
vp, where they haue noo howse s, to be in
stede of their shoppes.



Velamen, minis, a couerynge.



Velaria, clothes, wherwith tentis ar made.
also the same tentes.



Velatura, a frayte.



Velatus, ta, tum, apparayled.



Veles, velitis, a souldiour that weareth light
harneyse.



Velia, a fenne in Italy, in the countreye of
Calabria.



Velifico, care, to sayle.



Velina, a strete in Rome, by the hyll callyd
Mons Palatinus.



Velis equisque, by see and by lande.



Velitaris pugna, battayle done by them that
are lyght harneysed.



Velitatim, by leapes or skyppes.



Velitor, aris, ari, & uelito, uelitare, to stryue,
to brawle.



Velitatio, brawlynge.



Velitræ, plurali numero, a cytie in Italy.



Veliuolus, a, um, that whiche gothe with a
sayle, or is occupied with sayles.



Vella, olde writers vsed for villa.



Vellaturam facere, to lyue by cariage frome
one towne to an nother.



Vellicatim, by pluckes.



Vellico, care, to pynche, somtime to rebuke,
to byte, to rente.



Vello, lere, to plucke vp, or pull a thynge.



Vellus, velleris, a flyse.



Velo, lare, to couer or hyde, to bynde, to
apparayle.



Velocitas, swyftenesse.



Velocior, velocius, swyfter.



Velocissimus, ma, mum, swyftest.



Velocissime, mooste swyftelye.



Velociter, swyftely.



Velox, locis, swyfte.



Velum, a sayle, a curtayne.



Velut, veluti, as, lyke as.



Vena, a vayne.



Venabulum, a huntynge staffe.



Venalitiarius, he that selleth slaues.



Venalis, le, that whiche is sette to sale.



Venalitium, a place where any thing is sold.



Venalitius, he that selleth.



Venaphrum, a citie in Campania.



Venaria, an Ile, wherein be many vaynes
of mettalle.



Venaticus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to huntyng.



Venatorius, a, um, idem.



Venaticus canis, a hounde.



Venator, a hunter.



Venatrix, a woman hunter.



Venatura, idem quod venatio.



Venatus, tus, huntynge. Venatio, idem.



Vendax, acis, he that gladly selleth.



Vendibilis, le, easy or redy to be solde.



Vendicatio, a clayme.



Vendico, care, to vendicate, to clayme.



Venditarius, a, um, redy to be solde.



Venditatio, an auaunt.



Venditio, a saale.



Vendito, tare, to selle often, to auaunt.



Vendo, didi, dere, to selle.



Veneficium, the act and craft of poysoning.



Veneficus, & venefica, a maker of poyson, a
vser of sorcerie.



Venenari&ecedil; mulieres, women that do sel poison



Venenatus, ta, tum, poysoned.



Veneno, nare, to poyson.



Venenosus, a, um, that hath poyson.



Venenum, poyson, it is the general name of
all that dothe alter the nature or colour of
that thinge, wherwith it is myxte.



Veneo, niui, nire, to be solde.



Venerabilis, worthy to be honoured.



Venerabundus, he that dothe wourshyppe
any thynge. Venerandus, idem.



Veneranter, reuerentely.



Veneratus, ta, tum, humblye prayed vnto.
Sometyme reuerende.



Veneror, aris, ari, to honour.



Veneratio, honour, reuerence.



Venereus, a man disposed to lecherie.



Venetiæ, arum, the citie of Venyce.



Veneti, values in Brytayne. Also the peo­
ple of Venyce.



Venetus, ta, tum, of Venyce. Alsoo the co­
lour of lyght blewe or blunkat.



Venia, pardon, forgyuenesse. Tua venia, by
your lycence.



Venibo, auncient wryters vsed for veniam.



Venio, nire, to come, to sprynge.






Venire in mentem, to come to remembrance.



Venit in mentem, it cometh to my mynde.



Venitur ad me, they came to me.



Venila, for vnda, water in a ryuer.



Venor, aris, ari, to hunte, to gette a thynge
craftylye.



Ventanea, thynges that seme to be dange­
rous, and yet therin is no daunger.



Venter, tris, the bealy or panche. sometyme
it is taken for the stomake.



Ventilabrum, a fanne or flabelle, wherewith
wynde is made.



Ventilatio, a fannynge or wynnowynge.



Ventilator a vanner or wynnower of corne.



Ventilo, are, to gather wynde, to vanne or
wynowe corne, to tourne out of one hande
into an nother.



Ventito, tare, to come often.



Ventosus, a, um, wyndy, also lyght.



Ventositas, wyndynesse.



Vento uiuere, to lyue by the wynde. A pro­
uerbe applyed to theym, whiche haue noo
substance to lyue on.



Ventus, wynde.



Ventulus, a lyttell wynde.



Ventus operam dat, the wynde blowethe a
good coole.



Ventus popularis, vayneglorie.



Ventrale, a stomacher.



Ventricosus, a gorbealy.



Ventriculus, the stomacke.



Venum ire, to be solde.



Venundo, dare, to selle.



Venundatio, byenge and sellynge.



Venus, veneris, callyd goddesse of loue, som­
tyme lechery, also carnall appetite, alsoo
beautie, by whiche a man is styred to loue.



Venustas, tatis, beautie, proprely of women.
somtime a dilectable pronunciation or speche



Venuste, proprely, pleasantly, amyably.



Venustulus, a, um, somewhat fayre.



Venustus, ta, tum, fayre, dylectable.



Venusto, are, to ornate or make beautifull.



Veprecula, a lyttell bramble. Vepres, bryars.



Vepretum, a place full of bryers.



Ver, ueris, the spryng of the yere.



Veratrum, an herbe callyd also Helleborus.



Verax, racis, he or she that sayth truthe.



Veracitas, tatis, truthe in speche.



Verba dare, to deceyue.



Verba mortuo dare, to speake to a deed man,
a prouerbe whan a man loseth his labour.



Verbascum, an herbe wherof be. ii. kindes: of
which one is supposed to be Molin or long
wort, the other is supposed to be that whi­
che is callyd primerose, not withstandynge
other menne redynge the description, lette
theym iudge at theyr lybertie.



Verbena, & uerbenaca, an herbe callyd ver­
uyn. sometyme Verbenæ, are all leaues so­
deinly plucked vp, to garnyshe howses or
churches, or to make garlandes.



Verber, a small longe stycke or yarde.



Verberalis, worthy to be beaten.



Verberatio, Verberatus, tus, a beatynge.



Verbereus, ea, eum, worthy to be beaten.



Verbero, rare, to beate, to punyshe.



Verbero, ronis, a persone worthy punyshe­
ment, the reproche of all seruantes.



Verberito, tare, to beate ofte.



Verbigero, rare, for verba facere, to talke.



Verbenarius, was one of the ambassadors sent
fro the Romans vnto their enmies, whiche
ware on his heed a garland of veruyn.



Verbose, an aduerbe, signifienge with many
wordes. Verbositas, moch talking or speking.



Verbis meis salutem dicito, salute him in my
name.



Verbosus, full of wordes.



Verbulum, a lyttell worde.



Verbi causa, as by example. Verbi gratia, idem.



Verbum, a worde, also a sentence comprised
in one worde, a prouerbe.



Vercellæ, was a citie in Liguria, nigh to the
mountayns called Alpes. Vere, truely.



Verecundanter, & verecunditer, shamefastly.



Verecundia, shamefastnesse.



Verecunde, shamefastly.



Verecundor, aris, ari, to be ashamed.



Verecundus, da, dum, shamefaste.



Veredarius, a messanger that rideth by post.



Veredus, a lyght horse, a huntynge nagge,
or swyfte geldynge.



Verenda, places in a man and woman, which
without shame may not be named.



Verendus, da, dum, to be feared or dradde.



Vereor, reris, reri, to feare as the child doth
the father. Timêre, to feare, as the slaue or
boye dothe his mayster.



Vereor dicere, I dare not tell.



Vereor abs te, I am aferde of the, leste thou
wylt doo me dyspleasure.



Vergiliæ, the .vii. sterres, callid also Pleiades



Vergo, uersi, aut uerxi, gere, to declyne or
bowe downe.



Veridicentia, truthe in speakinge a true tale.



Veridicus, ca, um, he or she that telleth truthe.



Verifico, are, to verifie as lawyers do say, to
auerre



Veriloquentia, idem quod ueridicentia.



Veriloquus, & ueriloquax, he that speketh truth.



Verisimile, likely. Verisimiliter, idem.



Verisimilis, le, lyke to be true.



Verisimilitudo, lykelyhode.



Veritanus ager, a felde diuided amonge the
people, so that euery man may haue a porcion.



Veritas, trouth.



Vermiculatim, an aduerbe, sygnyfyenge in
smalle pieces.



Vermiculus, a lyttell worme.






Veriuerbium, a true tale.



Vermiculor, aris, ari, to be fulle of vermyne
or wourmes.



Vermiculata opera, warkes whyche are of
small pieces of dyuers colours, wherin ar
sette out sondrye pyctures, lyke as we see
in spruse tables or counters.



Vermina, pryckinges in the body, that it se­
meth wormes were cutte asonder.



Vermino, nare, to haue wormes.



Verminatio, the dysease of the wourmes,
proprely in cattell.



Verminosus, a, um, full of wormes, or that
wherin wormes are.



Vermis, a worme. Also it is a fishe in the ri­
uer of Ganges, whiche is in length .lx. cu­
bytes, and is blue in coloure, whiche hath
suche strength, that whan oliphantes com
to the water and do drynke, he wylle take
one of them by the nose, and plucke hym
into hym.



Verna, a bondeman or bondewoman, borne
in the house of the lorde, or in his owne
countreye.



Vernaculus, la, lum, al that taketh beginning
in our owne contrey, as Vernacula lingua,
the countrey language, the common speche,
peculyar or propre to countrey or howse.
Vernaculi, be also men of ylle maners and
language, whych vse to flatter or to speake
in rebuke.



Vernacula putatio, cuttynge of vynes in the 
sprynge of the yere.



Vernalis, le, pertaynynge to the sprynge of
the yere. also seruyle.



Vernaliter, lewdely, flatteryngly.



Vernatio, the olde skynne of an adder. It
is sometyme taken for age.



Vernalis, le, seruyle.



Cæcilius.



Vernilitas, flatterye.



Vernilitus, olde wryters vsed for a flatterer.



Verniliter, flatterye.



Verno, are, to sprynge, as herbes done, also
to synge as byrdes done.



Vernula, a dyminutiue of verna.



Vernus, a, um, lusty, freshe, as the spring time.



Vero, truely, verily. somtime it doth affirme
that which foloweth. also but yet.



Vero, is also a ryuer in Byskay.



Vero, are, to saye trythe.



Verona, a citie in Italy.



Verones, people dwellynge nyghe to the
ryuer of Vero.



Veronensis, & Veronius, a man of Verona.



Verpus, pa, pum, that whiche hath no skyn.
It is also the myddell fynger.



Verpi, be alsoo Iewes.



Verra, an altar at Rome, wherat they prayid
that children shulde not be wronge borne.



Verres, a hogge vngelded, a tame bore. as
aper may be called a wylde bore.



Verricula, wode wryters vsed for articulus.



Verriculum, a nette callyd a dragge.



Verrinco, care, to tourne or chaunge a thing
vnto better.



Verrinus, a, um, of a bore.



Verruca, an hyllocke or knappe on a hylle.
also a warte.



Verrucaria herba, warteworte.



Verrucosus, he that hath wartes.



Verrucula, a lyttell warte.



Verrunca, old writers toke for a hye place.



Versatilia, thingis that ar tourned or woun­
den one about the other, as two cordes or
two styckes wounden togyther. also pillers
made of the same facion.



Versatilis, le, that whiche tourneth or maye
be tourned.



Versicolor, oris, chaungeable, or that which
changeth colour. also of sondry colours.



Versicolorius, a, um, any thyng tourned out
of his naturall colour. also that whiche is
of dyuers colours mixt togither.



Versiculus, a lyttell verse.



Versipellis, a crafty person that wyll tourne
often as he lysteth.



Verso, are, to tourne.



Versoria, the needell in a shyppe, to knowe
the costes. Versor, aris, ari, to be occupied
in a thynge or matter.



Versura, a tournynge. it is also whan a man
boroweth of oone to pay his dettes to an
other. and to borow in suche wyse is Ver­
suram facere.



Versuram soluere, is to chaunge creditours,
as to borowe of one man to pay an other.



Versus, sa, sum, tourned.



Versus, us, a verse. sometyme an order. also
a songe. Versus, towarde.



Versute, craftyly.



Versutus, mutable, ofte tournynge, wylye,
experte.



Versutia, wylynesse.



Versutiloquus, a crafty speaker.



Vertagus, a hounde whyche wylle hunte
by hym selfe.



Vertat tibi bene, God gyue the therof good
lucke. Di bene uertant, I pray god tourne
it to good.



Vertebræ, places in the bodye, where the
boones doo not meete: but are knytte to­
gyther in suche wyse with synewes, that
they may tourne the more lyghtly.



Vertere terga, to rounne awaye, or flye in
battayle.



Vertere solum, to goo and dwelle oute of a
mans propre countrey.



Vertere, for Versuram facere.






Vertere stultiti&ecedil;, to repute foly in a thyng.



Plautus in
Epidie.



Vertere uitio, to put the blame in one. Quis
erit, uitio qui id non uertat tibi? Who is it,
that wyll not put the blame in the?



Vertere, to translate or interprete oute of
one tunge into an nother.



Vertex, & vortex, ticis, a whyrlewynde. also
a whyrlepoole in a water. also the crowne
or toppe of the heed. also the toppe of e­
uery thynge.



Vertibulum, idem quod vertebra.



Vertibula, a fyshe callyd also vrtica.



Verticulum, a wherue, whyche is a rounde
thyng set on a spyndel, to cause it to turne.



Verticillum, a lyttell wherue.



Vertigo, ginis, a sicknes of the heed, wher­
in it semeth to a man, that he seeth thyn­
ges tournynge.



Vertigus, a whyrlynge aboute.



Vertius, a man of great strength.



Verto, ti, tere, to tourne, to drawe, to tran­
slate, to consyder.



Vertunalia, the solemnite of Vertunus, whi­
che was kept in Octobre.



Vertunus, was callyd the god of bieng and
selling. it is somtime taken for the yere.



Veru, a spytte or broche.



Veruetius, a, um, lyke a shepe.



Veruecinus, a, um, of a wether.



Festus.



Veruat, for circundat, it compasseth.



Verutum, a castynge darte with a strynge.



Veruactum, the sommer tylthe.



Veruculum, an instrument of goldesmithes
lyke a lyttell broche.



Veruex, uecis, a wether shepe.



Verus, ra, rum, true, substanciall, vncorrup­
ted, good, iuste, profytable.



Veritas, tatis, truthe.



Verum, an aduerbe, signifieth truly. also but.



Verumtamen, yet not withstandynge.



Vesanus, a, um, cruell, furious, woode.



Vesania, furye, woodnesse.



Vescor, sceris, vesci, to eate, to vse. Actius
vsed it to see.



Vescus, ca, cum, euery thynge that may be
eaten, also lyttell or leane.



Vesca, browse, leaues, wheron beastes doo
feede in wynter.



Vesculus, a, um, very leane.



Vesicaria, an herbe, whiche potycaries do
calle Alkakengi.



Vesica, a bladder.



Vesuuius, & veseuus, a mountayn by Naples
which sendeth out continually smoke & fire.



Vesp&ecedil;, they whiche do burye deed corsis.



Vespa, a waspe.



Vesper, the euenynge, or euentyde, also the
euenynge sterre.



Vesper, ra, rum, of the euenynge.



Vesperi, an aduerbe, signifienge late, at the
ende of the daye.



Vespero, rare, to be euenynge.



Vesperasco, scere, idem.



Vesperna, old wryters vsed for vœna, supper.



Vespertilio, onis, a reremous or backe.



Vespertinus, na, num, that whyche is doone
in the euenynge.



Vesperugo, ginis, idem quod uesper.



Vespices, places thycke of bushes.



Vespillo, onis, he that burieth menne in the
nyghte tyme.



Vesta, the doughter of Saturnus, whiche
for her chastitie was honoured for a god­
desse. sometyme it is taken for pure fyre.



Vestales, were virgyns, whyche mynistred
to Vesta. 



Vester, tra, trum, your.



Vestiarium, a warderobe, wherein garmen­
tes are layde.



Vestiarius, the yoman of the robes, or he that
kepeth the warderobe.



Vestibulum, a voide place without the dore,
where men do tary whyles they do knock
and vntyll the doore be opened.



Vesticeps, cipis, a yonge man, which begin­
neth to haue a berde.



Vestigabundus, he that seeketh moche.



Vestigator, he that seeketh moche.



Vestigator, he that seketh for a thinge.



Vestigium, the prynt of a mans fo ote in the
ground. It is taken also for a sygne or to­
ken of any thynge that is doone.



Vestigo, gare, to seke.



Vide com.



Vestimenta, a vesture or garment.



Vestini, people in Italye.



Vestio, iui, ire, to apparel, to adorne, to keuer



Vestiplica, a mayden whiche layeth vp her
maystresse garmentes.



Vestis, a vesture, a garment, sometyme it is
put for a bearde.



Vestispicus, & vestispica, he or she which ke­
peth their maister or maistres apparayle.



Vestissimus, a, um, best apparailed, best clad.



Vestitus, ta, tum, apparayled.



Vestitus, tus, apparayle.



Vestrapte, & uestropte, of your owne.



Vestras, stratis, yours.



Vesulus, a mountayne in Liguria by Alpes,
at the rote wherof the riuer callyd Padus
or Po, spryngeth out.



Veter, olde. Veterior, ueterius, elder.
 


Veterrimus, ma, mum, eldest.



Veteramentarius, a coblar or botcher.



Veteraneus, a, um, auncient.



Veteranus, sometyme signifyeth olde. Also
he that had serued a hole yere in teh citie.
sometyme he that hath longe continued in
warres, an olde soudiour.



Veterator, oris, ueteratrix, a crafty begyler.






Veteres, men of olde tyme passed.



Veterina, beastes whiche do serue for bur­
deyne, as horses, mulettes, and asses.



Ve, vide in Veh. Ve uobis, oute vppon you,
sorowe come to you.



Veterinarius, he that letteth to hyre horses
or mules.



Veterinarius medicus, a horsleche, or ferror



Veterinarius, a, um, belonging to horsis & mules



Veternus, slepe without waking, also slouth
or sluggyshenes. also to moche slepe.



Veternosus, he that slepeth to moch, slug­
gish, slouthful. also he that hath the dropsy.
Cato.


Veteresco, & veterasco, scere, to be olde.



Vetero, rare, to make olde.



Veto, tare, Veto, tere, to prohibite.



Vetulonia, a place in Tuscia.



Vetulus, la, lum, a diminutiue of vetus.



Vetus, teris, olde, auncient.



Vetustas, age. Vetuste, agedly.



Vetustesco, scere, to be olde, to be the wars
for age. Veteresco, scere, to be the better
for age.



Vetustus, ta, tum, olde.



Festus.



Veuina, a longe darte.



Vexillarrius, & vexillifer, the baner bearer.



Vexillum, a baner.



Vexo, are, to vexe or trouble.



Vexabundus, he that troubleth or vexith o­
ther.



Vexatio, vexation.



Vexator, & vexatrix, he or she that vexethe.
other.

 

¶ V ANTE I.

VIa, a waye, a, iourneye, the maner, or
meane, custome.



Viam munire, to make or repair a way



Viatica cœna, a banket gyuen to a men atte
his departynge.



Viaticor, aris, ari, to prepare vytayles ne­
cessarie for iourneye.



Viaticum, necessaries for iourney, be it in vi­
taile or other thing, preparation for iorney.



Viator, toris, a trauayler by the way, a way­
farynge man, whiche warneth men to as­
semble to counsayle, and serueth offycers,
to calle men vnto them.



Viatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to the way.



Viatoria vasa, vessels whiche doo serue for
iourneye.



Vibex, bicis, a spotte remayninge in the skin
after beatynge.



Vibratio, a brandyshynge.



Vibriss&ecedil;, heares in a mans nose.



Vibrisso, are, to quauer in syngynge.



Vibro, brare, to shake a thynge, or to make
a thynge to shake or quauer.



Viburnum, the sprynge whyche commethe
out of the roote of a tree.



Vicani, men of the vyllage.



Vicarius, a, um, that whiche is in the steede 
or place of an other. Also the seruaunte of
hym, whiche is a seruant.



Vicatim, in vyllage by vyllage.



Vicem, vice, plurali, uices, uicibus, time & times.
per multas uices, multis uicibus, many tymes.
Vnica uice, ones. Somtyme it sygnyfyeth
paynes. Also perylle. sommetyme place or
stede, Fungar uice cotis, I wyl vse it in the
stede of a whetstone.
Horatius.Vergilius.Horatius.


Vicenarius, a, um, the twentieth.



Vicenus, a, um, twenty.



Vicia, a certayne grayne, whiche lyke to a
vyne, runneth vpon the stalkes of herbes.
whiche do growe hye.



Viciarium, the sowynge of suche grayne.



Vicies, twenty tymes.



Vicinia, the neyghbourheed, whiche cor­
ruptely we calle vicinetum.



Vicinitas, tatis, nyghnesse. somtime the mul­
titude of neyghbours.



Vicinus, a neyghbour.



Vicissatim, by tymes, by tournes.



Vicissim, by tourne, nowe one, nowe an no­
ther, sometyme it sygnifyeth, on the other
parte. sometyme semblably.



Vicissitas, idem quod vicissitudo.



Vicissitudo, dinis, the tourne, nowe oone,
nowe an nother.



Victima, the beast that is kylled in sacrifice.



Victimarius, the mynister, whiche serueth
to the sacrifice. Also he whyche boughte
the sacrifice to selle it.



Victito, tare, to lyue by eating a certain meat.



Victor, toris, he that vanquysheth.



Victoria, vyctorie.



Victoriatus, a certayne coyne, wherin was
the image of vyctorie.



Victoriosus, accustomed to haue vyctorye.



Victricus, a fader in law, my moders husband



Victrix, plurali victricia, pertaining to victory.



Victrix, a woman that vanquysheth.



Victurus, the participle of the future tense,
as well of Viuo, as of Vinco.



Victus, tus, & victuis, sustinance or fedynge.
Also a kynde or fourme of lyuynge.



Victus, ta, tum, vanquyshed.



Vicus, a strete in a towne. also a vyllage.



Viculus, a lyttell strete or vyllage.



Videlicet, as who sayth. sometyme it signy­
fieth surely.



Video, di, dêre, to see. It is sometyme ap­
plyed to other sences, as, Vide qualis est so­
nus, Here what a noise it is. Vide quid oleat,
Smell wherof it sauoureth. Vide quem durum
sit, Fele howe harde it is. Also it signyfieth
to take hede or consider, to prouide. Vide tibi




prouide for thy selfe. Tu uideris, loke therto
wel, take good hede, for I care not for it.



Videro, I wyll prouyde.



Videor, I remember me well.



Videre uideor, me thynketh I see.



Videtur mihi, me semeth.



Viden, for Vides ne? doest thou not see?



Vidua, a wydowe.



Viduertas, calamytie or myserye.



Viduitas, widowhed, lack of thinges necessary



Vidulum, wherin any thing is kepte.



Viduo, duare, to dyuide or take awaye, to
leaue alone.



Viduus, a, um, dyuyded, alone.



Vienna, a cite in Austria, an other in Dolpheni



Vieo, êre, to bende, to bynde.



Vietor, toris, a couper, whiche with how­
pes byndeth vessels.



Vietus, ta, tum, softe, weake, bendynge.



Vietus, a howpe, or strake of a carte.



Vigeo, gui, gêre, to lyue, to be stronge, to
thryue in growynge.



Vigesimæ, as decimæ. Vigesimarium aurum, idem.



Vigesimus, ma, mum, the twentieth.



Liuius.



Vigil, lis, watchful, vigilant. also a watchman.



Vigilans, tis, vigilant, watchefull, dylygent,
circumspecte.



Vigilanter, watchefully, dylygently, vygi­
lantely, cyrcumspectly.



Vigilantia, vygilancy, dylygence.



Vigiliæ, watches, aswel by day as by night.
somtyme the men whyche doo watche.



Vigilo, lare, to wake, or watche, to be vigy­
lant, or very dilygente. Also to here dili­
gently. Also to take peyne. Vigilare decet
hominem, qui uult sua tempori conficere
officia, a man muste take payne, that wylle
finyshe his busynes in tyme comuenient.
Vide com.Iuuenalis.Plautus in
Ruden.


Vigisonus, a broke by the citie of Padua.



Viginti, twenty.



Vigor, goris, strength, force.



Vigorosus, a, um, stronge, firme.



Vilis, le, vile, of no value. also good cheape,
of lyttell price.



Vileo, & vilesco, scere, to be vyle, or of small
or none estimation or price.



Vilitas, good chepe, contrary to derthe.



Viliter, an aduerbe, sygnyfienge cheape.



Vilito, tare, to make cheape.



Villa, a manour out of a citie or towne. al­
so a vyllage.



Villanus, a man of the vyllage.



Villaris, re, & Villaticus, ca, cum, pertayning
to the vyllage.



Villico, & villicor, aris, ari, to be occupied a­
bout husbandry, to haue the rule of husbandry



Villicatio, occupation about husbandry. also
the rule of husbandry vnder the owner.



Villicus, & villico, a baylyffe of husbandry.



Villula, a lyttell vyllage.



Villum, smalle wyne.



Villus, heare.



Vimen, minis, roddes, whiche wyll wynde
lyghtly, wherof baskettes are made.



Vimineus, a, um, wyckers, wyndynge rod­
des, or osyars.



Viminalis, le, apte to wynde.



Viminalis collis, a lyttell hylle at Rome.



Vinacea, kernels of grapes.



Vinaceus, a, um, of wyne.



Vinago, ginis, a kynde of stockedoues.



Vinale, the vyntage.



Vinarius, a vyntener.



Vinarius, a, um, pertaynynge to wyne.



Vinca, an herbe, whiche wyndeth about e­
uery thynge. some do call it Perwynke.



Vincia, olde wryters vsed for Continens.



Vincibilis, le, easy to be vanquyshed.



Vincio, vinxi, vincere, to bynde.



Vide com.



Vinco, vinxi, cere, to vanquyshe.



Vide com.


 


Vinctus, ta, tum, bounden. sometyme it sig­
nifyeth a prysoner.



Vinculum, & uinclum, a bonde. also vincula
pluraliter, is taken for a pryson.



Vindelicia, a countray in Germany, wherin
is the citie of Augusta, callyd Ausburgh.



Vindemia, the tyme of gatherynge grapes
to make wyne. it sommetyme sygnyfyeth
the gatheringe of other thinges, as hony
and syder.



Vindemialis, le, & vindemiatorius, a, um, pertai­
nyng to gatherynge of grapes or fruite.



Vindemiatio, a gatherynge of grapes, to
make wyne, also a makynge of hony.



Vindemiator, toris, he that doth gather gra­
pes to make wyne.



Vin demio, are, to gather grapes or ripe frute



Salust. in
Catal.



Vindex rerum capitalium, the mynister of exe­
cution, commonly callyd the hangeman.



Vindex, dicis, a reuenger of wronges. some­
tyme it sygnygyeth a proctour or attour­
ney, whyche prosecuteth an nother mans
cause. Also he that delyuereth hym selfe
out of bondage.



Vindici&ecedil;, assercyon of lybertie or fredome.
Vindicias secundum libertatem dare, to put
in pledges to proue hym or hir to be free
and nat bonde.
Ti. Liuius
lib.3.


Vindico, care, to reuenge, to defende or de­
lyuer a man from iniurie or damage.



Vindicta, vengeance. sometyme lybe rtie.



Vinditia, a rodde, whyche the lorde dely­
uered to his bondeman, whan he infraun­
chysed hym.



Vinea, a vyneyarde. It is also an ordynance
of warre made of tymber and hardelles,
vnder the whiche men went surely to the
walles of a towne that was besieged.






Vinealis, le, apt or pertaining to a vineyard.



Vinearius, a, um, idem.



Vineaticus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to vynes.



Vineolus, he that behaueth hym selfe wan­
tonly or tenderly.



Vinetum, a vyneyarde.



Vinitor, he that ordreth the vyneyarde.



Vinolentus, drunke with wyne.



Vinosus, he that loueth to drynke wyne.



Vinosus, a, um, full of wyne.



Vinulus, a, um, delycate.



Vinum, wyne.



Vio, are, to go a iourneye.



Viola, a vyolette.



Violabilis, le, whiche is apte to be violated.



Violaceus, a, um, of violette colour.



Violaris, are, idem.



Violarius, he that dyeth vyolette colour.



Violenter, violentelye, parforce, maugre
his hedde.



Violentia, vyolence.



Violentior, tius, more vyolente.



Violentissimus, ma, mum, moste vyolent.



Violentus, ta, tum, vyolent, forcible.



Violo, lare, to vyolate, to corrupt, to defile.



Vipera, a kynde of adders.



Viperinus, na, num, of an adder.



Vipiones, yonge cranes.



Vir, uiri, a man, it is also a husbande, it signi­
fieth also one of a good courage.



Virago, a woman hauynge the courage of
a manne.



No. Mar.



Viratium, of moche strength.



Virbius, twyse a man, whiche name was gi­
uen to Hippolitus, the sonne of Theseus
after that Aesculapius had broughte hym
eftesoones to lyfe.



Vireo, es, rere, & viresco, scere, to be greene,
to be more lusty.



Viretum, a grene place.



Viretus, ta, tum, greene.



Virga, a rodde or yarde.



Plautus.



Virgator, he that beateth with roddes.



Virgeus, a, um, of roddes.



Virginalis, le, & virginarius, a, um, of a virgin



Virgindemia, a gatherynge of roddes.



Virgineus, a, um, idem quod virginalis.



Virgo, virginis, a vyrgyn or mayden.



Virginitas, vyrginitie.



Virgulata, seu virgata vestis, a ray gowne.



Virgula, a lyttell rodde or yarde.



Virgultum, a place full of yonge roddes.



Virguncula, a yonge mayden.



Viriatus, a stronge manne.



Viriculæ, lyttell strength.



Viriculum, a wymble or percer.



Viridans, that whiche is grene.



Viridarium, a grene place inclosed, wherin
beastes or fowles are kepte.



Viridia, a groue or place sette with greene
trees for pleasure.



Viridicatus, ta, tum, made grene.



Viridis, de, grene.



Virido, dare, to make grene.



Virilia, the membres of a man.



Virilis, le, of a man, also manlyke or valiant.



Virilis toga, was a garment of the Romans
whiche they beganne to weare at the age
of .xvi. yeres.



Virilitas, manlynesse.



Viriliter, manly.



Viripotens, tis, a mayden maryageable.



Viritaneus ager, a fielde dyuyded amonge
the people.



Viritim, of euery man, also oone man with
an nother, man by man.



Viriditas, & vitor, roris, grenenesse.



Viro, rare, to fortifye.



Virosa mulier, a womanne desyrous of the
companye of manne.



Virosus, a, um, of ylle sauour or taste, some­
tyme stronge.



Virtus, tutis, vertue, strengthe, sommetyme
power, also helpe, merite or deserte.



Virulentus, venymouse.



Virus, venyme, greuousenes of sauoure or
taste, lyghtnesse in colour. sometyme the
humour of generation proprely in beastis.
Also naturall vertue or power.



Vis, power, strengthe, possibilitie, aboun­
dance, vyolence, multitude.
Liuius.


Viscatus, ta, tum, dressed with byrd lyme. also
lymed or taken with byrde lyme.



Viscera plurali, bowelles.



Visceratio, a dystrybution of fleshe.



Visceratim, by the bowelles.



Visceror, rari, to distribute meate, whiche is
boyled or rosted.



Viscidum, clammy, or cleuing to the fingers.



Viscosus, clammy or cleauynge.



Viscum, Myscelden or Myscelto, whyche
communely groweth on crabbe trees, and
wyld peare trees.



Viscus, sci, byrde lyme.



Viscus, sceris, all that is betwene the bones
and the fleshe.



Visenda, thynges worthy to be sene.



Visibilis, le, that whiche may be sene.



Visitatio, vysitynge or visitation.



Visito, tare, to vysite, to see often.



Viso, sere, to go to see. also to see.



Visum, a dreame. Visum, for videre, to see.



Visiones, vysyons, fantasyes.



Visus, us, syght. Visa, dreames.



Vita, lyfe. Vita functus, deade.



Vitabundus, he that escheweth a thynge.



Vitalis, le, that lyueth.



Vitellus, the yolke of an egge.






Vitex, a kynde of wythy called osyar.



Vitiarium, a place, wherin yong vines ar set.



Vitiata mulier, a woman rauished or deflored.



Viticula, a lyttell vyne.



Viticulus, the shote of a vyne.



Vitigineus, a, um, of a vyne.



Vitilia, thynges whiche maye be wounden
lyke an osyar.



Vitiligator, toris, a detracter or backebiter.



Vitiligo, ginis, a foulenesse of all the bodye,
hauynge spottes of sondry colours.



Vitiligo, are, to backebyte or detracte a man
or womanne.



Vitio, are, to corrupte or viciate, to defyle,
to distroye, to defourme.



Vitiositas, vyce, corruption, an inconstaunte
affection.



Vitio dare, to blame or reproue.



Vitio uertere, to dysprayse, to lacke.



Vitiosi magistratus, offycers not ryght con­
stitute or made.



Vitiosus, sa, sum, vitious, or full of errours.



Vitis, a vyne. Also a thynge, whyche a ca­
pytayne in warres dyd beare in his hand.



Vitis alba, an herbe, whiche runneth vp in
hedges, and wyndeth aboute the settes,
hauing a leafe like a vine leaf, but rougher
and a redde berye. It is callyd also Brio­
nia, and in englyshe



Vitis nigra, a lyke wiede, whiche commonly
groweth amonge herbes, & byndeth them
togither, hauinge a leafe in facyon lyke to
yuy, and lytle tendrynges with knappes,
and is called of some men [missing text]



Vitisator, he that selleth vynes.



Vitisco, scere, to sprynge vnto a vyne.



Vitium, vyce, contrarye to vertue. Alsoo a
faut or errour. also sycknes, an impediment.



Vitium offerre virgini, to defloure a virgine.



Terent. in
Hecyra.



Vito, tare, to eschewe, or beware.



Vitreus, a, um, of glasse.



Vitrinus, na, num, idem.



Vitrearius, a glassemaker, or a glasyer.



Vitreolum, an herbe growynge on walles,
wherwith vesselle beinge scoured, becom­
meth wonderfull bryght.



Vitricus, a father in lawe, or steppefather.



Vitriolum, a dyminutiue of vitrum.



Vitrosus, a, um, which hath plentie of glasse.



Vitrum, glasse.



Vitta, a syllette or heedbande.



Vitula, an heffar, or yonge cowe.



Vitulari, to reioyce.



Vitulatio, reioycynge.



Vitulinus, a, um, of a calfe.



Vitulinæ carnes, veale.



Vitulus, a calfe, not only of a cowe, but also
of an olyphant, and of great fysshes. It is
also a fyshe callyd a seale.



Vituperium, a rebuke.



Vitupero, rare, to rebuke.



Vituperatio, a rebuke gyuen.



Vituperator, he that rebuketh or blamethe
an nother.



Vituperones, rebukers.



Viuacitas, & uiuatia, amonge olde wryters
bodyly strength.



Viuacissimus, most liuely or strong of nature.



Viuaciter, strongely.



Viuarium, a place, where wylde beastes,
byrdes, or fyshes be kepte. It may be cal­
lyd as welle a ponde, as a parke, a coun­
nyngar, a walke for byrdes.



Viuatior, more lyuely.



Viuatus, & viuidus, full of lyfe or naturalle
strengthe.



Viuax, uacis, lyuely, stronge of nature.



Viuere diem, to lyue without any prouysion
or stoore.



Viuerra, a ferette.



Viuidus, da, dum, lyuely, quycke.



Viuior, & viuissimus, olde wryters vsed for
more lyuynge or moste lyuynge.



Viuiradix, icis, a yong vine set with the rote.



Viuitur. Quid agitur? T. Uiuitur, How is the
mattier? T. I lyue as well as I may.



Viuo, uixi, viuere, to liue, to haue a mery life.



Viuus, ua, uum, that whyche lyuethe, alsoo
quyck, natural, strong, vehement, or great.



Vix, vnethe, scantly, hardily. Vix dum, idem.



Vix tandem, in conclusyon.



Vix, for Non. Vix Priamus tanti, totaque Troia
fuit, Kynge Priamus and all Troye was
not so moche worthe.
Ouidius e­
pistola Pe­
nelopes.


Vix, with moche a doo. si idem istuc imita­
mur, ita tamen uix viuimus, Althoughe we
do the lyke, yet with moche a do we lyue.

 

¶ V, ANTE L.

VLcero, rare, to make a scabbe. also to
exasperate or make grefe.



Vlcerari&ecedil; herbæ, herbes that make
blysters.



Vlciscor, sceris, sci, to auenge.



Vlcus, ceris, a hydde myschiefe. It is alsoo
corrupt matter gathered within the skyn,
and couered with a scabbe.



Vlex, an herbe lyke to rosemarie, which dra­
weth to hym golde.



Vliginosus, sa, sum, soked with longe abode
of water.



Vligo, ginis, moysture of the erthe alwaye
remaynynge.



Vlius, a name of Apollo. 



Vllo, old writers vsed for vltus fuero, I shal




be reuenged.



Vllus, la, lum, any.



Vlmus, a tree callyd an elme.



Vlmeus, mea, eum, of elme.



Vlmarium, a groue of elmes.



Vlna, a fathom, also an elle.



Vlpicum, great garlyke.



Vls, of whome commeth vltra.



Vlterior, ulterius, further, more beyonde.



Plautus in
milite.



Vltima platea, at the ende of the strete.



Vltimis ædibus, on the back side of the hous



Terent. in
Heautont.



Vltimus, ma, mum, laste. sometyme it signi­
fieth fyrste.
Ver.æne.8


Vltio, vengeance.



Vltor, & vltrix, he or she that takith vengeance



Terentius



Vltra, beyonde, more, moreouer, sometyme
shrewdely or frowardely.



Vltro, willingly, without desyre or cohercion



Vltro citroque, hyther and thyther.



Vltroneus, a, um, wyllyng, with a fre wylle.



Vlubræ, a citie in Italye.



Vlula, a shryche oule.



Vlulatus, a barkyng.



Vlulo, lare, to howle as a dogge or a wolfe.



Vlysbona, a cite in Portugal, callid Lushbon



Vlysses, the moste eloquent and wise prince
of the Grekes, which came against Troy

 

¶ V ANTE M.

VMbella, a lyttel shadow. also a skrine
to kepe away the light of the sonne.



Vmber, of the countrey of Umbria.



Vmbilicatim, in the facyon of a nauyll.



Vmbilicatus, ta, tum, made like a nauill.



Vmbilicus, the myddes of euery thyng. al­
so the nauyll. also a lyttelle cerkle made in
the gronnde, to knowe whyche waye the
wynde standeth. Also it is a lyttell smothe
stone, or pyppell stone, a bose, suche as is
sette on the backe of a boke. Ad umbilicum
adducere, to brynge to a poynt.



Vmbo, bonis, the bose of a buckler or shield



Vmbra, a shadowe. It was also that, whi­
che was callid a gost of a man being deed,
whiche not only paynims but also christen
men supposed dyd appere visibly vnto men.



Vmbraculum, a place, where men moughte
be out of the sonne, or that whiche made
sha dowe.



Vmbraticus, ca, cum, lyke a shadowe.



Vmbraticus homo, a man lyuynge at ease,
and out of all labour or busynesse.



Vmbraticæ artes, craftes exercysed in the
shadow, as the more part of handy craftes.



Vmbratilis, le, that which is done in the sha­
dowe, or as it were with ease, and without
any sweate or payne.



Vmbratiles res, tryflyng thynges or trifles.



Vmbratilis pugna, exercyses of feates of
warre out of batayle as in a house.



Vmbria, a parte of Italy.



Vmbrifer, fera, ferum, makynge shadowe, as
a greatte wodde dothe.



Vmbrina, & vmbra, a fysshe, whiche by the
description of Paulus Iouius, semeth to
me to be an halybut, for the greattenesse
and delycacie of the heed, and similitude
to a sturgion.



Vmbro, brare, to shadowe.



Vmbrosus, a, um, hauynge moche shadowe.



Vmbro, bronis, a ryuer in Lumbardye, cal­
lyd also Lamber.

 

¶ V ANTE N.

VNa, togyther. Vna cum Cicerone, to­
gyther with Cicero. 



Vnanims, & vnanimus, of one mynde
and wylle. Vnanimus consensus, one hole
consente.



Vnanimitas, tatis, concorde.



Vncia, an ounce. also an ynche.



Vnciarius, a, um, of an ounce.



Vnciatim, ynche by ynche.



Vncinatus, a, um, hoked or croked.



Vncinus, a litle club or bat crokid at the end.



Vnciola, an ynche.



Vnctio, an anoyntynge.



Vnctuarium, a place high to a stoufe or hote
howse, where menne be annoynted after
that they haue swette.



Vnctum, the leafe of a hogge, whyche is
the fatte that lyeth by the backe & the ryb­
bes, whyche husbandes vse to rolle vppe,
and kepe for to make saulues, or els to frie
meate, as fritowes and pancakes.



Vnctura, an annoyntynge.



Vnctus, ta, tum, annoynted or greased.



Vncus, a batte or croked clubbe. Also anye
thynge croked at the ende.



Vncus, a, um, croked.



Vnda, water, proprely a wawe.



Vndabundus, da, dum, makynge greatte or
many wawes.



Vndans, wawyng or mouing like to wawes.



Vndatim, lyke to wawes of the see.



Vndeunde, of what place so euer it be, or from 
whence so euer it commeth.



Vndecunque, idem.



Vnde, from whense, wherto, wherby, wher­
of, wherfore, what to do. Vndegentium, idem.



Vndecim, eleuen.



Vndecimus, ma, mum, the eleuenth.



Vndenus, na, num, idem.



Vndelibet, from whens thou wylte.



Vndeuigesimus, a, um, the one and twenteth.



Vndeuiginti, nynetene, lackynge one of .xx.




the lyke signification is, where Vnde is
ioyned to any grete numbre.



Vndeuis, idem quod vndelibet.



Vndique, on euery syde.



Vndicola, he that dwelleth on the water.



Vndisonus, na, um, that maketh a noyse lyke
to wawes whan they ryse and fall in the
water, or doeth rore as the water doeth at
a great floode.



Vndiuomus, a, um, that whiche casteth wa­
ter out frome hym.



Vnedo, a kynde of wylde frute lyke apples,
which is bitter, & hurteth bothe the heed,
and the stomak.



Vndo, are, to ryse in wawes.



Vndosum mare, a troublouse see, and full of
of wawes.



Vndulata vestis, Chamlet, or a garment
wrought as it were with rynges.



Vndula, a lyttell wawe.



Vnguentum, & vngentum, a swete oynement.
it is vsurped for euery oynement.



Vngues, muskyls.



Vngo, unxi, ungere, to enoynt.



Vnguen, nis, oynement, or any thinge that
is fatty.



Vnguentarius, a maker of swete oynementes.



Vnguentaria, the craft to make oynmentes.



Erasm. in
chilia.



Vngues arrodere, to gnawe on his nayles, a
prouerbe applyed to them, which are in a
study, how they maye alter suche thinges
as they do repent theym of.



Vnguis, a nayle of the fyngars or toes. it is
also a disease which at length couereth all
the eye with flesh in the corner of the eye.



Vnguicula, a lytle soft nayle. A teneris vn­
guiculis, frome his tender youthe or in­
fancye.



Vngula, a houfe of a hors or other beaste.
Omnibus vngulis, with all myght & powar.



Vngulatus, he that hath foule great nayles.



Vngulum, of olde wryters was taken for
a rynge.



Cato.



Vngularius, a great nayle and ragged.



Non. Mar.



Vngustus, a croked staffe, or suche as com­
monly men do cal a croke, wherwith they
drawe to them any thynge.



Vnicalamum frumentum, wheate, whyche
hath but one rede growing out of the rote.



Vnicallis, an herbe whyche hathe but oone
stalke without any braunches.



Vnice, onely.



Vnicolor, oris, of one colour.



Vnicornis, Vnicornius, & vnicornium, a beest
callyd an vnycorne.



Vnicuba, a woman whiche lyeth or compa­
nyeth but with one man.



Vnicus, ca, cum, one alone.



Vnigenitus, one chylde without moo.



Vniiug&ecedil; uine&ecedil;, vines in the whiche vpon the
proppes being sette vp, sondry rayles are
layde on the one syde.



Vnio, iui, ire, to ioyne togyther.



Vnio, onis, concorde, somtyme a perle.



Vnioculus, he that hath but one eye.



Vnipes, pedis, hauynge but one foote.



Vnitas, tatis, vnitie.



Vnitio, a ioynynge togyther.



Vnitus, ta, tum, ioyned togyther in one.



Vniuersalis, le, vnyuersall.



Vniuersipotens, he that hath power ouer al.



Vniuersipotentia, power ouer all.



Vniuersitas, vniuersitie or generaltie.



Vniuersus, a, um, vnyuersall, sometyme it si­
gnifieth all, or the hole.



Vniuira, a woman hauynge but one husband.



Vniuocum, that whiche sygnifyeth but one
thynge.



Vniuoce, of the same sygnifycation.



Vnose, olde writers vsed for simul, togither



Vnni, Hungariens.



Vnquem, any tyme.



Vnus, na, num, one, also alone.



Vnus & alter, both, now one, now an other.



Vnusquilibet, Vnusquisque, Vna queque, Vnum
quodque, eueryche.



Vnis ædibus, in the same house.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Vno animo, of one accorde.



Vnus quiuis, who so euer thou wylte.



Vni sex dies, syxe dayes contynuall.



Plautus in
trinummo



Vno ictu, at one stroke.



Vno uerbo, at one worde.



Vnum, one thynge.



Vnus ex multis, Vnus ex omnibus, oone a­
lone, onely.

 

¶ V ANTE O.

VOberca, a towne by Bilbo in Spain.



Vocabulum, the denomination of a­
ny thynge.



Vocalis, le, lowde, also that whiche hathe a
voyce, also a vowell.



Vocalitas, a tune or sounde of a voyce.



Vocatio, a callynge.



Vocator, a caller.



Vociferatio, a cryenge out.



Vociferator, he that crieth out.



Vociferor, aris, ari, to crie out, to cry loude.



Vocifero, idem.



Vocito, to calle often.



Voco, care, to call, to byd, to aske.



Voconia, a kynde of peares.



Vocula, a lyttell voyce, somtyme obloquie.



Voculatio, an accent in speche.



Vola, the myddes of the hande or the fote.
It is taken for the soole of the fote.



Volaticus, ca, cum, that which flieth or goth




awaye sodeynly, flittinge.



Volatilis, le, that which can flye.



Volatus, & volatura, a flight.



Volema, a great peare, a wardyn.



Volens, willynge.



Volenter, wyllyngly.



Volentia, will.



Volito, tare, to flye often.



Vide com.



Volo, are, to flye, to runne or go quycklye,
or fast.



Volo, uis, uolui, uelle, to will.



Volo tuam gratiam, I desyre your fauour.



Volo te, I wolde speke with the.



Volones, were bondemen at Rome, whiche
in the warres of Cartage whan there lac­
ked Romanes, offred them selfes to fyght
for their masters, and bycause they dyd it
willyngly withoute constraynt or called,
therfore they were called Volones. 



Volsella, an instrument to plucke heares from 
the body or face.



Volua, for Vulua.



Volubilis, le, that which is easyly tourned.



Volucer, cri, swift, lyght



Volucra, a beast whyche eateth the tender
vines.



Volucres, byrdes, foules.



Volucrior, more swyfte.



Volucris, cre, all thinge that doth flye.



Volucrum, the after byrthe in a woman.



Volumen, minis, a booke: sometyme part
of a boke, called a volume.



Voluntas, tatis, will.



Voluntarius, a, um, voluntary, willynge.



Voluo, uere, to wrappe, to tourne.



Voluox, & Voluola, idem quod Conuoluo­
lus, a lytle wurme with many legges, whi­
che eateth the leuys of vynes, and of o­
ther trees.



Volup, for Voluptas.



Voupe, delectable.



Volupia, & voluptia, goddesse of voluptie or
delectation.



Voluptabilis, le, that which reioyceth.



Voluptaria loca, placis of pleasure.



Sal. in Ca.



Voluptas, tatis, an inordinate reioycinge or
delectation in thynges worldly, or carnall.



Voluptuarius, & voluptarius, he that is gy­
uen to carnall delectation.



Voluptuosus, a, um, voluptuouse, vnsatiable
in carnall pleasure or delectation.



Volutabrum, a place where swyne do walow.



Volutabundus, walowynge, tournynge, tos­
synge in the mynde.



Volutatim, an aduerbe signifienge, eftsones
tossinge in the mynde.



Voluto, tare, to tourne lyinge, to walow, to
reuolue and tosse in the mynde.



Vomer, meris, the culter of a plowghe.



Vomica, a rotten impostume, wherout run­
neth matter.



Vomitus, vomite. Vomitio, idem.



Vomo, mui, mere, to vomyte or parbrake.



Vide com.



Vopiscus, where two children are concey­
ued, and one of them is abort, he that com­
meth to perfyte byrth is called Vopiscus.
it was also the name of one that wrate the
lyues of Emperours.



Vopte, for Vosipsi.



Festus.



Voraciter, lyke a glutton.



Vorago, ginis, a swolowe or gulfe.



Voro, rare, to swolowe downe meate ere it
be chewyd. also to eate gredily.



Vorax, racis, a glutton.



Voracitas, gluttony.



Vorsura, for versura.



Vorsuran soluere, a prouerb applyed to them
that so discharge them selues of one busy­
nesse, that they entre into another more
paynefull or dangerouse.



Vortex, for vertex.



Vortunnalia, a solemne feast to the god Vor­
tumnus. 



Vos, you.



Votiuus, ua, um, that whiche is vowed. also
desyred.



Votiua verba, votiu&ecedil; præces, wordes and
prayers, wherin we desyre somwhat.



Votum, a vowe, sometyme a desyre.



Votiuæ aures, eares whiche desyre to here.



Votitum, olde wrytars vsed for Vetitum.



Voto, & Votito, to make auowe.



Voti compos, he that hath that whiche he
desyred.



Voueo, ui, uere, to vowe, or make auowe.



Vide com.



Vox, uocis, a voyce.



Voce assa, with the voyce onely of a manne
without any instrument of musyke.

 

¶ V, ANTE P.


Vpupa, a lapwynk or blacke plouer.

 

¶ V, ANTE R.

VRania, one of the Musis, whiche is
president of Astronomy.



Vragus, of olde writars was vsed for
Orcus, dethe.



Vrbanatim, & vrbane, lyke a gentyl manne,
courteysely, gratiousely.



Vrbanicani milites, souldyours of the citie.



Vrbanitas, courtesye, good maner, gentil­
nesse in speche, ciuilitye.



Vrbanus, a, um, ciuile, courtaise, gentyll in
speche and gesture.



Vrbicula, a lytle citie.



Vrbicus, ca, cum, of the citie.



Vrbo, are, to cast a mere with a plough.



Vrbs, bis, a wallyd towne. also a citie.



Vrceolaris, an herbe whiche is called Peli­
tory of the wall.






Vrceolus, a lytell water pitchar.



Vrceus, a pytcher pot, wherin water is ca­
ryed.



Vredo, dinis, the fault in corne or trees,
whan they are blastyd. it signifieth also an
yche and burnynge in the skynne.



Vergilius
Georg.



Vrgeo, ursi, urgêre, to prouoke, to haste
furth. sometyme to couer.



Vriculum, any thinge that is holow.



Vri, wilde beastis lyke oxen, called Bugles
or buffes.



Vrina, vryne or pisse.



Lucanus
Verg.



Vrere, is also to byte as froste doeth the
grasse.



Vro hominem. Non malum hercle. G. vro
hominem. P. vt falsus animi est. It is no
harme. G. I haue gyuen hym a corsy. P.
Se how falsharted he is. 
Ter. in Eu.


Vrere, to tourment or vexe.



Plautus in
Most.



Vrito, tare, to burne sore or feruently.



Vropigium, is the lowest and narowest part
of the chyne next to the fundement.



Vrsulus, & vrsellus, a lytle or yonge beare.



Vruat, Ennius vsed for Circundat.



Vruare, is also to drawe a furrowe with a
plowgh aboute a place.



Vruum, a plowghe beame, or crooked part
of a plowghe.



Vrinum, an adell egge.



Vrino, are, & Vrinor, ari, to dyue vnder the
water.



Vrinator, toris, a dyuar.



Leo. Por.
de Men.



Vrna, a waterpot: it is proprely a vessell,
which contayneth as moch water as doth
way fourtye pounde waighte: and two of
them do make Amphoram.



Vrnarium, a bourde wheron pottes where
sette.



Vrnula, a lytle potte.



Vro, ussi, urere, to burne, to be turmented,
or vexed.



Vror, reris, uri, to be bourned.



Vrsa, two figures of sterres, the one called
Vrsa maior, and the other V rsa minor.



Vrsus, a beare.



Vrsa, a shee beare.



Vrsinus, na, um, of a beare.



Vrtica, a nettyl. also a fisshe, which as Pau­
lus Iouius writeth, is of the quantitie of
a wallnutte, and the keuerynge of him is
betwene a shell and a hard skynne, and is
somewhat redde, and the fysshe of him is
harde.

 

¶ V, ANTE S.

VSia, for essentia.



Vsitatio, an vsage.



Vsitor, taris, tari, to vse often.



Vspiam, in any place, to some place, any
where.



Vsquam, any where, in any wyse or maner.



Vsque gentium, any where.



Vsque, vntyll, well nygh, diligently, continu­
elly, so longe, allwaye.



Vsque dum, vntyll.



Vsque adeo, as longe.



Vsque eo, in so moche.



Vsquequaque, all aboute, euery where, all­
waye.



Vsquequo, vntyll whan, or what.



Vstrigo, ginis, blast of corne.



Vstrina, the meltinge house, or place where
metall is molten or het.



Vstulo, are, to burne or sere a thinge.



Vstus, ta, tum, bourned.



Vsucapio, & Vsucaptio, a possession by pre­
scription of a long tyme.



Vsuarius, he that is in possession, the pernour
of the profytes, the occupyar.



Vsura, the occupation.



Vsurarius, a, um, that which is occupyed.



Leo. Port.
de Pond.



Vsura semissium, where they gyue syxe for
the yerely lone of one hundred, As if I
borowe of one a hundred poundes, and
paye to hym euery moneth ten shillynges,
duryng the tyme of the lone: this yeldeth
euery yere. vi. lb. for the hundred.



Vsurpo, pare, to vsurpe, to vse often and
moche.



Vsus, us, vse, sometyme the occupation or
exercise of a thinge, also profyte or frute.



Vsurpatio, an vsurpynge or vsurpation.



Vsus fructus, the vse of an other mannes
goodes by the consent of the owner, the
substance of the thinge being saued.



Vsuuenit, it happeneth ofte.

 

¶ V, ANTE T.

VT, as, that, as soone, howe, lyke as,
wolde to god, how moche, all be it,
sometyme for quippe & ita, lest not.



Vt satis commode supportari posset, uereri
dicebant, They sayde, that they feared,
that it mowght not be.
Cæs. in commentarii.
 

Vt, as well as. Vt uales? R. vt queo, Howe
farest thou? R. as well as I maye.
Plautus in
Persa.


Vt, beholde howe. Vt sæpe summa ingenia
in occulto latent, Beholde how that moste
exellent wittes do lye hyd in a corner.



Vt, admit it, or set the case, or put the case.
Legem illam appellare fas non est, & ut sit
lex, non debemus illam Hircij legem puta­
re,  It is not conuenient, that we call it a
lawe, and admit that it be a lawe, we shuld
not yet suppose it to be Hircius lawe. Ete­
nim vt circumspiciamus omnia, quæ popu­




lo grata, atque iucunda sunt: nihil tam popu­
lare quam pacem, quam concordiam, quam
otium reperiemus, for put the case that we
mought se perfitely all thinges that were
plesaunte and delectable vnto the people,
we shoulde nothinge fynde, that they so
moche desyre, as peace, as concorde, as
vacacion from laboure.
Ci. in Phi.


Te. in Ad.



Vt est dementia, Se the mans foly.



Vt istum dij deæque perdant, I beseche god &
all halowes send him a myschief.



Ci. in Bru.



Vt, for postquam. Nam vt illos de Republica
libros edidisti, nihil a te sane postea accepi­
mus, for sense ye set forth your bookes of
the weale publike, I neuer after receiued
any thinge from you.



Pli. in epi.



Vt in limine auditur, he was as well herde,
as if he had bene within.



Plautus in
pœnu.



Vt, so that. Olent, salsa sunt, tangere vt non
velis, They be so salte and stinkinge, that
thou wilt wish, that thou haddest not tou­
ched them.



Plautus in
Curcu.



Vt, se that. Operam vt det, See that he do
his indeuour.



Ter. in He.



Vt ad pauca redeam, To make a short tale.



Vt ne addam, To be short.



Vtcunque, In what maner or facyon. Sed no­
strum est intelligere, vtcunque, & vbicunque
opus est obsequi. But it is oure part to
knowe, in what facyon, and where soeuer
we shall gyue oure attendaunce.



Vtcunque, how so euer.



Vttcunque erit, how so euer it shall happen.



Liuius.



Vtensile, necessary to be vsed.



Vter, tris, a botell.



Vter, teri, a wombe, a bealy.



Vterum gerere, to be great with childe.



Vter, tra, trum, which of the twoo.



Plin.



Vter alteri dixerit nescio, which of them told
it to the tother, I can not tell.



Cicer. pro
Milo.



Vter vtri insidias fecerit, which of them layd
awayte for the tother.



Terentius
in Phorm.



Vterque utrique est cordi, They do lyke wel the
one the other.



Vterque alterum uerberauit, the tome beete the
tother, eche dyd beate other.



Vterculus, a litle bealy.



Vterlibet, which ye will.



Vterque, bothe, the one and the other.



Vteruis, which of them thou wilt.



Vti, for vt.



Vtica, a citye in Affrike, where Cato dyd fle
hym self, and therfore was afterwarde cal­
led Cato Vticensis.



Plautus in
Trinummo.



Vtibilis, le, for vtilis, profytable.



Vtibilitas, for vtilitas, profyte.



Plautus in
Mercator.



Vti, sometyme sygnifyeth to haue. Et te vtar
iniquiore, & mens me ordo irrideat, that I
may haue the, the warse toward me, & that
my company maye mocke me. Mihi si vnquem
filius erit, vt ille facili me vtetur patre, If e­
uer I haue a sonne, he shal haue me a gen­
tyll father.
Plautus in
Aul.Ter. in Eu.


Vti amore, to loue.



Vti amicitia, to fauoure, or be in amytye.



Vti eadem disciplina, to be of the same ler­
nynge.
Plaut. in
Asi.


Vti oculis, to see perfytely, or well. Maris
caussa hercle hoc ego oculo vtor minime,
In good fayth the se maketh that I se not
well with this eye, or I se not a whit with
this eye.
Plautus in
Mili.


Vti officio, to do the office or part.



Vtilis, le, profytable, conuenient



Vtilitas, profyte.



Vtiliter, profytably.



Vtinam, wolde to god.



Vtique, lyke as, veryly.



Vti valitudine, to be in helth.



Plin.



Vti foro, to take the market as it cometh, a
prouerbe applyed to theym, which canne
take the state of euery tyme and chaunce,
as it commeth. also it may signifye, to ap­
ply him self to the facions and condicions
present.



Vtor, teris, ti, to vse, to be conuersaunt with
one, to occupye.



Vtere vt vis mea opera, Take my seruyce at
youre commaundement. Da mihi operam
amabo. M. tua est, vtere, atque impera si quid
uis, A good felowshyp lend me thy helpe.
M. It is redye for the, haue here, com­
maunde what thou wilt.
Plautus in
Per.Plautus in
Aul.


Vtpote, bycause that he was, as.



Vt puta, for quemadmodum, as.



Vtquid, for quamobrem, for what cause,
wherfore.



Vtraque, by both places, by the tone place
and the tother.



Vtricularius, he that pypeth in a botell.



Vtriculus, the place in a woman wherin the
childe lyeth.



Vtrinque, of the one part and the other, of
thone and thother.



Plautus in
Amphitri.



Vtris, a skynne blowen full of wynde, also a
ball filled onely with wynde.



Vtrobique, in the one place and the other,
on thone syde and the other.
Plautus in
Mili.


Vtroque, to thone place and the other.



Vtroque versum, on bothe partes, on thone
part and thother, on euery part.



Vtrum, whyther.



Vtut, how so euer it be, in what facyon. Væc
adeo mea culpa fateor fieri, non me hanc rem
patri, vtut erat gesta, indicasse, I confesse,
all this happened by my defaulte, that I
shewed not to my father the mater, in
what facyon it was done.






¶ V ANTE V.

VVa, a grape, it is alsoo that, whyche
is in the roufe of a mannes mouth,
whyche sometyme wyll swelle, and
is also callyd Vuula. It is alsoo a swarme
of bees hangynge rounde.



Vua passa, a greatte reason.



Vueus, a, um, of a grape.



Vueus succus, wyne.



Vuidus, da, dum, moyste.



Vulcanus, called Iupyters smythe. Also it
is taken for fyre.



Vulcanius, a, um, of Vulcane. 



Vulga, a skryppe or sachelle, sommetyme a
womannes bealy.



Vulgaris, re, commune, moche vsed.



Vulgaria, for vulgaris.



Non. Mar.



Vulgatus, ta, tum, commonly knowen or vsed.



Vulgo, abrode amonge all men.



Vulgo conceptus, whose father is not cer­
tayne.



Vide com.



Vulgo, gare, to publyshe, to manyfeste, to
make commune.



Vulgus, uulgi, the common people.



Vulnerarius, a surgeon.



Vulnerarius, a, um, belongynge to woundes.



Vulnero, rare, to wounde.



Vulnus, a wounde. sometyme griefe.



Vulpes, a Foxe.



Vulpecula, a cubbe or a yonge foxe.



Vulpinus, na, num, of a foxe. sometyme sub­
tyll and crafty.



Vulpinor, naris, nari, to be wyly.



Vulsinus, a ryuer in Italye.



Vulsinienses, people dwellynge aboute the
ryuer of Vulsinus.



Vultorij, certayne dyse.



Vultuosus, sa, sum, heuye, sorowfulle of
countenaunce.



Vultuose, dysdaynfully, heuyly, with frow­
nynge countenaunce, with gesture agre­
able vnto the matter.



Vultur, turis, & vulturius, a rauyn.



Vulturinus, na, num, of a rauyn.



Vulturnum, a towne in Campania.



Vulturnus, the northeaste wynde.



Vulta, Lucretius vsed for the plurell num­
ber of Vultus.



Vulticulus, a lyttell vysage.



Vultus, of olde wryters is taken for wylle,
a Volendo.



Vultus, vultus, & vultum, countynaunce
or chiere.



Vulua, the wombe or mother of anye fe­
male kynde. It is alsoo a meate vsyd of
the Romaynes, made of the bealye of a
sowe, eyther that hathe farowed, or is
greatte with farowe.


 
¶ V ANTE X.

VXor, vxoris, a wyfe.



Vxorius, he that doteth on his wyfe.



Vxorius, a, um, of the wyfe.


 


¶ X ANTE A.

X##sp##A##sp##N##sp##T##sp##H##sp##A, a nymphe.



Xanthij, a people in Asia
whose citie beinge be­
sieged of the captayne
of Cirus, they brought
into the castelles theyr
wyues, seruantes, and
goodes, and puttynge
thervnto fyre, bourned all togyther, and
afterwarde issuinge out of the citie, faught
vntyll that they were all slayne.



Xanthicus, amonge the Iewes was the mo­
neth of Aprylle.



Xanthus, a, um, yelowe.



Xanthus, a riuer of Troy, callid also Scanman­
der, also a citie in Licia, also Hectors horse.



Xantippe, the wyfe of Socrates the phy­
losopher.

 

¶ X ANTE E.

XEnia, presentis sent by one to an other.



Xeniolum, a smalle present.



Xenodochium, an hospytall.



Xenocrates, a philosopher discipleto Plato. 



Xenophon, a philosopher, whiche as wel in
marcial acres, as in eloquence excellyd.



Xerampellinæ uestes, garmentes of a co­
lour, whyche I suppose is callyd Mur­
rey. Somme doo suppose it to be blacke
garmentes.
Probus.


Calepinus



Xeria, drye playsters.



Xerophagia, eatynge of drye meates.



Xerophthalmia, whanne the eyes be soore
without droppynge or swellynge.



Xerxes, a kynge of Persia.

 

¶ X ANTE Y.

XYlin&ecedil; uestes, garmentes of cotton.



Xyloaloes, a swete and precious wod
callid Lignum aloes, our women hauing
beades made therof callyd it Acellula.



Xylobalsamus, the wodde wherof baulme
naturall commeth.



Xylophagus, a worme breding in old wode,
whiche is white and great belyed, and hath
a blacke heed.



Xilon, cotton.



Xiphi&ecedil;, certayne blasynge sterres, whiche
haue beames lyke to a sworde.






Xisticus, he that exercyseth hym selfe in a
place couered out of the sonne or rayne.



Xyphius, a fyshe named a sworde fyshe, whi­
che hath in his nose a bone, lyke to the sca­
berde of a sworde, suche one haue I sene.



Xystus, et Xystum, a place, wherin menne
do exercyse wrastlynge and other like pa­
styme in wynter. It may be taken for a ga­
lerye or place to walke in out of the rayn.

 



¶ Z ANTE A.

Z##sp##A##sp##C##sp##A##sp##N##sp##T##sp##H##sp##E##sp##I, people
in the mountaynes cal­
lyd Pyrenei, by the ri­
uer of Hiberus.



Zacharias, the name of a
prophete. Also the fa­
ther of sayncte Johan
Baptiste. 



Zacynthij, people of the yle of Zacynthus.



Zacynthos, an ylande in the see callyd Io­
nia, wherin is a cytie of the same name.



Zagrus, a mountayne, which diuideth Me­
dia from Babilonia.



Zancle, a citie in Grecia, an other in Sicile.



Zaphyrus, a fyshe of the kynd of gylt hedes
but that he is somwhat blewe in colour.



Zathene, a stone lyke to aumber, now black,
now yelowe.



¶ Z ANTE E.

ZEa, a kynde of wheate.



Zelo, are, & zelor, lari, for æmulari.



Zelor, zelaris, ari, to be angrye, or to
haue zeale.



Zelotes, for æmulator, he that hathe enuye
at one, or assayeth to folowe an nother in
lyuynge.



Zelotypia, ialowsye.



Zelotypus, ialowse.



Zelus, sometyme enuy, somtyme loue, some­
tyme emulation.



Zenobia, a quene of Siria, which in greke
and latyne was very well lerned, and was
also valyant in armes.



Zephyrus, the weste wynde.



Zeros, a kynde of christall, whyche hathe
spottes whyte and blacke.



Zta, & zetecula, a place made in a chaum­
ber, wherein was a bedde and three sto­
les, whyche with courtaynes was so di­
uided from the chaumber, that sometyme
it was parte therof, sometyme it was se­
parate from it, and it hadde three wyndo­
wes or lowpes, by the whiche the sonne
mought entre into it.



Zeugma, a fygure, wherby many sences ar
ioyned togyther with one verbe, ss, Neque is
es Catilina, ut te, aut pudor a turpitudine, aut
metus a periculo, aut ratio a furore reuocarit,
Ne thou arte suche a man Catilyne, as ey­
ther shamefastnesse canne withdrawe from
dishonestie, or feare from daunger, or rea­
son from vengeable angre.



Zeusis, an excellent paynter, which so pain­
ted a boy caryeng grapes, that byrdes cam
to the table and pecked on the grapes, we­
nynge that they had ben very grapes, whi­
che Zeusis beholdynge, was with hym self
angrye, and sayd, If I had made the boye,
aswel as I haue done the grapis, the birdis
durst not haue come so nygh to the grapes.



Zeus, a fyshe taken about Calys in Spain,
whiche is blacke, but he is very delicate.

 

¶ Z ANTE I.
¶ 

Zigena, a fysshe of the see.



Zigari, people, whyche we doo calle Egyp­
tians, that wander about in euery royalme
and be horrible theues.



Zigarum, the contray from whens the said
people doo come.



Zizania, cockle, whiche groweth in corne.



Zinziber, gynger.

 

¶ Z ANTE O.

ZOdiacus, a cerkle in heuen, wherein
be the .xii. sygnes.



Zographia, the pycture of beastes.



Zoilus, was a poete, whyche enuyed Ho­
merus, and therfore the enuiers of welle
lerned men are callyd Zoili.



Zœlicum, certayne flaxe, that commeth out
of Spayne, whereof threde is made for
nettes to take byrdes.



Zomos, gruelle.



Zona, a gyrdell.



Zonatim, in compasse aboute.



Non. Mar.



Zopissa, pitche taken from shyppes, whiche
being tempred with waxe and salte, is of
more efficacie than other pytche.



Zopyron, an herbe, which some do suppose
to be Pulyol mountayne.



Zopyrus, was a man, whiche by phisnomye
knew euery mans condicions. And whan in be­
holding Socrates he iudged him to be vn­
thrifty, & therfore was scorned of many men,
Socrates answered, Zopyrus is not decei­
ued, for in dede I had ben suche one as he
saith, if I had not by philosophy subduid na­
ture. Also Zopirus was a noble Persian, ser­
uant to Darius, which whan the citie of Ba­
bylon rebellid ageinst king Darius, & that he
had madelong warre, & coulde not subdue
them, vnwares to any man, did cut of his owne
nose, & wounded him self, & fled to Babylon




sayinge, the kynge had so disfygured hym,
bycause that he perswaded hym to haue
peace with the Babylonians, whiche they
heryng, made him their chiefe capitayne.
Than by lytell and lytle declaryng to them
the strength of the kynge, and howe they 
mought not indure longe agaynste hym, at
the laste he caused them to submit them sel­
ues to the kynge, & to receyue hym into the
citie. Wherfore Darius was wonte to saye,
that he had leauer haue one Zopyrus, than
twenty Babylons.



Zoroanda, a ryuer, whiche the great water
of Tigris maketh on the one syde of the
mountayne Taurus.



Zoroastes, the fyrste fynder of Magike.

 

Z ANTE V.
¶ 

Zura, bearies of whyte thorne.


 

¶ 

Zygia, a pype, wherin menne dyd playe
at weddynges.

 

Zithus, drynke made with barley sodden. It
maye be taken for ale or biere.





Finis Dictionarii.





THE ADDICION OF
SYR THOMAS ELIOT KNIGHT
vnto his Dictionarye.



¶ A ANTE B.


Varro.



A##sp##B##sp##A##sp##G##sp##I##sp##O, gere, to fetche
a compasse in speaking,
& not to consist or abide
in one oration or sentence.



Abalienatio, alienation.



Abalienator, he that doth
aliene or putte awaye a
thinge, or altereth the
possession therof, an alienour.



Abanec, a gyrdel, which priestes did weare,
wrought with colours of scarlet & purple,
in suche wise that there seemed to be in it
floures and precious stones set in order.



Abania, is interpreted the father, vnto god
acceptable, or gratifienge vnto god.



Abarceo, cui, cêre, to prohybyte or put of.



Abauia, my great grandames mother.



Abbreuio, are, to abbreuiate or make shorte.



Abbatia, the dignitie of an abbotte. Some­
tyme the monasterie.



Abdicatio, a renouncing of one whom I take
for myn heire, a puttyng out of fauour.
Cic. in Pi­
sonem
&
ad Att.


Abdidit se domum, he kepte hym at home.



Abdere se ex conspectu heri, to kepe hym a­
way that his maister see hym not.



Abdere se literis, to lyue vnknowen in conti­
nuall study. Abducere clauem, to take the
kaye oute of the doore.



Abecedarius, he that setteth any thynge in
order by letter.



Abedo, dere, to consume.



Aberuncare iram deorum, to withdrawe the
vengeance of god with prayers.



Aberuncasso, sere, to tourne vppe.



Cicero.



Abhorreo ab urbe relinquenda, I haue noo
mynde to forsake the cytie.



Abhorret ab illo mea sententia, myn opynion
is contrary to his.



Abhorret a suspitione, it is contrarye to my
supposalle.



Abhorret a charitate uulgi, he tendreth not,
or passeth nothynge on the poore people.
Cicero de
Amic.


Abhorret hilaritudo, thy myrthe is tourned
into sadnesse.
Plautus in
cistell.


Abhortatio, a contrary aduyse.



Abhortor, tari, to gyue contrary aduyse.



Abi in malam rem, go hens with a mischefe.



Abibitur, I or he wyl depart or go away.



Plautus in
Mercator.



Abiectus, a vyle persone.



Abiegnus, na, num, of firre tree.



Abigena bos, was amonge the diuinours,
callid Augures, the oxe, whiche was to be
sacrifised, aboute whom the other beastes
to be sacrifised, were sette.
Varro.


Abigere ex &ecedil;dibus, to driue out of the dores



Plautus in
Asinar.



Abijcio, cere, to poure oute. sommetyme to
gyue awaye.



Abijcior, ci, to be out of reputation.



Abijt hora, the tyme passed.



Abijt sol, the sonne is gone downe.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Abitus, tu, a departynge.



Plautus.



Abyla, a mountain in the se ageinst Spain in
affrica, callid one of the pillers of Hercules 



Ab incunablis, from his infancy.



Ab ineunti ætate, from his chyldehode.



Abitio, a departure or going away, old wri­
ters toke it for deth, as we may call it, the
decesse of one. Abiudicare a uita, to put to
dethe. Abiudicabit nunquem ab suo triobolum,
He wylle neuer be of the mynde to gyue
thre halfe pens of his owne.
Plautus in
Asina.





Abiuratio, a forswearynge, an abiuration.



Ablectæ ædes, nete faire & pleasant houses.



Abludo, lusi, ludere, to speake of a thynge
couertly, that other shall not espie what
the matter dothe meane.



Ablutio, a washynge.



Abluuium, a vnyuersall floudde, wherwith
a countray is drowned.



Abneco, care, to strangle.



Abneptis, a daughter in the fourth discent.



Abnormis, out of rule.



Abolitus, ta, tum, rased oute, putte oute of
remmbraunce.
Festus.


Ab oloes, olde writers vsed for ab illis.



Abominalis, le, abhomynable.



Abortor, & aborto, idem quod abortio.



Abraham, the name of a patriarche, signifi­
enge father of many nations.



Abradere de bonis, to polle or spoyle a man
of his goodes.



Abripuit repente sese, he went away sodeinly



Abrogare fidem, to bring out of credence.



Abrogatio, the dissoluynge or repellynge
of a lawe.



Abrupta loca, rockes & hylles here & there
broken or dygged, so that one may vnethe
go or crepe vp to them.



Abruptum, that whiche hath suche a fall or
stepenesse downe, that no man maye passe
by it, but onely fall downe.
Plautus in
Ruden.


Abs te stat, it standeth vppon the, or it ly­
eth in the.
Terent. in
Adel.


Abs quiuis homine, of euery man what soo
euer he be.



Val. max.6



Abscissus, a, um, broken, sharpe.



Abscissior iustitia, sharpe iustyce.



Absconsus, a, um, hydde.



Absoluere vno uerbo, to telle at a worde, to
make an ende shortely.



Liuius.2.



Absoluere suspitione, to discharge or putte
of all suspition.



Plautus in
capt. in
Amphitri.



Absoluere, to depeche of busynesse.



Absolute, perfytly.



Absolutio, a discharge, or depeche.



Absolutus, ta, tum, discharged, depeched.



Absonum fidei, not credible.



Absonus uoce, he that hath an vntunable voice



Abstergeo, si, gere, to wype, to wipe awaye.



Absterrere, to feare awaye, or dryue awaye
with feare.



Plautus in
Mili.



Abstinenter, with abstinence.



Abstinere incommoditate, to behaue him ho­
nestly. Abstinere manum, to hold his hand.
Abstineas me manum, take hede that thou
stryke me not.
Plautus in
Ruden.


Sueton. in
Clau.



Abstinuit diu publico, it was long or he came
abrode. Abstinere uerbis, to take heede,
what he speaketh.
Pli. in epi.


Abstinens alieni, he that medleth not with
other mennes goodes.



Abstraxi me illinc, I gatte me thens.



Abstractum, taken by force.



Abstrudere colaphos, to buffet or giue blowes.



Abstrusus, a, um, hydde or shutte vp.



Abest mihi animus, I haue no courage.



Absit uerbo inuidia, a forme of speking whan
one wolde not be suspected of arrogance in
some thynge that he wyll speake.



Absente nobis, whyle I was away.



Absento, tare, to kepe from a place, or cause
to be absente.



Plaut. in
Mostel.



Absumpti sumus, we are vndone.



Absumedo, dinis, dispence, waste of money
or other lyke thynge.



Absumptio, a wastynge, waste.



Absurde, without purpose or reason, to no
purpose. Absynthium marinum, wormesede.
Absynthium santonicum, maye seeme to be
Lauander cotton.



Abundanter, abundantely.



Abunde est, it is ynoughe.



Abundans, a ryche manne.



Abundare ingenio, to haue a great wytte.



Abuerto, tere, to tourne from a place.



Abusque mane ad uesperam, frome the mor­
nynge to nyghte.



Ambustus, ta, tum, bourned vp.



Abusum, worne out.



Abusus, us, & abusio, abuse, yll vse.



Abutor, ti, to weare out.



Terentius
in Prolog.
Andri.



Abutitur operam, he loste his labour.



Abydeus, a man borne in the ile of Abydos.

 

¶ A ANTE C.

ACananthide, the olde name of the
yle of Cypres.



Acanthus, is an herbe commonly callid
Brankursyn. Loke afore in Acanthis.



Acapis, a ryuer in Asia.



Acarpos, vnfruytefull. Acasta, a nymphe.



Acar, & Acarus, a lyttell worme that bree­
deth in waxe.



Acatia, a thorne growynge in Egipt, wher­
of commeth a gumme, whyche is medy­
cynable for many diseases.



Acatium, a bote.



Accede adiutare, come helpe me.



Plautus in
Truculen.



Accedit huc, more ouer than that.



Accedere obuiam, to mete with one.



Accedere periculum, to take on hym the
daungiere.
Plautus in
Epidic.


Accedere alicui, to graunt to an other, to be
of an other mans opinion.



Accelerare gradum, to go apace.



Acceleratio, haaste or spede.



Accento, tare, to synge often.



Accessio, an augmentacyon, increase. Also
a commynge. Accessio morbi, the begyn­
nynge of a syckenesse.






Accersio, sire, to sende or call for one.



Accersitus, ta, tum, callyd for.



Accersi iube filiam, commande thy daughter
to be sent for, or callyd for.



Liuius.



Accido, cidere, to extenuate or make feeble,
to destroye.



Accisus, a, um, made feble, decayed.



Accidit, there happened, it is chaunced.



Acccinere, to synge to an instrument, or to
synge a parte, as a treble to a tenoure, or a
descant to a playne songe.



Accipenser, a fyshe hauynge the skales tur­
ned forewarde, contrary to other fysshes,
which in the old time was of most estima­
tion at the tables of kynges and princis.



Plautus in
casina.



Accipere auribus, to here.



Accipere causam, to holde excused.



Ci. Tyro.



Accipere cladem, to haue great losse in bataile.



Accipere corde, to perceiue well. Pol haud
satis meo corde accepi querelas tuas, in good
faythe I do not well perceyue the cause of
thy griefe.



Accipere conditionem, to take the offre.



Cicero de
Amic.



Accipere dolorem, to take thought, to be heuy



Accipere nomen, to take accounte.



Accipere potestatem, to haue leaue.



Accipere uulnus, to be wounded.



Acceptus, receyued, entertayned.



Acceptus, ta, tum, accepted, acceptable.



Accepti & expensi ratio, accompte of recei­
tes and expenses.



Accipiter humipeta, a sparhawke.



Accipiter hierax, an hawke callid a sakre.



Accipiter pecuniarum, a poller of people.



Accipitrarius, a faulconer.



Accliuitas, a raysynge vp of a hylle.



Accommodatus, ta, tum, applyed to a thyng
besemyng, couenable.



Accommodus, da, dum, apt, mete, conuenient.



Accreduo, duis, duere, idem quod accredo.



Accubatio, a syttynge at the table.



Accubitores, they that sytte at the table.



Accumbere alicui, to syt by one at the table.



Plautus in
Trucu.



Accurare, to do a thynge dylygently.



Accurare prandium, to make redy the diner.



Accurata malitia, malyce prepensed.



Accuratum habere, to prepense.



Accusatio, an accusement.



Accusatorius liber, a bylle of complaynt.



Accusare, to blame.



Accusabilis, le, worthy to be blamed.



Accusator, an accuser, a rebuker.



Accusatrix, a woman rebuker.



Acedaria, salettes or meate lyghtly prepared.



Acri ingenio, quycke wytted.



Acer equus, a swyfte horse.



Acerrimi inimici, mortall ennemies.



Acer morbus, a greuous syckenes.



Acres oculi, cleere eyes.



Acerrima uxor, a very shrewde wyfe.



Acere, a cytie by Naples.



Aceratum, mortar, or claye myxte with hey
or strawe, wherwith walles are daubyd.



Acerbè, bitterly, vnripely, cruelly, vehement­
ly.



Acero, rare, to myxte with chaffe. 



Acernus, na, num, of the tree callyd Acer.



Acerra, a shyppe, wherein frankyncense is
put. some do name it an aultar, which was
sette before a deed corps, wheron incense
was burned. Some call it a cuppe, wherin 
they dyd sacrifyce wyne.



Acerosus panis, browne bredde not ranged.



Acesinus, a great ryuer in Persia, whiche
runneth into the ryuer of Indus, wherein
do growe canes of suche greatnesse, that
they doo make betwene euery knotte or
ioynt therof, botes to rowe in.



Acesis, an herbe, which is yelow in colour.



Acestis, a great ryuer in India.



Acetabulum, a measure contayninge in it of
water measure, two ounces.



Acetositas, aigrenesse or sowrenes.



Acetosus, a, um, eygre, sowre.



Acetum in pectore, Nunc experiar, sit ne ace­
tum tibi cor acre in pectore, Nowe wylle I
proue, yf thou haste any thynge that doth
prycke the in the stomacke.



Aceum, a citie in Colchis, on the banke of
the ryuer callyd Phasis.



Achantia, a fyche, whiche some men do sup­
pose to be thornebacke.



Achar, a citie in Siria, nowe callyd Nisibis.



Achateon, the mayne sayle of a shyppe.



Achelous, a ryuer in Grecia, so named of a
kynge of that name.



Acheloeus, of that ryuer. sommetyme it is
put for aqueus.



Achemenia, a countray in Persia.



Acherontinus, & Acherontius, of the ryuer
of Acheron.



Acherusia, a fenne in the realme of Naples.



Achilleias, a kynde of barly, peraduenture
that whiche is callyd beare corne.



Achilleon, some do suppose to be mylfoyle.



Achras, a wylde peare.



Achylus, without lyppes.



Aciale, harde yron.



Acidalia, a name of Venus, of a fountayne in
a citie of Bœotia, callyd orchomenæ.



Acidylus, a knotte in the gyrdell of Venus. 



Aciem trahere, to sette in edge.



Acies animi, the capacitie of a mans wytte.



Acinaceus, a, um, full of kernels.



Aciritani, were people in Spayne.



Acis, a ryuer in Sycil, which cometh from
the mountayne of Aethna.



Acitia, an Ilande callyd also Melos in the
see by Candye.






Acilon, the bearye of holy.



Aclassis, a garment vnsowed from  the shulders



Acon, aconis, a fyshe, whiche after the des­
cription of Paulus Iouius, I soppose to
be that, whiche at London is callid a shad.



Acopus, an herbe callyd also Anagyris, full
of braunches, and hath flowres lyke to
colewortes, and hath an ylle sauoure, the
sede therof is in longe coddes, harde and
lyke in facion to kydneys.



Acorus, an herbe with longe leaues, lyke
the blade of a sworde. I suppose it be that,
whiche is callyd Gladwen or Gladen.



Acratismus, & acratisma, a breakefast.



Acris, a ryuer of Italye.



Acrodria, be all frutes, which haue an hard
rynde or shale, as pomegranades, nuttes,
chestyns, pistaces, and other lyke.



Acre, swyft, sowre, cruell, valiant, vehement,
dyligent, circumspecte.



Acritas, sowrenesse, crueltie, dilygence.



Acriter, swiftly, cruelly, vehemently, diligently.



Acrisius, kynge of Argiues, the father of
Danaes, on whom Iupiter begate Perseus. 



Acroama, a subtyle sentence, which requi­
reth an exquysite study to perceyue.



Acroamata, were certayne lectures of A­
ristotle, whiche he radde to his scholers,
wherin was the moste subtylle and coun­
nynge parte of philosophie.



Acroc&ecedil;raunia, mountaynes of wonderfulle
heyght, betwene Armenia and Hiberia.



Acrocomus, one hauynge longe heare.



Acrocorinthus, an high mountayne in Mo­
rea, betwene the two sees Aegeum & Ionium.



Acropolis, a castell sette on a hylle.



Acte, an elder tree.



Action, the bearye of an elder.



Act&ecedil;us, a, um, of Athenes.



Actia, orum, plays made ones in fiue yeres.



Actitatus, ta, tum, determyned by iugement.



Actitatio, a debatynge of a case in lawe, or
pleedynge.



Actius, a noble poete that wrate tragedies.



Actiuus, actyue.



Actualis scientia, a science that declarethe
thinges by their operation, of the which ar
thre partes, morall, dispensatiue, and ciuile.



Acta ætas, age whan youth is paste.



Acta agere, to doo that whiche is all redye
done, to lose laboure.



Actus, put in feare.



Actus, a braid in tillage, it is also a cartway.



Actuosus, alway in busynesse.



Actuosus ignis, fyre whiche alway burneth.



Seneca.



Aculeatus, ta, tum, any thyng that prycketh.



Acupedius, he that hath a quycke and apte
foote to runne with.



Paul. Iouius



Acus, a fishe, whiche is longe and somwhat
grene, and hath a beke, as it were the byll
of a crane, I suppose it is that, which som
calle an hornekeke.



Acustici, they whiche do here all, and speke
nothynge them selfes.



Acute, quyckely, subtilly.



Acuti oculi, cleere eyes.



Acuti cibi, sharpe meates.



Acutum ingenium, a subtyll or quycke wyt.



Acylon, an holye beary.



Acyphantes, a cytie in Thessaly, whiche is
also callyd Pindus.

 

¶ A ANTE D.

AD A D, in the Syrian tounge, is the
sonne. also it signifieth onely.



Ad me, with me. Commodum ad te
dederam literas, de pluribus rebus, cum ad
me bene mane, Dionysius fuit, I had scars­
ly sent my letters vnto the, whan Dionyse
was with me erly in the mornynge.
Cice. Atti.
lib.9.


Ad breuissimum tempus, for a very short time.



Pli. in pan.



Ad id tempus, at that tyme.



Ad sapientiam huius, nimius nugator fuit, In
regard of his wysedom he was but a fole.



Ad illam faciem, ita ut illa est, ut emerem sibi,
mandauit mihi, He commaunded me to bie
for hym one, whiche had suche an nother
face as she hath.
Plautus in
Mercator.


Ad cyathum stare, to awayte on the cuppe.



Sueton. in
C&ecedil;sare.



Ad manum seruus, he that is clerke to one,
or wryteth for hym.
Ci de ora­
tore.2.


Ad pedes, a lakay.



Ad manus venire, to come to handestrokes,
to cope togyther.



Ad meridiem, vntyll noone.



Ad multam noctem, late in the nyght.



Terentius



Ad tempus, in season. sometyme accordyng
to the tyme. also for a tyme.
Cice. Atti.


Ad dextram, on the ryght hande.



Ad hoc exemplum, Nunquem amaui, I neuer lo­
uyd of that facyon, or in that maner.
Plautus in
mercator.


Ad hoc modum, this way or in this maner.



Ad extremum, fynally, in conclusyon.



Plin.



Ad postremum, idem.



Plautus in
Aulul.



Ad summum, at the moste.



Cicero.



Ad uerbum, worde by worde.



Plinius.



Ad vnum, not one lefte.



Cicero de
Amic.



Ad vnum idem sentiunt, they be all of oone
opynyon.



Plinius.



Ad assem, to the vttermoste penye.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Ad annos sedecim, syxtene yeres herafter.



Plautus.



Ad rauim poscere, to ask vntil one be hoorse



Ad restim res redijt, It is come to the poynt
that he wyl hange him selfe. it is a sentence
signifienge desperation.
Terentius
in Phorm.


Ad rem suam sapere, to be wyse for his own
profytte.
Plautus in
Trucu.





Cicero.



Adæquo, are, to make or be equall.



Adaggero, rere, to gather and lay togither.



Adam, the fyrste manne, whyche sygnify­
eth redde.



Adamanteus, & Adamantinus, of a diamand,
or as harde as a diamande.



Adamaster, a gyaunt, whiche was of an in­
credible greattenesse.



Adamiani, were certayne heretykes, whi­
che went naked aboute all their busynesse,
sayenge that they dyd folowe the nakyd­
nes of Adam beinge in Paradise, who be­
leuyd that there shulde haue ben no mari­
age, if no man had synned.



Adaperio, rire, to open a thynge.



Adapertilis, le, for apertum, open.



Adarca, a salte fome, whiche cometh of the
ryndes of caanes or reedes growynge
in fennes.



Adasia, an olde ewe, which hath late eaned
or hadde a lambe.



Adasso, olde wryters vsed for Adigo, to
compelle.



Non. Mar.



Adaucto, tare, to augment or increace.



Adaugeo, gêre, idem.



Adauctus, ta, tum, augmented.



Adaxint, for adegerint, lette them compelle,
or constrayne.



Adcensi, souldiours put in the place of them
whiche are deed.



Addico, cere, to sette to sale.



Addicere animum, to gyue or apply his mynd.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Addictus, bounden to one.



Addebat hoc, he sayde moreouer.



Addere animum, to gyue courage.



Addere gradum, to make hym go faster.



Vergilius.



Additus, for an ennemie. Nec Teucris addita
Iuno, usquem aberit, Neither Iuno ennemy to
the Troyans shall lacke or be away.



Addo, dare, to gyue to one.



Addormisco, scere, to slepe.



Addubito, tare, to doubte.



Adducere habenas, to hold strait the bridel.



Adductus, ta, tum, brought, ledde, moued.



Adduplico, care, to double any thynge.



Adelphi, bretherne, it is also the name of a
comedie in Terence. 



Adeo res redijt, the matter is comme to that
poynte.



Adeousque, vntyll that.



Adest ei animus, he hath a good courage.



Adest, he is at hande.



Adesse, to ayde or succour one.



Terent. in
Andria.



Adesdum, come hyther.



Adeor, the passyue of adeo.



Ader, a place by Bethlem, where angelles
dydde synge at the byrthe of Christe, and
Iacob kepte there his shepe.



Non. Mar.



Adesus, a, um, consumed.



Ad exitam ætatem, for ad ultimam ætatem, at
the vttermoste age.
Festus.


Adfabrum, well wrought.



Adhæresco, scere, idem quod adh&ecedil;reo.



Adh&ecedil;sus, a, um, cleaued to.



Adhibere animum, to take hede what is spoken



Adhibere aures, to harken, to gyue an eare.



Adhibere in consilium aliquem, to aske coun­
sayle of oone.



Adhibere modum, to vse moderacyon or
temperaunce.



Adhibere parsimoniam, to spare.



Adhibere sermonem, to deuyse or talke to­
gyther.



Adhibêre testes, to brynge forth wytnes.



Adhibere uim, to doo a thyng by vyolence,
to inforce.



Adhinnio, to neye as a horse dothe after a
mare. Cicero by a metaphore maketh it to
sygnyfie to reioyce.
Cic. in Pi­
sonem.


Adhuc locorum, for adhuc.



Plautus in
capt.



Adiabene, a countray beyonde Armenia.



Adiantum, an herbe growinge about sprin­
ges of water, hauynge smalle leaues lyke
to Coriander. somme doo nowe take it for
Maydenheare.



Adiaphoron, indifferente.



Adij te heri de filia, I came yesterday to talk
with the for thy doughter.



Adijcere album calculum, to approue a thing



Plin. epist.



Adijcere animum, to set his mynde or loue
on oone.



Adijcere oculum hæreditati. Plane uidebant
adiectum esse oculum hæreditati, They saw
playnely, that the other wente aboute to
gette the inheritaunce.



Adimere animam, to kylle.



Adimere ius, to prohybyte.



Pli. de ui­
ris illustr.



Adimere uestem, to pulle of his garmente.



Adimere suum alteri, to take an other man­
nes goodes from hym.



Adinuenio, to inuente a thynge.



Adinuentum, an inuention.



Adipisci senectutem, to come to age.



Cicero de
senectu.



Adipisci, to ouertake one.



Adiposus, ryche.



Plautus in
Epidic.



Adipson, a swete roote callyd lykorys.



Adipsos, a certayne date tree growynge in
Egypte, the fruite wher of hath no stone,
Plinius callyth it Myrobalanum.



Adire ad pactionem, to come to a poynt.



Adire discrimen, to put hym in daunger.



Adire hæreditatem, to take on me, the, or him,
the inherytaunce.



Adire periculum, to take a daungerouse
thynge on hym.



Aditiculus, a lyttell entrie.



Adiungere, to wynne or optayne. Errat longe
mea quidem sententia, qui imperium credat




grauius esse aut stabilius, ui quod fit, quam
id quod amicitia adiungitur, He is foule de­
ceyued in myne opynion, that thinketh,
that rule to be more ferme and stable, whi­
che is goten by vyolence, than that which
is obtayned by frendship.
Terent. in
Andria.Plautus in
Men.


Adiurgium, debate.



Adiuratio, a coniuringe.



Adiurati, confederate or alied togither
by othe.



Adiutor, an helper, Adiutrix.



Adiuuamen, helpe.



Adlino, nere, to enoynt, or rubbe a thinge
with any thinge liquide.



Administer, a stuarde of householde.



Administro, rare, to do seruyce, to exployte,
to fournyshe.



Administratio, exploytynge or doynge of a
thinge, seruice.



Admirabilis, wonderfull.



Admirabundus, he that doeth wonder or
maruayle at a thinge.



Admisceo, scui, cere, to myngle or mixte one
thinge with another.



Admistio, onis, a menglynge or mixture.



Admiste, an aduerbe signifyenge, one men­
glyd with another.



Admistura, idem quod admistio.



Salust.



Admittere uitam, to retayne lyfe, to lyue.



Plautus in
Men.



Admittere, to do. Quid tandem admisi in te?
what haue I offended the?



Plautus in
Pen.



Admittere noxiam, to pardon an offence.



Admittere diem, to open the wyndowe, that
the lyght maye come in.
Plin ep.21.


Cicero de
finib. 2.



Admittere equum, to lyte vp to horsebacke,
or as we saye, to take his horse.



Tit. Liu.2.
Valerius.3



Admittere, to put the male beste to the fe­
male for generacion.



Te. in Ad.



Admittere sumptum, to do great coste.



Admodum, ye.



Adnato, tare, to swym to a place.



Adnecto, tere, to knyt to a thynge.



Adnexio, a knyttynge or fastning to a thing.



Adnicto, nixi, nictere, to wynke on one.



Festus.



Adnitor, niteris, niti, to leane to a thinge, to
beare or sustayne it.



Adnotatio, a titillinge, or short notinge of
that, which we do reade or here.



Adnumero, rare, to adde to.



Adolabilis, withoute grief or sorowe.



Adolescens, tis, a yonge man, whiche is yet
growynge.



Adolescentulus, a ladde.



Adonai, the name of god amonge the Iues,
which signyfyeth, The Lorde of all cre­
atures.



Adoperio, rire, to kouer or hyde.



Adoptatitius, he whome a manne ordayneth
to be his heyre, and taketh vnto him in the
stede of his sonne.



Adoptio, where a manne maketh one his
heyre, and taketh hym for his sonne, be­
inge of his owne kynne or a straunger.



Ador, & Adoreum, a kynde of wheate, cal­
led also Far, which by the description se­
meth to be the wheate, whiche we calle
ducke byll.



Adorno, nare, to apparayle, to prepare, to
prayse.



Adquiro, quisiui, quirere, to geate, to con­
quere.



Adquo, for quousque, vntyll.



Adramelech, an ydolle of Syria, whome al­
so the Samaritanes honoured.



Adrastia, a contraye not ferre from Troye,
also the name of a citye there. It was also
called a goddesse, which toke from manne
both memory and wytte.



Adrastus, a kynge of Argyues in Greece,
qho hadde two dawghters, of the which
the one was maryed to Tideus, the other
to Polynices, reade the historye of the
syege of Thebes.



Adrepo, psi, pere, to reache at a thynge, to
take it with vyolence.



Adscisco, scere, to ioyne or take to, as whan
one ioyneth another with hym in auctori­
ty, or taketh one to ayde him in his office.



Adscriptitii, were men of warre, whyche
were taken into an armye to supplye the
places of them that were slayne, or other
wyse lacked.



Ascripti, were they that were appoynted to
inhabyte townes or cityes, made by the
Romanes, called Coloniæ.



Adscriptiui, idem quod Adscriptitii.



Adsitis domi facite, Se that ye be bothe at
home.



Aduallas, a mountayne, frome the whyche
the great ryuer called the Rene, runneth
Northward.



Adubanus, the famouse ryuer called also
Danubius and Hister.



Aduelitatio, a mutuall reprochinge, or con­
tention in wordes.



Aduentus, tus, a commynge.



Aduerbialiter, lyke an aduerbe.



Aduersaria, a reknynge booke of expensis,
wryten fyrst afore the booke of accompte
be made.



Aduersa ærumna, aduersyty, dammage.



Terentius
in Phorm.



Aduersa valetudo, syckenesse.



Aduersatus, ta, tum, agaynst or contrary.



Aduersis vulneribus, with woundes in the
forepart.
Pli de ui­
ris illustr.


Aduerso flumine, agaynst the streme.



Aduersus, sa, sum, that whereof onely the
fore parte is sene, as Auersus, wherof on­




onely the hynderpart is sene.



Aduorso animo, agaynst my wyll, thy wyll,
or his wyll: agaynst his hart.



Aduersum, agaynst. Quis est hic, qui aduer­
sum mihi fit? Who is he that commeth a­
gaynst me, or marchyth towarde me?



Aduersum, for erga.



Aduertere, to perceyue.



Aduertere animum, to take hede, or herken.



Pli. in pan.



Aduertere oculos, to perceyue, to see, to
beholde.



Aduesperascit, the euenynge, or euentyde is
commen, or it waxyth late, or it is nyght.



Aduigilo, uigilare, to watche, to take good
heede.



Adulteror, rari, idem quod Adultero.



Adumbratus, a, um, fayned, countrefayted,
portured.



Adumbratio, portrayture.



Adulator, toris, a flaterar.



Adulatrix, a woman that flatreth.



Aduocito, tare, to call for one often.



Aduocatus, he that defendeth an other
mans cause.



Aduocatio, pleadynge.



Aduoluo, uere, to wrappe rounde togither.



Aduorsor, for Aduersor.



Aduorsem, olde wrytars vsed for Aduersa­
rium. 



Aduro, ussi, urere, to rost, to burne.



Adustio, rostinge, or burnynge.



Adustus, ta, tum, rostyd, or burned.



Adyticulum, a dyminutif of Adytum.

 

¶ A, ANTE E.

AEantion, a towne in the promontory
or hill of Troye, called Sigeum.



Aeas, æantos, a ryuer of a contraye
called Epyrus, whiche runneth oute of
Macedonia, and falleth into the Se cal­
led Ionium.



Aeacus, was the sonne of Iupiter and Eu­
ropa, whome Paynymes dyd suppose to
be of suche iustice, that he was appoynted
by Pluto, called godde of hell, to be one
of the iuges there, with Minoes and Ra­
damanthus, to discusse the transgressyons
of menne beynge deed, and to assigne to
theym punysshement accordinge to their
merites.



Aedificatio, buyldynge.



Aedificator, a buyldar.



Aeditio, a publication of a thinge.



Aeger, ægra, um, sycke, sorowfull.



Aegerrime, very greuously.



Aedes, a chambre.



Aedilitius, a, um, pertayninge to Aediles.



Aeditimus, idem qui Aedituus.



Aedon, a Nightingale.



Aeg&ecedil;, a citie in Cilicia, also an Ile in the Se
called Aegeum.



Aeg&ecedil;on, a gyant called also Briareus, also
it is one of the names of Neptunus. 



Aegæa, a cytye in Macedonia, another in
Mauritania.



Aegeria, a Nymphe or goddesse, with whom
Numa Pompilius the seconde kynge of
Romanes, fayned to haue familiar com­
pany and communicacion concernyng re­
ligion and worshyppynge of goddes, to
the intent that he mought thereby with­
drawe the people frome the appetyte of
warres, wherewith they were inflamed.



Aegæum mare. 



Aegeus, the father of Theseus. 



Aegealus, was a countraye called also A­
chaia, in Greece.



Aegides, of Aegeus, patronymicum.



Aegylops, wylde otes.



Aegina, a citie ioynynge to Peloponeso or
Morea, agaynste the countraye of Athe­
nes, also an Ile frome Pireum .xii. myles.



Aeginenses, the people of Aegina the citie.



Aeginitæ, people of the Ile of Aegina.



Aegineticus, ca, cum, of Aegina.



Aegimuros, an Ile called also Capraria, be­
yonde Corse.



Aegiochus, a name of Iupiter. 



Aegis, gidis, an haubergeon, whiche onely
the goddis were paynted with.



Aegium, a towne in Peloponeso, now cal­
led Morea, where they fayned that Iupi­
ter was norysshed with a gote.



Aegle, a Nymphe.



Aegloga, a communication of shepeherdes
togither.



Aegocephalus, a byrde, which is withoute
a splene.
Aristot. de
animali. 2.


Aegocerus, idem quod Capricornus.



Aegonomus, a gote herde, or kepar of
gotes.



Aegos, a ryuer in Thracia.



Aegre, with moche payne, or difficulty.



Aegrefero, tuli, ferre, to be sory.



Aegresco, sci, scere, to be sycke.



Aegrum, idem quod ægritudo, sorowe, dis­
pleasure.



Aegrius, more sorowfully, more displea­
sauntly.



Aegrio, I am sycke.



Aegritudo, dinis, grief of mynde, or sorow.



Aegrotare, to fayle, or be feble of courage.



Aegrotus, feble of courage.



Aegula, a kynde of brymstone, wherewith
in some places they doo perfume wulle to
make it whyte.



Aegylops, a fistula in the corner of the eye




by the nose of a manne, whiche rounneth
mattier.



Aegyptini, people of Ethiope, marchynge
on Egypte.



Aegyptius, & Aegyptiacus, a, um, of Egypt.



Aegyptus, the countrey callyd Egypte.



Aegypstus, he that slewe Agamemnon. 



Aelius, the propre name of a Romayne.



Festus.



Aelurus, a catte.



Aemidum, swollen.



Aemilius, the propre name of a Romayne.



Aemilia, a countray in Italy, callid also Fla­
minia, & Romandiola.



Aemulatio, enuye, or imitation.



Aemonia, a countray callyd also Thessalia.



Aenëas, a noble man of Troy, which with
Anthenor betrayed the citie of Troy.



Aenobarbus, the name of a Romain, so cal­
lyd bycause he had a berde as red as brasse.



Aeolium mare, the see ioynynge to Asia.



Aeolus, callyd the kynge of wyndes.



Aequalitas, equalitie.



Aequatio, the equall diuision of a thyng, or
where one thing is made equal to an other.



Aequidium, idem quod equinoctium.



Aequilanium, seu aequilaneum, the half deale
of the hole.



Varro.



Aequimentum, hyre of a horse, or other beest.



Aequipollentia, equalitie in estymation or
valewe.



Aequipondium, of equall or lyke weight.



Aequiter, iustely.



Aequiualentia, equall value.



Aequiuocatio, makynge dyuers significa­
tions to one worde.



Aquiuoce, dyuersely sygnyfyenge in oone
worde or terme.



Aequoreus, ea, um, of the see.



Aerius, a, um, of the ayre.



Aerarius, he that was put from his fredom
of a cytesin, & payd tribute as a straunger.
Cicero.


Plautus.



Aera, ræ, dernel, whiche groweth in corne.



Aeratus, indetted.



Aerarii Tribuni, were treasourers, whiche
payde to the souldiours their wages.



Aerarii præfectus, hygh Treasourer.



Aere meo. Multi n anni sunt, cum ille in ære
meo est, It is longe time passed that I ac­
compted hym in the numbre of my frendes,
or for one of myne.



Aerificium, the crafte to make any thynge
of brasse or copper.



Aero, rare, to dresse with copper or brasse.



Aeromantia, diuynation or coniecture of
thynges to come by the ayre.



Aerosus, a, um, that wherin brasse or copper
is, or wherof it is made.



Aerumnalis, le, where in is greatte peyne
or laboure.



Aerumnatus, brought to myserye.



Plautus.



Aerumnosus, a, um, myserable, full of payne
or trauayle.



Aerumnulæ, lytell croked staues, wherwith
menne do carye fardelles and trusses on
theyr backes.



Aes circumforaneum, money layd in banke.



Aesculapius, the sonne of Apollo, callid god
of medycine.



Aesopus, an auncient wryter of fables. also
the name of a famous player in tragedies.



Aestimare litem, to taxe the damages and
costes, that a man hath susteyned by wrong.



Aestus, doutfulnes, or flittyng of the minde.



Pli. in epi.



Aeta, an hylle in Thessalye.



Aetabula, chyldehode.



Aetalia, an Ile in the see by Geane.



Aetatem meam me viduam esse mauelim, quam
istæc flagitia tua pati, quæ tu facis, I hadde
leauer be a wydowe all my lyfe, than to in­
dure this trouble that I haue with the.
Plautus.


Aetatem uelim seruire, Litanum modo ut con­
ueniam, I wolde do seruyce all the dayes
of my lyfe, on the condicion that I mought
mete with Litanus. 
Plautus.


Aetas acta est mihi, my tyme is passed.



Cicero.



Aetas bona, the flowre of youthe.



Aetate adulta, of full age.



Aetate affecta, of olde age.



Aetate exacta, very aged, in extreme age.



Aetate confectus, idem.



Aetate integra, in the floure of youth.



Aetate prouecta, aged, or of great age.



Aetatem, an aduerbe, signifieth longe time.
Iam dudum &ecedil;tatem lites sunt inter eos, There
hath ben variance betwene them long time.



Aeterne, euerlastyngely.



Aeterno, nare, to make perpetuall.



Aethereus, a, um, of the firmament. Anaxa­
goras putteth it for the element of fyre.



Aethiopia, a great countrey in Affrike, con­
teynynge many regyons, callyd Ethiope:
wherin be founde people, beastes, and ser­
pentes of meruaylous forme. It hathe on
the west, the mountaynes callid Athlantes,
on the easte it extendeth to the marches of
Egypt: on the south it hath the see occean:
on the northe parte, it is inclosed with the
ryuer callyd Nilus.



Aethiopicus, ca, cum, of Ethiope.



Aethiopissa, a woman of Ethiope.



Aethiops, æthiopis, a man of Ethiope.



Aethon, oue of the horses of Phebus. 



Aethrusci, the olde Inhabytauntes of the
countray in Italy, callid nowe Tuscana.



Aetiologia, a rehersynge of the cause.



Aetites, a precious stone, whiche hath the
colour of an egles tayle that is whyte.



Aetius, the name of a famous writer in phisik.






Aetolia, a countraye in Grece.



Aeuitas, eternitye.

 

¶ A, ANTE F.

AFfecta, almoste fynysshed, or nyghe
at a poynt.
Sueton. in
Vesp.


Affecta fides, credence almost lost.



Plautus



Affectus uirgis, beaten with roddes.



Affectus morbo, vexed with sycknesse.



Cice.



Affectum bellum, warres nyghe at a poynt.



Affecta ætas, Somer well nyghe passed.



Cice.



Affectio, affection, sometyme trouble of
mynde.



Varro.



Affector, taris, idem quod Affecto.



Afferre auxilium, to helpe, to ayde.



Varr. de re
rust.



Afferre dentes, to byte.



Afferre manus, to set violent handes on one.



Afferre uim alicui, to make assault on one.



Afferre molestiam, to do displeasure to one.



Afferre morbum, to make sycke.



Catullus.



Afferre pedem, to come. Abite, vnde malum,
pedem attulistis, Goo hense, frome whense
with a myschief ye came.



Affero ad te salutem, I come to salute you.



Afficere cura, to brynge in care.



Afficere lucro, to make one to wynne or
gayne.



Afficere bonis nunciis, to brynge good ty­
dynges. Vti bonis uos, uestrosque omnes
nuntiis me afficere uultis, As ye will that I
brynge to you and yours good tydinges.
Affecit præda atque agro populares suos, He
made his countray men ryche both of lan­
des and goodes.
Plaut.Plaut.


Cicero.



Afficere stipendio, to paye to hym his
wages.



Affici, to be moued with affection.



Affinis negociis publicis, he that medleth
with the affaires of a communalty.



Affinitas, tatis, affinity, aliance.



Affinis rei capitalis, gylty of a great offence,
which deserueth deth.



Affinis sceleris, gylty of the trespace.



Affirmatiue, with an affirmaunce.



Afflatus, tus, a blast.



Plautus.



Affleo, affleui, flêre, to wepe in the remem­
braunce of a thinge.



Salust.



Afflictus, stryken downe to the grounde.



Affligere, to throwe or beate downe to the
grounde.



Plaut.



Affligam te ad terram scelus, si me uno digi­
to attigeris, I will beate the downe to the
grounde wretche, yf thou touchest me but
with one fyngar.



Affluenter, abundantly.



Affluentia, abundance.



Affluens, tis, abundant.



Afformido, dare, to haue greate feare.



Affricus, ca, cum, of Affrike.

 

¶ A ANTE G.

AGar, the mayden of Sara, on whom
Abraham begate Ismael. 



Agaricum, a thynge lyke to a whyte
mussheron growyng on the stem of a tree,
and is called Agarike, which is medicina­
ble in pourginge of fleame.



Agaso, sonis, a horse kepar, a muletour.



Agatho, the name of one of the sonnes of
Priamus, also a boye, whom Plato louyd.



Agathyrsi, people by Scithia, whyche be
ryche of golde, and yet be neyther couay­
touse nor enuyouse, and their heares are
blue.



Agathocles, was a kynge of Sicile.



Age dicat, let hym speke on, let hym speke
hardyly.



Age, age ut lubet, well go to, do what ye
wyll.



Age. & agite, go forth, furth on.



Agea, a way in a shyppe.



Agelastus, he that neuer lawghyd.



Agenor, the father of Europa, whome Iu­
piter rauysshed, & of Cadmus, who buyl­
ded the citye of Thebes.



Agere, to here, to perceyue. Vos agite spe­
ctatores, ye that beholde, heere, or take
heede. Hoccine agis, an non? Perceyuest
thou this matter or no? also to conclude.
Herus me relictis rebus, iussit Pamphilum
hodie obseruare, ut quid ageret de nuptiis
scirem, My master hath commaunded me,
that layenge all thinges apart, I shoulde
awayte vppon Pamphilus, to thintente I
mought knowe, what he wolde conclude,
touchinge the mariage.
Plautus.Terentius.


Agere, to go. Quo hinc te agis? Whyther
goest thou from hense? Sometyme it sig­
nifieth to come. Vnde agis te nunc Dorpa­
le? from whense commest thou now Dor­
palus. 
Terentius


Agere. Pectus mihi agit nunc cubito. She
hitteth me on the hart with her elbowe.
Plautus.


Agere ad præscriptum, to do that, that he
was appoynted.



Agere ætatem, to lyue.



Agere ambages. Quid opus me multas age­
re ambages? what nedeth me to make ma­
ny wordes? or to speke by circumlocu­
tion?
Plautus.


Agere animam, to dye.



Agere annum octingentesimum, to lyue eight
hundred yeres.



Agere apologum, to tell hym a fable.



Plautus.



Agere amicum, to do lyke a frende, or playe
the part of a frende.
Pli. in pan.





Agere cum aliquo, to treate with one, or to
speke. Cum mecum sæpe ageres, ut de ami­
citia scriberem: Where often tymes thou
dyddest intreate me, that I shulde wryte
of frendshyppe. Illo præsente, mecum a­
gito, si quid uoles: If thou wilt any thinge
with me, speake it in the presence of that
manne.
Plautus.


Agere iniuriarum, to sue one for trespase or
wronges done.



Agere summo iure, to procede with rigour.



Agere suo iure, to execute his auctority.



Agere lege, to sue, to procede by the waye
of Iustice.



Plautus.



Agere diris malis, to curse.



Agere mensuras fideliter, to measure thin­
ges iustly.



Agere nugas, to mocke, to tryfle.



Cicero.



Agere orationem, to pronounce an oration.



Agere uineas, to laye ordinaunce to a thing.



Actum de me est, I am vndone.



Agesilaus, a kynge of Lacedemony, which
was lytle of stature, an haltyd on the one
foote, but in vertue, wysedome, and pro­
wesse he excelled all princes of his tyme,
whose lyfe is wryten by Plutarche and
Xenophon. 



Plautus.



Aggerere, to brynge to one. Namque escator,
amor & melle & felle est fœcundissimus, gu­
stu dat dulce, amarum usque ad sacietatem ag­
gerit, for in good fayth, loue hath abun­
dance both of hony and galle, in taste it is
pleasaunte, but it bryngeth with it bytter­
nesse, so moch that it becometh lothesome.



Aggrauatio, a grief, a bourdon.



Aggrauesco, scere, to waxe more greuouse.



Aggredi, to assayle.



Ennius.



Aggretus, idem quod Aggressus.



Agiliter, nymbly, quyuerly.



Aginor, nari, to marchandyse vyle thinges,
or of small value.
Cicero.


Agis rem actam, thou lesest thy labour.



Agitrem suam, he goeth aboute his owne
busynesse.



Plautus.



Agit hic perpetuum diem sol, The sone shy­
neth here all the daye longe.



Agitare, to intreate well, to compell to go.
Iam calcari quadrupedem agitabo aduersum
cliuum: Nowe will I with a spurre make
my horse runne vppe the hill.
Terentius
Plautus.


Agitare conuiuium, to banket and make good
chiere. Age ergo hoc agitemus conuiuium,
uino et sermone suaui, Therfore go to, lote
vs banket, drynke talke and make goode
chiere.
Plautus.


Plautus.



Agitare custodiam, to take good hede in ke­
pynge of one.



Plautus.



Agitare diem, to passe forth the daye.



Agitare imperium, to gouerne. In pace vero,
beneficiis magis quam metu imperium agi­
tabant: In the tyme of peace, they gouer­
ned, more by gentyllnesse, than by feare.



Agitare iustitiam, to exercise iustice.



Pli in epi.



Agitare letitiam, to make ioye.



Salust.



Agitare mente, to conceyue in the mynde, to
thinke.



Agitare cum animo, to reuolue in the mynd.



Salust.



Agitare præsidium, to be in garyson.



Salust.



Agitare uigilias, to kepe watche.



Agitare uitiam, to lyue.



Agitatio, a meuynge or styrringe. alsoo ex­
ercise.



Agitator, a dryuer of a cart, or of beastis.



Agitedum, ite mecum, than forth, and come
ye on with me.



Agitur mecum bene, I am in good condicion.
Agere bene, sometyme is of a lyke signy­
fication.
Val. Max.
de Miltia.


Agitur de capite, de fama, &c. whan the life
or renomme is in daunger to be lost.



Agitur res capitis, the question or mater in
debate, concernyth lyfe.
Terent.


Aglaia, one of them which are called Cha­
rites, gracis.



Agnascentia membra, membres whiche are
superfluouse, as where one hath thre leg­
ges, or syxe fingars on one hande, and o­
ther lyke.
Plinius.


Agnitio, knowlege.



Agon, agonis, a contention in fourme of ba­
tayle, or a wrastlyng, also the place where
it was exercysed.



Agonalia, certayne festiuall dayes kepte a­
monge the Romaynes.



Agonensis porta, a gate of Rome callyd al­
so Colina.



Agones, were sometyme callyd hylles.



Agônia, sacrifice done on hylles.



Agonius, was named a god, whiche hadde
preemynence ouer thynges to be done.



Agraria lex, a lawe made for the common dis­
position of landes, as be oure statutes of
inclosures and decayenge of husbandry.
but amonge the Romaynes they were su­
che lawes as dyd appoynte, howe moche
lande a Senatour shuld haue, and not ex­
cede, and howe moche shulde be dyuided
amonge the people.



Aggrigentinus, tina, num, of the towne of
Agrigentum, whiche is in Sicile.



Agricolatio, tyllage or husbandry.



Agricultura, husbandry.



Agricultor, an husbandeman.



Agrippina, the name of the mother of Ne­
ro the Emperour. Also the dawghter of
Octauyan. 



Agrippina, Colonia, the citie of Coleyne.



Agylla, a citie in Thuscana.






¶ A ANTE H.
¶ 

Ah, a voyce of lamentyng or sorowyng.

 

¶ A ANTE I.

AIax, the name of .ii. noble men of Grece



Ain, for aisne, is it as thou sayst?



Terentius



Ain uero, idem.



Non. Mar.



Aiutamini, for adiuuate.



Aizon, an herbe callyd Syngrene, it gro­
weth on a tyled house.

 

¶ A ANTE L.

ALaband&ecedil;, a citie in Grece, in the coun­
trey of Ionia.



Alabandicus, ca, cum, of that citie.



Alabarches, he that hath the rule ouer salt:
and amonge the Egyptians it was an ho­
nourable name.



Alabaster, & alabastrum, a kynde of marble
callyd alabaster.



Alacriter, promptly, couragiously, gladly.



Alacre, idem.



Alania, a region of Scithia in Europa, whi­
che stretcheth vnto the greatte fennes of
Meotis.



Alani, people callyd also Massaget&ecedil;.



Alaricus, a kynge of Gothes, whyche dy­
stroyed Rome.



Alarij equites, horsemen, whyche are in the
wynges of a battayle.



Alauorsi, people in the vttermoste parte of
the Northe.



Alba, the name of two cities in Italy.



Albana, a cite in Arabia. also a region in the
east, wherein is also a citie callyd Albania.



Albanus, a riuer not farre from the citie of
Rome. also the name of two cities, one in
Macedonia, the other in Armenia.



Albanus, a, um, of Alban in Italy. albani pa­
tres, the Senatours of Alba.



Albegmina, parte of the inward of bestes,
which was offred to Dis, callid god of hel.



Albenses, people of Alba.



Albesco, scere, to be white.



Albi calculi, whyte stones, with the whiche
the people of Creta dyd note or mark the
dayes, wherin they had good fortune: like
as they marked yll dayes with blacke sto­
nes, callyd nigri calculi.



Albia, a ryuer, whyche passeth through the
realme of Boemia.



Albicera, a kynde of olyue tree.



Albicerat&ecedil; ficus, brode fygges, with a small
stalke. Albidus, da, dum, somewhat white.



Albinga, a towne in Liguria.



Albinus, the name of an emperour.



Albion, the ancient name of England. also
the name of one of the sonnes of Neptunus 



Albis, a ryuer in Boemia, whyche cometh
to the citie of Prage.



Albogalerus, a hatte, whyche the greatte
priestis of Iupiter, callyd Flamines Dialis,
dydde weare.



Albor, albugo, & albumen, the whyte of an
egge. albugo, is alsoo a whyte spotte in a
mannes eye.



Albosia, shieldes or targates.



Albula, the olde name of the ryuer of Ti­
ber. also a water in the felde callyd Tibur­
tinus, which was medicinable for sore eien.



Album plumbum, tynne.



Albunia, a wodde and fountayne by the ri­
uer callyd Aniene, in Italy.



Alburnus, a hyll in Lucania.



Alc&ecedil;a, a lyon.



Alce, a wylde beast in the woddes of Ger­
many, in facion and skyn lyke to a gote, but
greter, which haue no iointes in theyr leg­
ges, & therfore they do neuer ly, but only do
leane to trees, whan they do rest them, which
the hunters knowyng, doo sawe the trees
that they leane to, halfe a sonder, whereby
they falle downe, and be taken.



Alces, a beast in France lyke a mule, but he
hath his ouer lyppe so longe, that whan he
fedeth, he goth backewarde, or els he can
not bite of the grasse and herbes, whiche
he shulde eate. The horsekynde of them
haue hornes on their ouer browes.



Alceste, seu Alcestis, the wyfe of Admetus
the kinge of the people callid Pherei, who
being sicke, and hauing answere of the god­
dis, that he shuld escape dethe, if any of his
kynne or frendes wold die for him willing­
ly, whan all men and women refused it, only
Alceste his wife consented therto, and wil­
lyngly dyed.



Alc&ecedil;us, a famous poete.



Alchech, in the Araby tongue, is the beast,
whiche is callid Linx, whiche is begotten
betwene a lyon and a lybarde.



Alcibiades, a noble capitayne of the Athe­
nienses, whiche in nobilitie, beautie, pro­
wesse, actiuitie, & eloquence, passed al other
in his tyme, nat withstandynge his vyces
were accompted equall vnto his vertues.



Alcides, idem quod Hercules. 



Alcinous, the name of a kyng of a peple cal­
lid Ph&ecedil;aces, excellent in Iustice, which had a
fayre and magnifike palyce, with orchardes
which bare most plentuousely fruites twyse
in the yere. Alcman, a famous poete.
Homerus
Odyss.


Alcmena, the mother of Hercules. 



Alcmenes, a cunnynge grauour.



Alcon, was a good archer of Creta, which
beholdynge a dragon redy to deuoure his
sonne, dydde shoote so craftily, that as the
dragon was imbracynge of the chylde, the
arowe passed vnto his harte, and hurte nat




his son, so that the dragon immediatly died.



Alcyon&ecedil;, the name of .ii. ladies, wherof the
one was wife to Ceisis, who seing the deed
body of her husband cast on land, threw her
self into the see, whom the poetes fained to
be turnid into a bird of that name: the other
was doughter of Euene, callid also Marpesia



Aleatorium, a dice playing, or a dycyng hous.
Suetonius calleth it aleatorium forum.



Alebria, thinges whiche do nourishe well.



Alec, is a sauce made of the liuers of fishes.
also a fyshe, callyd a hearyng.



Alecto, one of the furies of Hell.



Alectoria, a stone founde in a cockes gysar
or mawe, of the greatenes of a beane, of
the colour of christall.



Alemani, peple of Germany, callid Germains



Aleo, aleonis, a dysar, or dyseplayer.



Aletudo, fattenesse of the body.



Alexander, the name of a man, specially of a
king of Macedony, which conquered al the
east part of the world, and was in prowesse
and wysedom incomparable: but being drow­
ned in ouermoche felicitie, he felle into ex­
cedinge pride and crueltie, and was at the
laste poysoned, and died in Babylon, exce­
dynge lyttell the age of thirty yeres.



Alexandria, the name of a great citie in E­
gypt. also of dyuers other cities.



Alexandrinus, na, num, of Alexandria.



Algenses, fyshes callyd also purpur&ecedil;.



Algidense, a kynde of radysshe, longe and
clere through.



Algidus, a mountain .xii. myles from Rome.



Algida sylua, a wod at the fote of that moun­
tayne. Algo, idem quod algeo.



Alguasen, an herbe like to a lyly.



Algus, uel algu, colde.



Plautus.



Alia, a ryuer .xi. myles from Rome.



Alias res agis, thou thinkest on other mat­
ters. Vnde anulum istum nactus? dic mihi, ille ali­
as res agere se simulare, Tel me where gat­
test thou this ryng? he made semblance as
yf he thought on an other matter.



Alicarij, they that do sell alicam.



Alicariæ, common harlottes.



Alicastrum, a diminutiue of alica.



Alienatio, an alienation or alteration.



Alienator, he that altereth a thynge.



Alienior ætate, of nonage, not of competent age.



Terentius



Alienus animus, Iam primum illum alieno a­
nimo a nobis esse, res ipsa indicat: The thing
selfe declareth, that euen nowe he hath no
fauour toward vs, that he is not my frend.



Alieno more mihi uiuendum est, I must lyue
after an other mans facion.



Aliena consilii, vnmete for the counsell.



Salust.



Alienum suis rationibus, vnprofytable for
his purpose.



Alienatus, a, um, put away, altered, estranged.



Alienos agimus, we become strange vnto them



Alimentarius, a, um, pertaining to liuinge or
sustinance. Alimonia, idem quod alimentum.



Alimodi, idem quod aliusmodi, of an nother
facion or maner.



Aliouersum, towarde an other place.



Aliptes, he that annoynteth a man.



Aliquis, aliqu&ecedil;, aliquod, some.



Alirei, Plautus vseth for ali&ecedil; rei.



Alisma, an herbe callyd also barba syluana,
water plantayne.



Aliter ac, aliter atque, aliter auam, otherwise than.



Alites, byrdes.



Aliubi, for alicubi, somewhere.



Aliuta, olde writers vsed for aliter.



Aliusmodi, in an other maner, of an other facion



Alligare aliquem furto, to apech one of felony



Alligare se furti, to charge him self of felony 



Alligator, he that byndeth.



Alligatura, a bonde.



Allobrox, allobrogis, a man or woman of the
countray in Fraunce, callyd Dolpheny.



Allocutio, a speakynge to one.



Allocutum ire, to commune with one.



Alloquium, communication, speche.



Aludor, idem quod alludo.



Alluuium, idem quod alluuies. Alluuio, idem.



Almities, quietenes, secretenes.



Almopia, parte of Macedonia.



Aloe, aloes, is vsed commonly for a iuyce of
an herbe congeled lyke a gumme, wherof be
two sortes, one is named Succotrina, which
is like a lyuer, redde, bright, & bronkle: the
other is callyd Caballina, and is sandy and
grosse. The fyrste clenseth and confirmeth
the stomake of a man, and therfore is mixt
with purgatiue medicines, bicause they shal
not anoy or hurt the stomake, the last is oc­
cupied about horses and other beastis.



Aloe lignum, or lignum aloes, is a swete & pre­
cious wod, which beinge receiued in medi­
cine, comforteth the stomake, and all the in­
ferior partis of a man, & maketh swete breth.



Alogia, vnreasonable or beastly feding, and
ingurgitation of meate and drinke.



Alopecus, he that hath a pylde heed, that is
to say, the heares fallynge with scurfe.



Alosa, a fyshe callyd also Laccia, and Clu­
pea, is that, whiche by the description of
Paulus Iouius semeth to be a cheuyn.



Alphabetarii, they whiche do lerne first the
order of letters.



Alphabetum, the order of letters, as a. b. c.



Alpheus, a riuer in Archadia, also the name
of a manne.



Alphos, a morphy or staining of the skinne.



Alpinus, a, um, of the mountains of Alpes.



Alpus, pale, carefull, or studious.






Alsine maior, an herbe callyd wodbynde.



Alsine minor, an herbe callyd the seconde
mouse eare.



Alsiosus, a, um, colde of nature. also whiche
are soone hurt or anoyed with colde.



Altanus, a wynd, which is on the depe sees.



Alte, on hygh.



Altellus, a surname of Romulus the foun­
der of Rome.



Alter & vicesimus, one and twentie.



Alter quisquem, any other.



Alteras, olde writers vsed for alias.



Altercatio, a contention in wordes, where
one man purposeth, an nother replyeth.



Altercum, siue altercagenum, an herbe cal­
lyd also faba porcina.



Alterplex, plicis, old writers vsed for duplex
double.



Alteria, idem quod alterutra.



Altior altius, hygher.



Altissimus, ma, mum, hyghest.



Altimetor, an Instrument wherwith highe
thinges are mette.



Altinum, an old citie by the riuage of Venice.



Altinates, people of Altinum.



Altitudo, height, or depenes.



Plautus.



Altrouersum, on the other parte, or on the
other syde.



Altum otium, longe reste, great leysure.



Aluini, they whiche haue frettyng in theyr
bealyes with contynuall fluxe.



Alumnatus, nouryshed.



Alyba, a countraye not farre frome Mista,
where as Homerus dothe write, were mi­
nes of syluer.



Alysius, the name of Bacchus. 



Alysina, an herbe callyd water plantayne.

 

¶ A, ANTE M.

AMalthea, a woman, whiche with her
syster callyd Melssa, nouryshed Iu­
piter with the milke of a gote. Also
the name of a prophetesse.



Amantior, more louynge.



Amantissimus, moste louynge.



Amantissime, moste louyngely.



Amanthes, people in Affrike, whiche haue
suche plentie of precious stones, that they
buylde therwith houses.
Solinus.


Amanus, a mountayne callyd also Taurus.



Amaracinum, an oyle made of maioram.



Amaramis, the father of Moyses. 



Amarantus, an herbe, which groweth a fote
in height, & hath leues like basile, and hath a
floure facionid like an ere of wheat, of crim­
son colour, which neuer dieth: in frenche it
is callid Passeuelute. some there be, whiche
do suppose it to be callid in englysh Baldar.



Amarico, are, to make bitter, to make angry



Amaror, idem quod amaritudo.



Amarus, ra, rum, bytter, very angry.



Amariscus, an herbe callydde Mathis, or
Dogge fenell.



Amarillis, the name of a shepeherde in the
bucolicis of Vergile. 



Amasenus, a ryuer in Italy.



Amasias, a kyng of Iewes: whiche signy­
fieth as moche as populum tollens.



Amasis, was a noble kynge of Egypt, whi­
che made a lawe, that euery yere, eche man
shulde make a rekeninge to the heed offy­
cer of his realme, of his life, & shew wher­
by he liued, or by what occupation he was
susteined, and he the dyd not make suche
accompt shulde be put to deathe.



Amasso, idem quod amauero.



Amatio, a louynge.



Amastrum, uel Amastris, the principall citie
of Paphlagonia.



Amath, the sonne of Chanaan. 



Iosephus.



Amathus, thuntis, a cite in Ciprus, dedicate to
Venus. Amathuntius, a, um, of the sayd citie.



Amathusa, the yle of Ciprus.



Amaurosis, the dymnesse of the eyen.



Amazones, women of Scithia, which wanne
a great part of Asia: who slewe all the men
chyldren, and kept the women chyldren, of
whom they burned the right pappe, bicause
it shulde not lette them to throwe their Ia­
uelyns, or to shote.



Amazohicus, ca, cum, pertayning to the Ama­
zones. Amazonius, a, um, idem quod Amazonicus.



Amazonicus, nici, a countraye callyd after
warde Cesaria.



Ambarualis hostia, was a sacrifice made for
the fieldes, with a sowe great with farowe.



Ambedo, ere, to eate or gnaw about a thing



Ambegni, were an oxe and a ramme, where
on euery side of them lambis were brought
to be sacrificed. Ambesus, a, um, eaten rounde.



Ambest, idem quod circumest.



Ambiani, seu Ambianenses, people in France
about Languedoke.



Ambidentes, shepe of two tethe, of somme
callyd hogges, of some theaues.



Ambiguitas, doubtfulnesse.



Ambitus, ta, tum, enuyronned or compassed.



Ambitus, tus, inclosure, alsoo ambycion or
desyre of promotion.



Ambra, a very swete thyng, whiche is found
on the see, as musherons are on the erth,
wherof is made very precious and cordial
medicines.



Ambracia, a cite in the countray callid Epirus
in Grece. Ambracienses, peple of Ambracia



Ambrices, tyles, which be layd ouerthwart
betwene other tyles.



Ambrones, people in France.



Ambrosia, an herbe, whiche some men doo
suppose to be Tansey.






Ambubeia, the commune cykorye with the
longe leafe, and the blewe floure, whyche
wyll be closed at the goinge downe of the
sonne, and opened at the rysynge.



Ambubeiæ, dronken drabbes, whiche wan­
der about the stretes.



Ambulariuncula, a lyttell walke.



Ambustus, ta, tum, bourned.



Amecus, & ameca, olde writers vsed for a­
micus, & amica.



Amen, a worde of Hebrue, which after the
interpretation of Aquila, signifieth fideliter,
faythefully, after the .lxx. interpretours, it
signifieth fiat, be it.



Amentia, foly.



Amento, tare, to bynde a thonge aboute a­
ny thynge.



Amentior, tius, madder.



Amentissimus, a, um, maddest.



Ameria, an olde citie in Italy.



America, a countrey late founde in the east
by Amercum Vesputium. 



Amerinum, a citie in Italy.



Amethystus, a precious stone of vyolet co­
lour, an ametyst.



Amethystinus, a, um, of an ametyst.



Amia, a fyshe lyke to a Tuny, but he hathe
no scales, but a playne skynne, which shy­
neth lyke to syluer mixte with blue, and his
tayle is in facyon lyke a newe moone.



Amica, a woman that is loued. alsoo a con­
cubyne.



Amicibor, for amiciam, I wyll clothe or put
on a garment.



Amicior, ciri, to be cladde.



Amicissime, moste frendely.



Amice, frendely. Amiciter, idem.



Amicissimus, a, um, moste frendely.



Amicius, more frendely.



Amictorium, a lynnen rayle that womenne
doo weare.



Amicula, a diminutiue of amica.



Amiculum, a short cloke.



Amiculatus, he that weareth a short cloke.



Amicabilis, le, frendely.



Plautus.



Amme&ecedil; vites, vynes growynge in a coun­
trey by Salerne.



Amyson, a famous citie in the royalme of
Pontus.



Amissio, the losse of a thynge.



Amissus, a, um, loste.



Amiternum, a towne in Campania, where
Salust was borne.



Amites, perches, wheron haukes be sette.



Plautus.



Amittere iusiurandum, to breake an othe, to
lose credence. Quod si non dederit, atque
hic dies præterierit, ego argentum, ille ius­
iurandum amiserit, If he doo not paye it,
and this day do passe, I shall lose my mo­
ney, but he shall lose his credence.



Amittere libidinem. Iam non possum, amisi
omnem libidinem, I may do no more, I am
paste all pleasure.
Plautus.


Ammon, a surname of Iupyter, worshyp­
ped in Egypte.



Amnestia, forgetfulnes of thynges passed.



Ammoniacum, a certayne gumme.



Amnicus, ca, cum, of the broke.



Amo, are, to loue.



Amæne, merily, pleasantly.



Amomum, a spyce growynge in India, lyke
to a wylde vyne, and is in colour somwhat
yelowe or browne, & very soote in sauour.



Amorrhei, peple beyond Hierusalem, & had
their name of Amorrheus the son of Canaan. 



Amores, wanton passetymes, or affections
of lecherye.



Amosio, for annuo.



Festus.



Amouere segnitiem, to caste away slouth.



Amouere crapulam, to parbreake whan one
is dronke.



Plautus.



Ampendices, old writers vsid for appendices.



Ampelos agria, a wylde vyne.



Amphibea, beastes or byrdis, which do liue
as well on the water, as on the lande.



Amphilogia, a forme in speakyng, where a
sentence may be taken two sondry or con­
trary wayes.



Ampelusia, an yle callyd nowe Tinge.



Amphibolum, a doubtefull sentence.



Amphibrachus, a foote in meter, beynge of
thre syllables, the fyrste and laste short, the
mydell syllable longe, as Cupido.



Amphilochus, a phylosopher.



Amphesibene, a serpent, hauynge two hed­
des, wherof the one is before, the other
behynde, where his tayle shulde be.



Amphimacrus, a foote in meter, hauing the
fyrst syllable and the last longe, the myd­
dell syllable shorte.



Amphimalla, garmentis rough on both sides



Amphitapetes, garmentes of Cotton on
bothe sydes hearye.



Amphimerimon, a feuer cotidyane, whiche
commeth of fleume.



Amphion, a man, whiche with naturall elo­
quence, brought rude and wilde people to
a ciuile forme of lyuynge: and as some do
suppose, founde first harmony.



Amphipolis, a citie nigh to Macedonia.



Amphiroe, a nimph or maiden of the ryuers.



Amphitana, a precious stone, the brimme or
edge wherof shineth lyke to golde.



Amphitheatrum, a round place made with sea­
tes or scaffoldis, where men beheld plays.



Amphitreatrales ludi, playes exercysed in
those places. Amphitrite, the wyfe of Nep­
tunus. it is also taken for the see.






Amphitrio, trionis, the husband of Alcme­
na, mother of Hercules. 



Amphitrionides, he that comith of the ligne
of Amphitrio. 



Amphictyones, the generalle or commune
counsayle of all Grecia.



Ampiruo, are, is proprely where in dauncing
like meuing or countenance that one maketh,
he vnto whom it is made, shal do the sembla­
ble, it was first vsid of the pristes callid Saly.



Amplant, olde writers vsid for amplificant,
they enlarge.



Ample, amply, largely.



Non. Mar.



Amplexa, for amplexare, imbrace or take to
you.



Amplexari, for amplecti.



Amplexus, imbracynges.



Ampliatio, a deferrynge of iudgement.



Amplificatio, an augmentation.



Amplifico, care, to augment.



Amplior, larger, greatter.



Amplissimus, a, um, greattest, largest.



Amplissimus ordo, was vsed for the Se­
nate of Rome.



Amplissimus magistratus, the highest office.



Ampliter, largely, abundantly, magnifikely.



Plautus.



Ampliter occupatus, let with moch busines.



Ampliter testis, witnes of al the hole matter



Amplius, more ouer, more largely.



Cæsar.



Amplius horas quatuor fortissime pugna­
uerunt, They foughte mightily more than
foure houres. Cœperunt amplius tria millia
hominum, They toke prisoners thre thou­
sande men and aboue.
Liuius.


Cicero.



Ampliare, to deferre or delaye a thynge in
iugement, to reprie.



Amplius pronuntiare, idem.



Ampron, a corde or chayne fastened to the
yokes, wherby beastes do drawe a wayne.



Ampullarius, a bottell maker.



Amuleus, the gret vncle of Romulus & Remus 



Amussitatus, tata, tum, made by lyne, welle
proporcyoned.



Amycl&ecedil;, a citie in Lacedemonia, where Ca­
stor & Pollux were borne. also an other citie
in Italy. Amycl&ecedil;us, a, um, of that citie.



Amylum, is wheate laide in water .iii. days
and euery day the water chaunged fyue ti­
mes, and being soft, to poure out the water
softly, that none other thing do passe, than
to poure in a litle & rubbe the corne, and to
skymme away the huskes and the branne,&
strayn the residue, and being somwhat dried
in a clothe, than to lay it on newe tyles, and
set it in the sonne, and drye it.


Anagallis, an herbe, whiche hath a square
stalk, & leues like to peritory of the wal, but
moche lesse, the male hath red floures, the
female blewe. some do suppose it to be our
pympernell, some take it to be chykweede.

 

¶ A ANTE N.

ANabasius, he that rideth by post hor­
sis. Hieronymus contra Rufinum.



Anabathrum, a pulpyt or other lyke
place, whiche standeth on hygh, whervnto
a man must go vp by a ladder or grieses.
Iuuenalis.


Anabula, a beaste in Aethiope, hauynge a
heed like a camell, a necke like a hors, leg­
ges lyke an oxe, and is of colour a bryght
redde, full of white spottes.
Plinius.


Anacephaleosis, a shorte recapytulation or
repetition of thynges before rehersed.



Anacharsis, a philosopher of a meruaylous
wysedom, all be it that he was borne in the
barbarous countrey of Scithia, whom Pliny
supposeth to haue fyrst founden the potters
whele: And beinge in the tyme that Solon
made lawes to the Athenienses, He sayde
that lawes were lyke to copwebbes, which
tyed fast lyttell flyes, & the great flyes brake
them, and went clene through them. In like
wyse the poore & meane men are fast woun­
den in the penalties and dangers of lawes,
but lordes and men in great auctoritie daily
breake lawes, and are not corrected.



Anachorita, an hermite: the interpretation
therofis, he that lyueth a parte, and oute
of companye.



Anaclinterium, a mattresse.



Spartianus
in Ceio­
uio.



Anadiplôsis, is a doublynge of a worde, as
the last worde of the fyrst verse, is the fyrst
word of the second verse: as, Certent & si­
gnis ululæ, sit Tytirus Orpheus, Orpheus in
syluis inter delphinas Arion.



Anaglypha, & anaglypta, vessell or plate of
golde or siluer chaced, as cuppis or bolles
beaten with the hammer, & not ingraued.



Anaglyptes, he that worketh suche vessell.



Anagliptice, the craft to chace or imboce plate.



Anagnostes, he that redeth to other men,
as bible clerkes, or any other clerke, whi­
che redeth whyle an other writeth.



Anagoge, the high and subtylle vnderstan­
dynge of scripture.



Analecta, fragmentis of meat, which fal vn­
der the table, & be afterward swept awaye.



Analesia, is a sicknes of the heed, which ta­
keth away sensiblenes from the hole partis
of the heed, & cometh of the weakenes of
the stomak, or of to moch meat, or of to mo­
che lechery, or drinking moche cold water,
or to moche study, drinke, or of indigestion.



Analogia, conueniency or proporcion, whose
propretie is to conferre that which is dout­
full, with that whiche is like to it, whiche is
more certayne, to make it more playne.



Analogos, proporcionable.



Anapestus, a fote in meter of .iii. sillables, ha­
uing .ii. the fyrst fete short, the laste longe.






Anapis, a ryuer in Sicile, tenne furlonge
from the citie of Syracusis.



Anarchos, without a prynce, or withoute a
begynnynge.



Anastrophe, a tournynge out of a commune
order, as, Italiam contra, for contra Italiam.



Anaticula, a lyttell ducke.



Anatorius, a keper of duckes.



Anauros, a ryuer in Thessalia.



Anaxagoras, a famous philosopher, noble
of bloode, but more noble in vertue & wise­
dome, whiche abandonynge all his posses­
syon, gaue hym all holly to the study of na­
turall philosophie: and whan one said vnto
him, Haste thou no care for thy countreye,
he aunswered, Yes verily, I haue exceding
care for my countrey, poyntynge vp to he­
uen with his fynger. Also whan he hadde
ben longe out of his countray, and was eft­
sones returned, and behelde his possessions
distroyed and wasted, he sayd, I had not ben
safe, except these thinges had be loste.



Anaxarchus, a philosopher, whiche fallyng
in the indignation of a tyrant, callyd Nico­
creon, kyng of Cipres, was by hym appre­
hended, and put into a great morter of stone,
where he was beaten or pounde with yron
pestyls: whiche tourment he toke so paci­
ently, that he doubled these wordes, wor­
thy of remembraunce, Beate on, beate on
Anaxarchus wynd bagge, for Anaxarchus
thou beatest not. By the which wordes he
accounted his body but a bagge ful of wind.



Anaximander, a philosopher, which fyrste
founde the description of the compasse of
the see and land, and made first the sphere.



Ancesa, grauen vessell.



Anceps, cipitis, doubtfull. sometyme it signi­
fieth double. also cuttyng on bothe sydes.



Anchises, the father of Aeneas.



Anchorarius, a, um, pertayning to an anker.



Ancillula, a lytle or poore wenche seruant.



Anclabra, vessels whiche priestes vsed.



Anclare, seu antlare, to empty a vessell.



Ancona, a Cytie in Italye, vppon the see
of Venyce.



Anculi, & Ancul&ecedil;, goddis and goddessis of
seruynge womenne.



Ancus, he that hath a croked elbow. it was
also the name of a kynge of Romaynes.



Anchusa, an herbe, of whose rote commeth
a redde iuyse, wherwith sanguyne colour
is dyed.



Ancyra, the name of two cities, the one in
Phrigia, the other in Galatia.



Andabat&ecedil;, certayne men that faughte with
swordes wynkynge.



Andegauia, a countray in Fraunce, callyd
Angiewe.



Andrachne, an herbe callyd purcelan.



Andrago, a woman hauyng a mans harte.



Andricus, an hylle in Cilicia.



Androdamas, a stone, which is like to siluer



Androgeus, the sonne of Minoos, kyng of
Crete, whiche by enuye was slayne of the
Atheniensis. For the whyche many yeres
after the sonnes of Athenienses were sent
to Crete, to be delyuered to the monster
callyd Minotaurus, whiche was afterward
distroyd by Theseus. It was also the name
of a noble Briton, whan Iulius Cesar came
hither into this realme of Britayne.



Androgyn&ecedil;, people in Asia, beinge of both
kyndes in one person, man and woman.



Androgynos, a man hauyng both membres
of a man, and also of a woman.



Andromache, the wife of the valiant Hector. 



Andromede, the wyfe of Perses, whom he
saued from a monster of the see.



Andron, a chaumber, whereinto men onely
do come, and not women. Also a space be­
twene two houses, wherinto the rayn fal­
leth. Andronitis, idem.



Andron&ecedil;, festis, whervnto only men do com.



Andros, an ile betwene Grece and Asia, di­
rectly agaynst the citie of Ephesum.



Andruare, olde writers vsed for Recurre,
to runne ageyne.



Anellus, a lyttell rynge.



Anemon&ecedil;, wylde popie, with red floures.



Anethum, an herbe callyd dyll.



Anger, a certaine serpent, after whose stin­
gynge hapneth intollerable peynes.



Angerona, was callid the goddesse of plea­
sure, callyd also Volupia. 



Angil&ecedil;, people in Affrike, of whom the wo­
men, the fyrst nyght that they be wedded,
do accompany with al men, which come to
the wedding, but euer after they be chast.



Anglia, Englande.



Angaria, a constrayned seruyce.



Angari&ecedil;, arum, some doo expounde it for a
poste or a currour.



Anguimanus, an Olyphant.



Anguinus, na, num, of a serpent, or winding
and crepynge lyke a serpent.



Angustitas, a strayte or strayte place.



Anhelator, he that fetcheth his wynde of­
ten, or bloweth moche, poursike.



Ania, a Romayne woman, whyche beynge
fayre & yonge, after that her husband was
deed, was counsailed to take an other, but
she wold nat consent therto, For if said she,
I shall hap to haue as good as I haue had,
I wyll not be in feare to lose him: If I shall
haue an yll husbande, what shall I nede, af­
ter a good man, to suffre a shrewe?



Anicetum, idem quod Anethum, dyll.






Anicula, a lyttell olde woman.



Animam adimere, uel extinguere, to kyll.



Animam debet, he oweth more than he is
worthe, he oweth soo moche, that he hath
not his lyfe but in lone.



Anima, somtime signifieth brethe. Dic ama­
bo, an fœtet anima uxori tu&ecedil;? Telle me of
good feloship, doth thy wiues breth stink?



Animam comprime, holde thy brethe.



Plautus.



Anima, sometyme signifieth wynde, somme­
time water. Si situlam iamiam cæpero, nunquem
ædepol tu mihi diuino quid credas post hunc
diem, ni ego illi puteo, si occepso, animam o­
mnem intertraxero, If I take the buckette,
neuer beleue me for a prophete after this
day, if I drawe not cleane out, if I ones be­
gynne, all the water of the welle.



Animitus, from the very soule or lyfe.



Animo male est, it greueth hym at the ve­
rye harte.



Animum eijcere, to putte awaye affection
or fantasye.



Anio præsenti, with a bold spirite or corage



Animo obsequi, to take pleasure, to folowe
appetyte or wylle.



Animo morem gerere, idem.



Animum explere, to accomplishe wil or desire



Animum adiungere, to applye or set mynde
to a thynge.



Animum aduertere, to take hede.



Animum appellere, to dispose or apply hym
to do a thynge.



Animum adiicere ad uirginem, to sette his
loue on the mayden.



Animum recipere, to take harte or courage.



Animus tibi pendet, thou standest in doubte
what thou mayste do.



Animo bono esse, to be of good chere.



Animus impotens, an vnpacient courage.



Animo iniquo pati, to suffre vnpaciently.



Animos lactare, to draw mens hartes with
fayre promyses, to make fooles sayne, to
brynge men in fooles paradyse.



Anime mi, my dere harte.



Animule, idem.



Animi causa, for pleasure. Cur eam emit? T.
Animi causa, Wherfore dydde he bye hir?
T. For his pleasure.
Plautus.


Animatus, ta, tum, hauynge a fantasye or fa­
uour to a thynge, or to be disposed. Ita ani­
matus sui, itaque nunc sum, ut ea te patera do­
nem, I had suche a fantasy, and yet haue,
that I wold gyue the cuppe to you. Ama­
bo si quid animatus est facere, fac iam vt sci­
am, If he be disposed to do any thyng, let
me knowe it.
Plautus.


Animaduerto, uertere, to take hede, to per­
ceyue. Experrecta nutrix animaduertit dor­
mientem, circumplicatum serpentis amplexu,

The nouryce awaked, and perceyued the
childe beinge on slepe, wrapped all about in
the wyndynge of the serpent. Date operam
& cum silentio animaduertite, Take you hede,
and with sylence perceyue what I wylle
saye to you.  It is also to punysshe or cor­
recte, Ea sunt animaduertenda peccata m axi­
me, qu&ecedil; difficillime pr&ecedil;cauentur, Those of­
fences ought to be moste sharpely correc­
ted, whiche mooste hardlye are eschewed.
Hac re animaduersa, Cæsar iubet signa con­
uerti, After that that matter was punyshed,
Cesar commaunded to aduaunce the stan­
derdes.
Plautus.Terent.Cicero.Cæsar.


Animaduersio, punyshement, correction.



Animaduersi, they whyche are punysshed
or corrected.



Animaduersor, he that punysheth.



Anio, anienis, a ryuer in Italye in the felde
callyd Tiburtinum.



Anisum, an herbe callyd Anyse, wherof co­
meth anyse seede.



Annarius, a, um, aged. Anicularis, re, idem.



Annibal, the moste valyant captayne of the
Carthaginensis, a man most expert in marcial
prowesse, who at .xxv. yeres of age subdued
Spayne, percyd the mountaynes, callyd
Alpes, where afore neuer was passage, dy­
stroyed all Italy, and slewe the more parte
of the nobylitie of Rome, and kept warres
with the Romaynes .xxx. yeres.



Anniuersalis, the compasse of the yere.



Anniuersarius, a, um, that euery yere retur­
neth at one tyme.



Annonarius, & annotinus, a, um, pertayning
to vyttayle.



Anodina, thynges, whyche do putte away
payne or grefe.



Anomalum, vnequall, dyuers, rough.



Anonymum, without a name.



Anonium, an herbe callyd deade nettylle or
archaungelle.



Anophytus, sprongen or growen vppon a
thynge.



Ansatus, ta, tum, hauynge a handell.



Ansanctus, on euery parte holy.



Ansula, the diminutiue of ansa.



Ant&ecedil;, Iambes. also postes of a doore.



Ant&ecedil;us, was a gyant in Libia, whiche was
xl. cubites longe, as it appered by his se­
pulchre founde by Sertorius in a cite cal­
lyd Tigena.



Antandros, a citie in Phrigia.



Antarcticus, the fyfthe cerkle in heauen,
callyd the southepole.



Antarium bellum, bataile before a cite or towne.



Anteambulo, lonis, a lackey or other seruant
that gothe afore his mayster.



Antefixa, thynges caste in mouldes, and set




ouer doores.



Antelapides, stones sette at bothe the sydes
of a doore for strength.



Antelucani venti, wyndes that do blowe fro m
the water, or from some crecke.



Anteluco, an aduerbe, before day.



Anteluculo, an houre afore sonne.



Antenor, a prince of the Troianes, whiche
betrayed the citie of Troy: he fyrst inha­
bited the countray of Venice.



Ante oculos, before his eyes: but it signifi­
eth further of than Coram oculis.



Antermini, the inhabitantes of the marchis
or frontiers of a contray.



Anterot&ecedil;, loue mutually sette betwene two
persones.



Antesum, antefui, anteesse, to excel an other
in any thynge.



Anteurbanus, a, um, nyghe to the citie: as
Anteurbanum pr&ecedil;dium, a manour nygh to
the citie.



Antexpectatus, ta, tum, come before that he
was loked for.



Anthedon, a kynde of medlars, which hath
leues lyke an almonde tree, the fruite lasse
then the common medlar, but moche ple­
saunter, and wyll be lengar kepte.



Anthemis, an herbe called chamomyll.



Anthrax, cis, a stone called a carbuncle, whi­
che shyneth in the nighte: it is also an apo­
steme or swelling callid a carbuncle or botch.



Anthracides, a stone, in the which there se­
meth to be sparkes as it were of fyre.



Anthracinus, na, um, blacke as a cole.



Anthraceus, a colyar.



Anthracia, a burnynge cole.



Anthropophagi, people in Asia, which eate
men.



Anthropomorphit&ecedil;, were heretikes, which
of a folyshe symplicitie affirmed, that god
had membres lyke a man.



Antibacchius, a foote in metre, hauynge the
firste syllable and the laste shorte, and the
myddell syllable longe.



Anticthones, people dwellyng in the vtter­
most part of the world, directly against vs.



Anticyra, an Ile in Asia, where the herbe
called Elleborus groweth, which purgeth
melancoly, and there it may be taken with­
out any daunger: wherof grewe this pro­
uerbe spoken to men in theyr melancholy,
Nauiga ad anticyras: Go sayle to Anticyra.



Antidora, gifte for gift, one for a nother.



Antigerio, olde writars vsed for very short­
ly, forthwith, or the thynge were done.



Antimetabole, a fygure in speache, where
wordes are repeted to a contrary sentence:
as, Non vt edam uiuo, sed vt viuam edo. I
lyue not to eate, but I eate to lyue.



Antiochia, a great citie in Siria, another at
the riuage of Persia.



Antiochus, the name of dyuers kynges of
Siria.



Antiperistasis is that thinge, wherby where
heate commeth colde is expelled, where
colde is, heate is expelled: by this, well
water in the wynter time is warme, for as
moche as the hygh partes of the ayre be­
inge colde, the heate withdraweth him to
the lowest partes. like wise in the body of
man the spirite is kepte in more feruente
by the outwarde colde, by the ioynt con­
scent & tolleration of al partes of the body.



Antipater, was a philosopher, borne in the
citie of Tirus, of the sect of Stoici, whi­
che from the tyme of his byrthe, vntyl his
deathe, had alway a feuer, and not with­
standyng he lyued vntil he was olde.



Antipathia, a naturall dyfference or repug­
nancy of thynges.



Antipelargesis, one good torne for another.



Antiphrasis, a worde or sentence hauynge a
contrary meanynge: as, Parc&ecedil;, the myni­
sters of deathe be so called, bycause they
spare no man.



Antipodes, people whiche doo inhabite the
part of the world, in respect of the round­
nes therof, vnderneth vs, that it seemeth
that theyr feete be agaynst our feete.



Antiqui homines, men of the olde facion.



Antiquus hospes, myne host of longe tyme.



Antiqua ratio, the maner of tyme passed.



Vergilius.



Antiqua terra, a noble countray. Terra anti­
qua, potens armis, et vber&ecedil; gleb&ecedil;, A noble
countray puissaunt in warres, and of a fer­
tile soyle.



Antiquatio, an abolicion of a lawe.



Antiquum obtinere, to kepe the olde facion.



Antistitor, he that standeth before them that
do worke and controlleth them.



Antithesis, a fygure, where one letter is set
for a nother: as olli, for illi.



Antitheton, a fygure, wherby one contrary
is ioyned with a nother.
Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis.
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
Colde thynges contended with them that
were hote, moyst thynges with dry, Hard
thynges with softe, lyghte thynges with
heuy kept not one note.
Ouidius in
Metamor.


Antium, a citie in the parte of Italy called
Latium.



Antlia, a pumpe or lyke thynge to drawe vp
water.
Martialis.


Antæci, people whiche dwel in the contra­
ry Zone or gyrdell, to Anticthones.



Antrum, a denne vnder the erthe.



Anubis, was a god of the Egiptians, which




they honoured for Mercurius. 



Anxur, a citie, called also Tarrasina.



Anygrus, a ryuer in Thessalia.

 

¶ A, ANTE O.

AOnia, the countray called Thracia.



Aonius, a, um, of that countray.



Aornos, a place, whervnto no birde
maye come.

 

¶ A, ANTE P.


Plautus.



APage, fy, fy. Apage, haud nos dece­
at fugitiuos imitari: Fy, fy, it wyll
not beseme vs to play the michers.



Apage te, gette the hens.



Apage a me, haue away from me.



Appalæstris, he that can neither wrastell nor
do any other maistrie.



Apamia, the name of oone citie in the lasse
Asia, an nother in Parthia.



Aparine, an herbe that growethe in corne
feldes, whiche is rough, and cleaueth to
the garmentes of them, which passe by it,
and hath a white floure, the siede lyke to
a nauyll: I suppose that it be goose grasse
or clyuers.



Apathes, were phylosophers, whiche of a
frowarde and stubborne nature, held opi­
nion that a wyse man had non affections
or passions.



Apedes, a byrde, whose fete be so lytle, that
they seeme to haue none. I suppose they
be martlettes.



Apelles, the moste excellente paynter that
euer was.



Apello, lere, pulsum, to amoue or putte of
from a thynge.



Appenninus, the part of the mountaynes of
Alpes, whiche begynne at Geane.



Aperte, openly, playnly, euidently, without
dissimulation or colour.



Apertus, ta, tum, open, playne, euident, dis­
couered, without colour or cloke.



Apesus, suntis, a mountayne in Grece.



Apexabo, bone, a pudding callid a bludding



Aph&ecedil;resis, a figure, wherby a letter or syl­
lable is taken from a worde: as Pone metum,
for depone metum, mi, for mihi, tun, for tu ne.



Aphilos, he that hath no frende.



Aphracta, a lyttell barke or brygantine.



Aphrodisia, days dedicate to Venus, or ve­
neriall pastymes.



Aphronitrum, the some of saltepeter, callid
of the Arabiens, Baurach.



Apiculus, the diminutiue of Apex.



Apinus, a tree, wherof commeth pitche.



Apina, a tryfle.



Apiria, infynitenesse.



Apis, callyd also Serapis, & Osyris, whome
the Egyptians honored for their chief god.



Aplanes, the parte of heuen, whiche neuer
moueth.



Apluda, wheaten branne.



Aplustre, et aplustria, orum, the taklynge of
a shyppe.



Apocalypsis, sios, a reuelation.



Apocleti, counsaylors of the priuie councel.



Apocope, a fygure, by the whiche a letter
or sillable is taken away. as peculi, for peculij.



Apocopi, men beinge gelded.



Apocroti, men that be harde and myserable
in lyuynge.



Apocryphus, a, um, hydde, not knowen.



Apocryphi libri, bokes, the authors wher­
of be vnknowen.



Apocynon, a lyttell bone in the left syde of
a frogge, wherwith it is supposed, thinges
may be done, whiche were not expedient
to be openly knowen.



Apodixis, an euydence, demonstration.



Apodyterium, the place by a bayne, where
they whyche wyll be bayned, do putte of
theyr clothes.



Apog&ecedil;i, wyndes that doo aryse out of the
grounde.



Apogeum, an habytation vnder the ground.



Apolactizo, are, to strike with the heles. al­
so to despise or set at nought.



Apollittaris, an herbe callyd henbane.



Apollinares ludi, playes made in the honor
of Apollo. 



Apollo, linis, whom the gentyles honored
for god, referrynge to hym the inuencion
of musyke, of poetrie, and of phisike: It
is sometyme taken for the sonne.



Apollonia, the name of a cite in Epiro, now
callid Valonia, an other in Creta, an other
in Siria, also an ile by Thracia.



Apolloniat&ecedil;, people of Apollonia.



Aponus, a broke of hotte water by Padua.



Apoplecticus, he that is taken with the palsy.



Aposiopesis, where somewhat is lefte out,
specially in speakyng, and left to the con­
iecture of them that be herers.



Apostasia, rebellyon or forsakyng of a mans
profession or allegiance.



Apostata, a rebelle or rennagate.



Apostrophe, a conuersion in speakyng from
on to an nother.



Apotelesma, a pronostication or declaration
of the signyfications of sterres at a mans
natiuitie, or the beginnyng of any thynge,
what therof shall happen.



Apotheosis, a dedycation or consecration,
proprely of men into goddes.



Apozema, a decoction of dyuers herbes
and spyces.






Apparere qu&ecedil;stioni, to serue processe as ser­
geantes and baylyffes done.



Apparo, are, to apparayle or trymme, to be
redy to do a thinge, to prepare or ordeine.



Appellare Cæsarem, to apele to the Emperour.



Appendicula, a diminutiue of Appendix.



Appia uia, the name of a high way at Rome



Appiana poma, a kynde of appulles as gret
as quinces, and hauyng as great a sauour
as they.



Applicat primum ad Chrisidis patrem se: He
fyrste made repayre to Chrisis father.



Apronia, an herbe called also Vitis nigra, a
blacke vine, whiche runneth vp, and wyn­
deth about trees and stalkes of herbes, &
hath a leafe lyke an yuy, but greatter, and
beareth beryes in clusters, whiche at the
begynnynge are greene, and blacke whan
they be rype, also the rote is blacke with­
out, and within is yelowe lyke boxe.



Approbo, aui, are, to approue or allowe.



Appropinquo, are, to approche, to drawe
nyghe to.



Appropinquatio, an approchynge or draw­
inge nyghe to.



Appropero, aui, are, to make hast to come.



Aprurius, et Aprugnus, a, um, of a bore.



Aprunum, uel Aprugnum callum, the brawne
of a bore.



Apsis, the fely of a carte wheele.



Apsorus, an Ile in the Venecian See.



Aptera, a citie in the countray of Licia, and
a towne in Crete.



Apud eum est primus, he is his pryncypall
mynyon.



Terentius



Apud me priores partes habet, he maye doo
moste with me. Facio te apud illum deum,
I wyll make hym to take the for a god.
Per eam te obsecramus amb&ecedil; si ius, si fas est,
uti aduersa eius per te tecta, tacitaque apud
omnes sint, We bothe desyre you on her be­
halfe, if it may be by any meanes possible,
that by you, polycy her mysfortune maye
be keuered, and from al men kept secrete.
TerentiusTerentius


Apud aliquem mentiri, to make a lye to one.



Apud nos imperium tuum est, we remembre
your commaundement.



Salust.



Apud animum meum statuo, I determyne in
my mynde.



Apud forum, In the market, apud ædes, In
the house. apud horcum, in hell.



Apud quem, in whose presence.



Cic. in off.



Apud maiores nostros, In the tyme of our
forefathers.



Apud se non est, he is out of his wytte, or he
is not in his ryght mynde. Vix sum apud me,
ita animus commotus est metu, spe, gaudio, me­
rando hoc tanto, tam repentino bono: I am
well nyghe out of my wytte, my mynde is so
vexed with feare, hope and ioye, with this
good chaunce, whiche is so wonderfull, so
great, and so sodaynely hapned.
Terent.


Apud te sis, thynke what thou haste to doo,
remembre thy selfe.



Apud ignem, by the fyre. apud aquam, apud
quem, by whome. apud eum, by hym.
Salust.


Apud te exemplum experiendi habes, non e­
ges foris: ye haue the experience at home,
ye neede not to seeke for it abrode.
Plautus.


Apulia, a countraye in Italy, marchynge on
the see called Hadriaticum.



Apus, odis, a byrde lyke a swallowe, but he
hath larger winges, and is most common­
ly about the see costes where alway he ey­
ther flyeth or houereth in the ayre, & bre­
deth in a rocke.



Apyrena, swete pomegranates.



Apyrotus, a stone that no fyre may damage,
or deface.

 

¶ A ANTE Q.

AQu&ecedil;licium, rayne water vsed in me­
dicine.



Aquaintercus, cutis, water which run­
neth betwene the skynne and the flesshe,
the dropesy.



Aquarioli, boyes whiche do attende vppon
common harlottes.



Aquarius, one of the .xii. sygnes.



Aquarius, a, um, partaynynge to water, as
aquarius sulcus, a sorow, by the which water
is drayned.



Aquifolia, a wylde medlar, or a tree lyke a
wylde medlar.
Vide The­
ophrastum.


Aquilegium, a gourde of water, which co­
meth of rayne.



Aquileia, a citie in Italye, in the countreye
wherof the people are called Carni.



Aquula, a lyttell water.

 

¶ A ANTE R.

ARabarches, a lorde of Arabia.



Arabia, a great countrey ioynyng to
Iudea and Siria, Araby.



Arabs, arabis, a man or woman of Araby.



Arachne, the name of a woman, whiche first
inuented spynnyng of lynnen, and making
of nettes. it is also taken for lynnen yarne,
or the woufe.



Arachneus, a lyttell beaste, whiche gothe a
softe pace.



Arachnion, fyne threde.



Arachosia, a countrey in Asia.



Araci&ecedil; ficus, fygges brode and whyte, whi­
che do growe on a lyttell stalke.



Aracynthus, a mountayne in Grece, in the
countray callyd Aetolia.






Araneolus, a yonge or lyttell spyder.



Araris, et arar, a ryuer in Fraunce, whiche
runneth out of the countray of Langue­
docke by Burbone and Burgoyn, into the
ryuer of Rone.



Ararus, a ryuer of Scithia, whiche runneth
throughe the realme of Armeny.



Arath, a countraye in Armeny wonderfull
fertyle.



Aratro, aui, ari, to ploughe eftsones lande
that is sowen, to make the grounde fatte.



Araxis, a ryuer in Armeny, where it is sup­
posed, that the arch of Noy abode, whan
the flodde ceased.



Arbea, a citie in Iudea, where Adam and o­
ther thre patriarches were buryed.



Arboses, olde writers vsed for Arbos,



Arcadia, a countray in Greece, in the parte
called Peloponesus, nowe Morea.



Arcadius, ca, cum, of Arcadia.



Arcas, cadis, one of the sonnes of Iupiter.
it is also a man or woman of Arcadia.



Arcatus, ta, tum, bent lyke a bowe.



Arcesilaus, a philosopher, which affirmid by
Sophemes, that he nor non other knewe
any thynge.



Arcessere, to purchace or gette a thynge.



Archarius, a treasorer, or coferer.



Archidamus, a noble man of Sparta, who
being demanded howe moch money wold
serue to the warre of Peloponesus, aun­
swered, sayinge, that warre sought for no
certaynty.



Archigenes, the name of a famous phisition.
it is also he that wold be taken for the wi­
sest of his kynne.



Archigrammateus, a chauncellour or chyefe
secretary.



Archimedes, was a geometrician of Sira­
cusis, in Sicile, whiche inuented a sphere
of glasse, in the whiche all the mocions of
heuen were playnely perceyued. he mad
also a dooue of woode, whiche conteyned
suche an equall poyse, that it wolde hange
in the ayre.



Archytas, a noble philosopher of the citie
of Tarentum in Italy, whiche was of the
sect of Pythagoras, and was a great frend
vnto Plato. 



Archon, was the chief dignitie in Athenes.



Archimimus, the mayster or chyefe of the
players.



Architectonice, ces, idem quod architectura.



Archontici, certayn heritikes, whiche affir­
med that the vniuer sal state of thinges was
not made by god, but by princis, and they al­
so denied the resurrection of the body.



Arcirna, a lyttell carte, a whelebarowe.



Arconicum, a thynge called Arcenyke.



Arctophylax, a certayne fygure of sterres,
folowynge Charles wayne.



Arctos, a fygure of sterres callyd Charles
wayne. also Vrsa maior.



Arctous, & arcticus, ca, cum, of the northe.



Arcturus, a sterre whiche is at the tayle of
that, whiche is callyd arctos, or vrsa maior.



Arcuor, ari, to be made bent like a bowe, or
to be vaulted. Arcatus, ta, tum, idem.
Liuius.
Plinius.


Ardeates, people of the citie of Ardea.



Ouidius in
Metamor.
12.



Ardeola, an hernesewe.



Ardêre cupiditate, to couete ardently.



Ardere iracundia, to be inflamid with anger.



Ardere maximo flagitio, to haue done, or to
be infamed of a myscheuous dede.



Plautus.



Ardere, to shine. Tyrioque ardebat murice læ­
na, His mantell dydde shyne of fyne pur­
ple of Tyre.



Ardens, burnyng, ardent, feruent in doinge.



Ardum, olde writers vsid for arduum.



Arelate, a citie in France, callid Orleance.



Arenarius, a, um, pertaining to a fighting place.



Areopagitæ, were Iudges, whiche sate in a
place by Athenes, and iudged causes of
murder, and weighty thynges concerning
the commune weale.



Areopagus, Marces towne, where the said
iudges dyd sytte in iudgement.



Areopolis, a cite in Araby, callid also Moab



Areopolitæ, the inhabitantes of Areopolis.



Arete, in latine virtus, in englishe vertue. It
was also the name of the wife of Alcinous
kyng of Phœacis, of whom Homere wri­
teth in Odyssea.



Arethyssa & Arethusa, a ryuer in the greate
Armenye.



Arethusa, the companion of Diana. it is also
the name of a fountayne in Sicile, and of
dyuers other.



Aretium, a citie in Tuscana.



Aretinus, a, um, of that citie.



Arferis, wyne or water offred to the infer­
nall goddes, or rather deuyls.



Argentarius commeatus, prouisyon of money.



Argentaria cura, care for moneye.



Plautus.



Argentariæ illecebr&ecedil;, thinges getting money



Argentaria inopia, lacke of money.



Argentaria, a banke of exchaunge.



Argentum uiuum, quycke syluer.



Argestes, the westerne wynde.



Argeus, a, um, of the citie of Argos.



Argiæ plurali, a citie in Laconia.



Argiletum, the sepulchre of Argus. it is al­
so a place, where potters clay is dygged. it
was also a strete in Rome, where the boke
sellers dwelled.



Argiletan&ecedil;, boke sellars dwelling in the said
strete callyd argiletum.



Argimyss&ecedil;, thre lytle iles in Asia, by the iles




of Mitelen&ecedil;, and Lesbus.
Stra. li. 13.


Argis, at the citie of Argos.



Argo, the shyppe wherin Iason and his com­
panye sayled in to Colchos, to wynne the
flyse of golde.



Argolicus, ca, cum, of Argos.



Argonautæ, were the noble men, which ac­
companyed Iason vnto Colchos.



Argos, singulari: Argi plurali,a citie not far
from Athenes, a nother in Achaia. it is al­
so a countray, part of Greece.



Plautus.



Arguere, aliquem pecuni&ecedil; interuersæ, to accuse
one for stealynge of money.



Arguta diuisio, a subtill diuision.



Argutum caput, a sharpe or pikyd hedde lyke
a sugar lofe.



Argyranche, the syluer sykenesse.



Argyraspidæ, men bearyng shildes of syluer



Argyritis, the spume or fome of syluer.



Ariadne, a lady, the wife of Theseus, whom
he forsoke, notwithstandyng that she hadde
sauyd his life.



Aricia, a city in Italy.



Aricinum nœmus, a woode by the sayd citye
where Numa kynge of Romaynes fayned
to speke with Aegeria the fayry.



Plautus.



Aricinus lacus, a brooke by Aricia.



Aridus homo, a dry felowe, of whom no
thynge maye be goten: some do call hym,
a pelt, or a pynchebeke.
Plinius.


Arimaspi, peple in the north part of Europa
whiche haue but one eye, & that is in theyr
forehed, which do fyght contynually with 
Griphons.



Ariminum, a citye in Italy.



Arimphæi, people in the north part of Asia,
whiche all though that they haue onely
woodes for theyr dwellynge, and onely
beryes for theyr sustynance, yet kepe they
iustice and peace amonge them selues, and
be temperate of maners.



Herodotus.
Gellius.



Arinca, a corne called Rye.



Plinius.



Arion, a famouse harper, whom the mary­
ners wolde haue throwen into the see, for
to haue his money: but he desyryng them
to let hym play a songe on his harpe or he
dyed, afterwarde lepte into the water, but
a dolphyn receyuyng hym on his backe,&
brought hym to lande a lyue.



Aristathea, the malowe with the great lefe.



Aristarchus, a famouse grammarien, whiche
corrected the bookes of Homere, tryeng
out what verses were his, and what verses
were counterfayt. Therfore they vse to
call hym Aristarchus, that is a sharpe cor­
rectour of other mennes workes.



Aristides, a noble man of Athenes, who for
his playne and iust dealing, as well in dee­
des as in wordes, hadde the surname gy­
uen hym, Ryghtuous, or Iuste: He that
readeth this mannes lyfe, in the lyues of
Plutarche, shall thinke hym before all o­
ther to be folowed by a counsaylour or go­
uernour vnder a prynce.



Aristippus, a philosopher, whiche fyrst dyd
put the principall good thynge in the plea­
saunt mocions of the mynde: the prynci­
pall yll thinge, in gryefe.



Aristocratia, the fourme of gouernaunce of
a weale publike, where they do rule, which
are of moste vertue.



Aristolochia, an herbe, wherof be two kyn­
des: one is called longe, the other round.
The rounde hath leues in facion like yuy,
but somwhat rounder, wherin is a sharpe
and soft odoure, the floure white lyke a
lytle bonet vpon a redde knoppe, the roo­
tes are rounde and many. The longe Ari­
stolochia, hath lenger leues, small braun­
ches, and a purple floure, which stynketh:
and whan it spryngeth, it is of the facyon
of a peare, the rote therof is long, and of
the greatnesse of a mannes fyngar: bothe
of them do beare beryes lyke to capers,
within of box coloure, whiche are bytter
and stynkynge.



Aristomenes, a man of Messene, whiche
was called Iustissimus, moste iuste. This
man, whan he was dead, was founden to
haue his hart all heary.



Aristophanes, a famous poete, which wrate
Comedies, wherin he taunted them, whom
he dyd not fauoure: all be it he was very
eloquent, and moch myrth is in his workes



Aristophorum, a dysshe, wherin meate is borne
to dyner.



Aristoteles, a philosopher, of whom Quin­
tylyane writeth in this wyse: whatte saye
you by Aristotle, whome I wote not, whi­
ther I maye iudge more excellent in know­
lege of thinges, or in abundaunce of wry­
tynge, or in swetnesse of eloquence, or in
sharpnesse of witte, or els in diuersyte of
workes. Notwithstandynge he was lytle
of personage, crooke backed, yll shapen,
and stuttynge.



Aritudo, drythe, or dryenesse.



Arma coquinaria, vtensyles of the kechyn.



Armenia, a royalme in Asia, lyeng betwene
the two great mountaynes, Taurus and
Caucasus, and stretcheth from Cappado­
cia to the see called Caspium.



Armeniacum pomum, a pome citron, or a
Citron, whiche is lyke an orenge, but that
he is somwhat in length.



Armentarius, the keper of an armery: som­
tyme Esquiar de Esquyry.



Armille, an instrument of falshode or craft.






Armilustrum, was a festiual day, in the whi­
che the Romaynes dyd sacrifice armed, and
trumpettes dyd blowe bluddy soundes. also
the place wherin suche sacrifyce was made.



Palladus.



Armocea, a wylde radyshe.



Columel.



Armoradum, the tendrels or yonge stalkes
of wylde radyshe.



Iosephus.



Armon, a ryuer that cometh from the hil­
les of Arabye, and dyuydeth Moabitide
from Amonitide.



Arnoglossa, an herbe callid brode Plantain
or waybred.



Aroma, atis, pleasant sauour, also spyce.



Aromatites, a precious stone, whiche hathe
the sauour of Mirre.



Aromatorius, & aromatopola, he that sel­
leth thynges hauynge swete sauour.



Arios, an herbe, callyd wake Robyn. It is
callyd of some Serpentaria minor, bycause
it hath leaues lyke to Dragons, but bro­
der, and hauynge blacke spottes, it grow­
eth moche about hedges.



Arpinum, an auncient towne in Italye, fa­
mous and noble by the byrthe of Plautus,
Tulli, and Marius. 



Arpinas, a man or woman of Arpinum.



Arquites, olde wryters vsed for an archer.



Arquus, arqui, the raynbowe.



Arrideo, ere, to smyle on one. also to lyke or
seme pleasant. Aedes mihi arridebant, The
house lyked me well.
Plaut


Terentius.



Arrige aures, lay to thyn eares, or gyue an
eare to that whiche is spoken.



Salust.



Arrexit animos, it aduanced their courage.



Arrectarii parietes, walles made with tym­
ber and parget, to diuide chambers.



Arripere se foras, to gette hym oute of the
doores.
Plautus.


Arripere sermonem, to take hym at his word.



Arripere maledictum, to take hede of an yll
reporte. Quare cum ista sis authoritate, non
debes Marce arripere maledictum ex triuio,
aut ex scurrarum aliquo conuitio, Wherfore
in as moche as ye are in this auctoritie, or
of this estimation, ye ought nat Marc, to
take hede of an yll worde spoken abrode,
or of the rebuke of a raylynge knaue.
Cicero.


Sueton. de
claris grgrammaticis.



Arripere conditionem, to take the offer.



Arrugia, a Coney.



Ars parasitica, the feate of flatterye.



Arsaces, was the general name of the kyn­
ges of Parthia.



Aristotel.



Arsenothelea, a beaste, whiche is both male
and female, as some do saye that a haare is
one yere male, an other yere female.



Artaba, a measure of the Egyptians, con­
taynynge thre score and .xii. Romayn me­
sures called Sextarii.



Artaxata, a cytie in Armenye.



Artaxerxes, the name of dyuers kynges of
Persia, of the whiche one of theym callyd
Artaxerxeswith the longe hande, vsed to
say, that it was moche more kingly to giue,
than to take.



Artemisia, was the name of a noble princesse
whiche was wyfe to Mausolus, kynge of
Caria, who was of a notable chastitie, & in
loue towarde her husband so excelled, that
whan he was deade, she caused his harte to
be dried in a vessell of golde, into pouder,
and by lyttell and lyttell dranke it vppe, say­
enge, That theyr two hartes shulde neuer
departe asonder, and that she thought, that
there mought be made noo worthye sepul­
chre for it but her owne body. Nat withstan­
dynge she made for his body suche a sepul­
chre, that for the excellente warkemanshyp
that was in it, also the beautie, and costly­
nesse, it was taken for one of the meruayles
of the worlde, and for the notable faame
therof, all sumptuous and great sepulchres
were afterwarde callydde Mausolea. She
founde also an herbe called Artemisia, Mug­
wort, or Motherwort in englyshe, of great
vertue in womens diseases.



Artemisius, the moneth of Maye amonge
the Macedonians. also a hyll in Arcadia.



Artemon, monis, a troukle, wher by ropes
do runne. It may also be taken for any in­
strument, which hath troukles.



Artitus, well instructed in sciences.



Arthetica passio, callyd also Morbus articu­
laris, the ioynt syckenesse, is thus diuided
into Coxendix, callyd Sciatica, whyche is
in the buckle bone, Podagra, the goute of
the legges & fete, and Chiragra, the goute
of the fyngers.
Galenus.


Plautus.



Arthuntis, idem.



Articularius, he that hath the gout.



Articulate, articulately, as whan one dothe
expresse euery syllable.



Arthritica, som do suppose it to be that herb
and floure, whyche is callyd Prymerose.



Artocrea, maye be callyd a pastye or pye,
with fleshe or fyshe baken.



Artolaganum, fyne cakebreade.



Plautus.



Artopta, a bakynge panne, wherein they
baake tartes, or other thynges, made of
fyne paste. Some take it for a vesselle to
kneade in.



Artoptesii, tartes or cakes baken in a panne



Artoptitius panis, browne bread, or breadden
of course wheate.



Artotyritæ, people, whiche didde offer vnto
god bread and chese.



Aruales fratres, were supposed to be the fo­
ster brethren of Romulus, to whom he gaue
the dignitie of priesthode, to make sacrifice




for growynge and increace of corne, and
preseruation of the corne feldes.



Aruisium, an hyll on the see coste of the ile
callyd Chium, where groweth the wynes
callyd Aruisia vina.



Arunca, a towne in Italy.



Aruncus, the bearde of a gote.

 

¶ A ANTE S.

ASarum, an herbe, whose leaues are
lyke vnto yuie, but they be lesse and
rounder, and hath a good sauour, the
floure is purple, lyke to the floure of hen­
bane, but it sauoreth swetely, and groweth
betwene the leaues by the roote, the stalke
is edged, and somwhat roughe, the rootes
ar smal, croked, & like to grasse, full of knot­
tes: it is commonly callid Asarabaccha, som
calle it wylde Spikenarde.



Asarotum, pauynge tile with pictures ene­
lyd, which may nat be swept with a besom,
but the dust and other thing must be swept
with a wynge and gathered vp.



Ascalon, a citie in Palestina.



Ascaloniæ, a kind of onyons called scalions.



Ascanius, the sonne of Eneas. 



Ascit&ecedil;, Arabians.



Asclepiades, the name of a famous phisiti­
an. Alsoo of a philosopher, whiche beinge
blynde, was demaunded in skorne, what his
blyndnes dyd profit him, and he answered,
that he had the more company by one boye
that dyd leade hym.



Ascopera, a bagge of lether.



Ascra, a citie in Boeotia, where Hesiodus
the poete was borne.



Ascriptus, ta, tum, inrollyd.



Ascripti milites, sowldiours, whose names
are regystred or entred with other.



Ascriptiuus, idem quod ascriptius, he that is
regystred with other.



Asellus, a lyttell or yong asse. also the name
of a see fyshe, callyd an haddocke.



Asianus, a, um, of Asia.



Asiaticus, a surname gyuen to oone of the
Scipyons, bycause that he subdewed the
lasse Asia.



Asilus, a great flye, whiche byteth beastes,
and is callyd a horse flye.



Asion, an owle, whiche hath fethers on e­
uery syde of her heed lyke vnto eares.



Asiortum, a kynde of spyders, with whyte
strakes, of whom if that one be stunge, his
knees shall bowe and waxe faynt.



Asomatos, vnpalpable, or that cannot be felt



Asopus, a ryuer in Achaia.



Asotia, ryotte.



Asotus, ryottous.



Aspalathus, a thorne growynge in the easte
partes of the worlde, the rynde wherof is
somwhat redde, and within, the wodde is
of a sadde purple, and smellith very swete,
and therfore is vsed in parfumes.



Asparagus, an herbe callyd of common apo­
tycaries Sparagus, in englyshe Sperage.



Aspello, aspuli, aspellere, to dryue awaye
from one.
Plautus.


Asperum uinum, a roughe wyne.



Asper numus, money newe coyned.



Aspersus infamia, stayned with dishonour.



Aspergere comitatem seueritate, to myxt fa­
myliaritie and grauitie togyther.
Cicero.


Asphaltum, a water in Syria, wherein no­
thynge that hath lyfe may be drowned. It
is callyd Mare mortuum, the deed see. It is
supposed, that in that place stoode the cy­
ties of Sodoma. It is also a certayn lyme
myxte with brymstone, whiche being ones
hette, may neuer be extincte.



Asphodelus, an herbe callyd daffadyll.



Aspidisca, a lyttell tergate or shielde.



Aspilates, a stone lyke to syluer.



Ass&ecedil;, drye stones.



Assatura, rosted meate.



Assectator, a companyon.



Assentio, to perceyue. Sed assentio aperiri
fores, qu&ecedil; absorbent quicquid uenit infra pes­
sulos, But I perceyue the doores are ope­
ned, whiche deuouren all that commethe
within the boltes.
Plaut.


Assentatio, flatterye.



Assentatiuncula, a flatterynge tale.



Assequor, assequi, to render as moch to one
as he hath deserued. Nullam partem uide­
ar tuorum meritorum assecutus, It may nat
be founde in me, that I haue rendred to
you any thynge after youre merytes, or
haue doone soo moche for you, as ye haue
deserued.
Cicero


Assequi nomen, to gette renoume.



Plinius.



Asser, asseris, a pole.



Asserculi, & assiculi, lytel bourdes or lathes.



Asserere aliquem manu, to set one at libertie
or to manumyse a bondman.



Asserere in seruitutem, to brynge in bondage
or seruytude.
Plautus.


Asserere ab iniuria, to defende from wronge
or daunger.



Asserere se studijs, to leaue al other besynes,
to applye study.



Assertor, toris, he that setteth one at liber­
tie, or defendeth hym from bondage.



Assidela, a byshops seate or chaire, wherin
he sytteth whan he ministreth.



Assidere literis, to be alwaye in studye of
letters.



Assiduus scriptor, an author approued, whose




sentence is holden for certayne and true.



Assiduitas, continuance in a thinge.



Cicero.



Assidue, & assiduo, aduerbes, whiche do si­
gnifie continually.



Assignare fam&ecedil;, to applye hym selfe to get
renoume.



Assimilo, are, to do a thynge lyke to an no­
ther man, to immitate or folowe one.



Aslimilis, le, lyke or semblable.



Assimiliter, al semblably.



Assimulo, are, to fayne to do a thynge, and
nat to doo it.
Plautus.


Assipondium, a pounde weight.



Assisia, one of the names of Pallas or Minerua 



Assoleo, lêre, to be wont or accustomed.



Assono, are, to sowne or make a sowne.



Assa uoce cantare, to synge withoute an In­
strument.



Varro.



Assuefactio, a bryngyng of one in custome.



Cato.



Assuesco, scere, to vse of a custome.



Assumptio, a takynge.



Assur, a cytie in Iudea, buylded by kynge
Salomon. 



Assus, a, um, tosted or rosted.



Assyria, a region in Asia, callyd now Syria,
in englyshe Surrye, hauynge on the easte
Indie, on the west the ryuer of Tigris, on
the south Medi or Mede, on the northe
the mounte of Caucasus.



Asta, departe nat, stande styll.



Astachus, a kynde of crabbes of the see.



Astare, to stande by, or to be present.



Astare in genua, to knele.



Astare aduocatus, to assyst or speake for one.



Plautus.



Astaroth, an olde citie sometyme belonging
to Og, kyng of Basan, in the which dwel­
lyd gyantes, and afterwarde it came to the
lotte of the tribe of Manasses, and is in the
countray of Bethania. There be two ca­
stelles of that name nyne myles a sonder,
betwene the citie of Adara and Abella.



Asterte, a goddesse of the Sirians, to whom
Salomon to please his concubyne, raysed
an Aultar.



Asterias, a kynde of herons, I suppose that
it is an Egrette.



Asthma, matis, a sycknesse, where one maye
not fetche his wynde but with moche diffi­
cultie, with weasynge of the breast: whiche
hapneth by straytenesse of the pypes stop­
ped with toughe fleume, or of somme impo­
stume growen in the pypes.



Astomi, people of Indie, hauynge no mou­
thes, whiche lyuen by ayre and smelle of
swete thynges.



Astr&ecedil;a, sygnyfieth Iustyce.



Astringere fidem, to promyse.



Astringere se furti, to yelde or make him self
gyltie of felonie.



Astroites, a stone lyke to a fyshes eie.



Astrologus, an astrologien, he that studieth
the speculation of astronomie.



Astronomus, an astronomer.



Plinius.



Astruere dignitati alterius, to augment an o­
ther mans dignitie or honour.



Plinius in
Epistolis.



Astruitur his, is putte for more ouer, or fur­
thermore.



Astur, any thyng of Asturia, a cite in Spain.



Astur equus, a spanysshe horse, callyd a ge­
nette. Asturcones, idem.



Astura, a towne and ryuer in Italy.



Asturia, a citie in Spayne.



Asuestinum, lynnen threede, whiche maye
nat be burned.



Asymbolus, he that commeth to a bankette,
without appoyntement, an vnboden geste.

 

¶ A ANTE T.

AT, yet, or at the least way. Si non pro­
pinquitatis, atætatis suæ, si non hominis,
at humanitatis rationem haberet, All
though he had not consideration of kinred,
yet shulde he haue had regarde to his age,
and though he caryd not for the person, yet
shulde he haue hadde respecte vnto good
humanitie.
Cicero pro
Flacco.


Atabulus, a feruent wynde, whyche whan
it bloweth in the realme of Naples, pesty­
lence immediately insueth.



Atalanta, a mayden, whiche was doughter
to the kynge of Argiues, whiche kepynge
perpetuall virginitie, haunted forestes and
woodes, and dyd slee wylde beastes, & was
the fyrste that wounded the greatte bore of
Calidonia.



Attalus, a kynge in the lasse Asia, of meruai­
lous rychesse, of whome all magnifyke and
stately thynges, are callyd Attalica.



Attamen, but yet.



Atechna, thinges vnkunningly handled.



Ategia, a bouthe, or place made vppe with
trees and boughes.



Ater panis, broune breadde.



Athacus, a byrde with foure legges, hauing
the longest behynde.



Athanatos, immortall.



Athenæ, narum, the citie of Athenes.



Athen&ecedil;um, a place at Rome, where all scy­
ences were radde.



Athenodorus, a phylosopher, whiche lefte
with Octauian the Emperoure this lesson,
whan he toke his leue of him: Noble prince,
whan thou art attached with wrath, neither
say nor do any thing, vntyl thou hast by thy
selfe pervsed the .xxiiii. greke letters, and
remembred the order of places where they
stand, to thintent that the passion of yre, by
withdrawyng the mind to an nother thing,
mought languishe and vanishe away.






Atheromata, lyttell pousshes in the necke,
and vnder the armes.



Atheos, he that doth not beleue that god is.



Athesis, a ryuer in Italy that passeth by the
cyties of Verona and Tridentum callyd
Trente.



Athos, a hylle in Macedonia, of a wonder­
full heyght.



Athrax, a citie in Thessalia.



Athracia ars, arte magike.



Atlantic&ecedil; insul&ecedil;, the yles callyd nowe fortu­
nat&ecedil;, where fruite and herbes doo growe
without labour.



Atlantides, the doughters of Atlas, alsoo
certayne sterres.



Atlas, Atlantis, the name of a kynge, whi­
che fyrste taughte the course of sterres,
and therfore it was fayned of hym, that he
susteyned heuen on his sholders. It is also
the name of a hylle in Barbaria, highe and
small, that it perceth the cloudes.



Atlantes, Moores dwelling about that hyl.



Atocion, a medicyne, which maketh a wo­
man to be barrayne.



Atocius, a certayne spyder which is heary.



Plautus in
Pseud.



Atque, than. Illi sunt alio ingenio atque tu, They
be of an nother maner of wytte than thou
art. Non Appollinis magis verum, atque hoc
responsum est, Appolloes aunswere was
neuer truer than this is.
Terent. in
And.


Plautus in
Casina.



Atque adeo, and that more is. Esurio hercle,
atque adeo nunc haud parum sitio, I am hun­
grye, and that more is, I am a thyrste not
a lyttelle.



Atque eccum, but lo where he is.



Atractilis, an herbe, hauing a longe stemme
and rough, with long leaues growyng by
the toppe, the residue without leaues, the
toppe full of prickes, and a yelowe floure,
women were wonte to make spyndelles of
the stalkes therof.



Atricapilla, a byrde, with blacke fethers on
the crowne of his heed.



Atrifer, a rushe that beareth a blacke sede.



Atriolum, a lyttell ynner court.



Atriplex, an herbe callyd orache or arage.



Atritas, blackenesse.



Atrophia, an affecte or discrasye, wherin the
body can nat be nouryshed with any thing
but consumeth with leannesse.



Atrophus, he that hath that affecte.



Atropos, one of the fatall ladies, whyche
is fayned to breake the threde of lyfe: it
is somtyme put for necessitte of dethe.



Atra, is he that gothe so on the soles of his
fete, that he swepeth the grounde, rather
than walketh.



Attagen, & attagena, a byrd, whiche is found
in Ionia, and is very delycate, and hathe
fethers of sondry colours, and beynge at
large, is alwaye syngynge or chatteringe,
whan he is taken, he maketh no noyse, nor
semeth to haue any voice. They ar decei­
ued that take hym for a woodcocke.



Attalica toga, a gowne of tynsette.



Attelan&ecedil; fabul&ecedil;, were comedies or enterlu­
des, whiche onely were in iestes and mery
scoffes, or bourdynges.



Attel&ecedil;, a citie nygh to Naples.



Attentus, he that hereth diligently, attentiue.



Attentus ad rem, carefull to get goodes.



Attero, triui, terere, to rubbe against a thing.



Atterere famam, Post ubi eorum famam atque
pudorem attriuerat, maiora alia imperabat,
After that he hadde made theym consume
their good name and honestie, he set them
in hande with other greatter attemptatis.
Salust.


Attica, a countray in Grece, wherin stoode
the famous citie of Athenes, the nourice
of all scyences.



Attice, an aduerbe, sygnifyenge in the elo­
quence of speche of Athenes.



Atticismus, the fourme of that speche.



Atticisso, sere, to speake lyke an Atheniense.



Attigo, idem quod attingo.



Attilus, a fysshe, whyche is in the ryuer of
Po, very gret, and with longe rest waxeth
meruaylous fatte, which Franciscus Phi­
lelphus supposed to be a sturion, but that
is denied by Iouius, which affirmeth that
he is greatter than a sturion, and vnlyke
to hym in fourme, taste, and price.



Attingit me sanguine, he is nigh of my blod.



Plinius.



Attingere senectam, to come to greate age.



Attingere partes natur&ecedil;, to com to the know­
lege of naturall causes.
Vergili. in
Geor.


Attingere studia, to sauour of letters.



Attingitur, it is nyght.



Attondeo, attondêre, to clyppe or sheare a
thynge nygh.



Attondere arbores, to shrede trees.



Plautus.



Attondere auro, to rydde one of his money,
to take all away from hym.



Attributus, ta, tum, attributed.



Attributa pecunia, moneye delyuered to be
gyuen to an nother manne.

 

¶ A ANTE V.

AVarus, coueytous of money.



Aucupare sermonem alicuius, to har­
ken or take hede what one sayth.



Audin tu? Herest thou not?



Audire bene, to haue a good name.



Audire male, to haue an yll name.



Audiens dicto, redy to doo that he is com­
maunded, at commaundement, obedyent.



Audienciam facere, to commaunde or make




sylence, as they doo wihche are cryers in
places of iustyce.



Auello, auulsi, auellere, to plucke awaye by
vyolence.



Auellere se a meretrice, to withdrawe hym,
or go away by force from an harlotte.



Auenaria, a kynde of grassehoppes, which
appere nat vntyll the corne be rype.



Auentinus, an hylle at Rome.



Auerni, people in France, callid Auergnes.



Auernus, a lake in Campania, whyche was
dedicate vnto Pluto kyng of Hell, where
men supposed, that there was an entrie or
passage to helle.



Auersus, a, um, straunge, vnacquaynted.



Auertere ab aliquo loco, to lette or prohy­
byte one to enter.
Vergilius.


Aueruncus, god whiche putteth awaye all
euylle.



Aufero, abstuli, auferre, to take away.



Terentius



Aufer te hinc, gette the hense.



Aufer te domum, gette the home.



Plautus.



Auferas iurgium, leaue thy chydynge.



Auferre litem, to gette by action or processe
of the lawe. Maiore mulcta mulctat, quam
litem auferunt, He maketh them to spende
more than they may wynne by their suite.
Plautus in
Ruden.


Aufer nugas, leaue these trifelynges, leaue
your mockes.



Auferre petitionem, to haue the thynge that
he as keth. Tuo arbitratu, dum auferam abs
te id quod peto, Euen as ye wyll, soo that
I maye haue the thynge that I aske or
demaunde.
Plautus in
Cur.


Auferre pignora, to take a dystresse or gage.



Auferre tacita, to make oone to confesse a
thynge secrete. Suspendas potius me,
quam tacita hæc auferas, Thou mayst ra­
ther hange me, thanne make me confesse
that secrete.
Plautus in
Asina.


Terentius
in Andria.



Auferre inultum, to goo quyte without pu­
nyshement. Ergo pretium ob stultitiam fe­
ro, sed inultum id nunquem auferet, I am well re­
warded for my folyshenes, but yet he shall
not go quyte away without punyshement.



Auferri sibi, to be vexed in mynde, or frome
hym selfe.
Cic. Tusc.
quest.3.


Ennius.



Augifico, for augeo.



Augere auxilia, to make a newe hoste, after
a discomfyte.



Auguratus, the dygnitie of theym, whiche
were Augures, of whome was a colledge
in Rome: as there be nowe of priestes in
Cathedrall churches.



Augurium, dyuination or tellynge before of
thinges, whiche shall happen, specially by
the flyght or voyces of byrdes.



Auguror, ari idem quod Auguro.



Cicero pro
L. Murena



Auguror opinione, I suppose in myn opinyon



Augusta C&ecedil;saria, a cytie in Spayne, vppon
the ryuer of Iberus.



Augusta emerita, a cytie in Portugall.



Augusta Vindelicorum, a goodly and beau­
tyfulle citie in Germanye, nowe callydde
Awsbourghe.



Augustalis, ale, the Emperours Palayce or
Pauyllyon.



Augustus, a place consecrate, full of maie­
stie and honour, it is also a name of addi­
cion gyuen to emperours.



Auiarius, & auiaria, he and she that hath the
charge of the kepynge of pultrie or wild­
foule. It may also be vsed for a pultar, whi­
che selleth pultrie.



Auiarium, the place where pultrie is kept.
also busshes sette for byrdes to haunte and
sytte in.



Auide, affectuously, couetously, ardantly.
with great desyre.



Auidis moribus, of an excedynge couay­
tous appetite.



Auiditas, desyre of a thynge, couetyse, ar­
dant affection.



Auidus cibi, hungrye.



Terent.



Auilla, a lambe lately yeaned.



Auius, uia, uium, wherby there is no passage
or waye.
Plaut.


Vergil.



Auius, he that gothe out of the way.



Salust.



Aula, of old writers was vsid for olla, a pot.



Aulula, a lyttell potte, wherof cometh Au­
lularia,  a comedye of Plautus, wherein is
declared the couetous mynd of one, whi­
che hydde his money in a potte, thynkyng
that noo man knewe hit but hym selfe, and
yet was he deceyued of it.



Aulicotia, boyled meate.



Aulicus, a courtyar.



Aulicus, ca, cum, of the court, as aulicus ap­
paratus, courtely apparayle, but most pro­
prely the apparayle of pryncis.
Sueton. in
Nerone.


Aulis, lidis, a lyttelle countraye or shyre in
Boeotia in Grece. It was also a great cy­
tie and hauen, where the princis of Grece
assemblyd, and conspired togyther the di­
struction of Troy.



Aulon, the name of a Mountayne and ci­
tie in Calabria, where growethe excel­
lente good wynes. Alsoo of two other
cyties, the oone in Macedonia, the o­
ther in Cilicia.



Aul&ecedil;, shaulmes or waytes.



Auleticus, he that playeth best on a shalme
or wayte.



Auocare animum, to withdrawe the mynde
from a thynge.



Auocamentum, passetyme, recreation, that
withdraweth the mynde from heuynesse
or melancholy.






Aurata, a fyshe of the see, which I suppose
to be a gylte heed, for he hath in his fore­
heed a thinge congelate, which in the wa­
ter shyneth lyke golde, and also hath a set
of tethe lyke checke tethe, wherwith he
hathe ben harde of fyshers in the night to
crushe cockyls, and suche other lytell shell
fyshes, wheron he fedeth.



Terentius
in Andria.



Aures arrigere, to lyfte vppe the eares, to
here attentyuely.



Aures calent illius criminibus, myne eares
glowe or burne to here of his mischeuous
actes. Aures hebetes habet, he is dulle in
herynge, or he lysteth nat to here.
Cicero in
Salust.Cicero pro
G. Planco.


Plautus in
Trinummo.



Auribus accipere, to haue herde.



Auribus capere spolia, to harken & beare a­
way our secresies, or secrete counsayle.
Plautus in
Mili.


Auribus dare, to flatter, to speake that whi­
che shall content a mans eare.
Trebonius


Cicero.



Auribus æquissimis alicuius uti, to be fauo­
rably harde of one.
Cic. Volum.


Apuleius.



Auribus prouehi, to be caried by the eares,
it is proprely vsed, where we wyl declare,
that beinge in iourney with one, we delyte
so moch in his communication, that we fele
no labour or payne by going or riding. So
may we say, auribus prouehimur, in hering
of hym our paynes are relieued, or in he­
ryng him talke, our iorney semeth shorte,
or is abbreuiate.



Auricularius, a, um, pertayning to the eares.



Auricularis confessio, confession made secret­
ly, as priestis do here it.



Auricularis, re, idem.



Aurigo, a sicknes callid the yelow iaundise.



Aurilegus, he that hath stollen golde.



Auripigmentum. 



Aurum coronarium, was golde gathered of
the people, to make crownes, to sende to
Emperours, after their vyctories.



Plaut. in
Mercator.



Auscultabitur, he wyll do as ye byd hym.



Auscultare alicui, to obeye one, or be at his
commaundement.



Auscultare inter sese, to whyster oone in an
nothers eare.



Ausim, sis, sit, is put for audeam, as, at.



Ausitis, the contray callid also Hus, where
Iob dwellyd.



Ausonium, Italy. Ausones, were the ancient
kynges of Italy.



Ausum, & ausus, a presumptuous enterprise.



Plautus in
Persa.



Auspicium liquidum, a manifest signe or token.



Auspicia optima, tokens of good lucke.



Auspicio malo, with ylle lucke, or in an ylle
tyme. N&ecedil; ego edepol ueni huc auspicio ma­
lo: I camme hither in an ylle time, or, An
vnhappy or vnlucky fortune broughte me
hyther.
Plautus in
Aul.


Auspico, are, to seke for a thing by diuination.



Auspicatus, ta, tum, honourably enterprised.



Quintilia.



Auspicato, happyly.



Austrum, the spoke of a whele.



Aut certe, or at the least. Quo enim vno uin­
cebamur a victa Gr&ecedil;tia, id aut illi ereptum est,
aut certe nobis communicatum, That oone
thynge, wherin we gaue place to Grece, whi­
che is vanquyshed by vs, eyther it is taken
cleane away from them, or at the lest we be
therin equall vnto them.
Ci. in Eru.


Autenticus, ca, cum, of auctoritie.



Autocthones, people which beganne in the
countray that they doo inhabyte, whyche
name was gyuen to them of Athenes.



Autodidactus, he that lernith without a ma­
ster by his owne study.



Automata, thynges without lyfe, whyche
seme to moue by them selfes: as it may ap­
pere in olde horologes, and ymages, whi­
che by vices do moue.



Autopyros, breade of cleane wheate with­
out other mixture, sauing a lyttell leuen.



Author, the fyrste Inuenter or maker of a
thyng. also a reporter of newes. also he that
hath the custody of one within age. also he
that doth sell or delyuer a thing on warran­
tise. also he whom a man foloweth in doing
any thynge.
Ti. Liuius.
Paulus in­
reconsultus.
Ci. in Ver.
Plautus in
Cur.


Terentius
in Prolog.
Andri.



Authoritas, authoritie, credence, puissance,
opinion, iugement, the inioying of possession.



Authoritatem defungi, to deny to haue done
any thynge, or to haue bene the cause that
it was doone.
Plautus in
pœnu.


Authoritatem defugere, to refuse to do that
whiche he is commanded.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Authoritatem interponere, to commaunde a
thynge to be done.



Authoramentum, wages, or hyre.



Authoro, rare, to bynde one by couenant to
doo seruyce.



Authoratus, ta, tum, bounden by couenaunt.

 

¶ A ANTE X.

AXis, an extree of a cart, somtyme the
hole carte, Sometyme it is shyngle,
wherewith howses are couered in
the stede of tyle.
Iuuenalis


Axilla, the armehole.



Axamenta, verses made by the priestes of
Mars, called Salii, in quycke tauntynge
of all men.



Axare, olde writers vsed for nominare, to
name or as ke.



Axioma, a sentence spoken and proued: as
If Plato walketh, Plato moueth, if it be day,
the son is aboue the erth. It is put by Tulli
for that, which sophisters do call a proposi­
tion, whiche is a sentence trewe or fals.






¶ A ANTE Z.

AZymus panis, vnleuened breadde.



Azanium, was a welle, the water
wherof beinge dronke, caused menne
to hate the sauour and taste of wyne.



Azotus, a citie in Siria.


 


¶ B ANTE A.

B##sp##A##sp##A##sp##L in the tongue of
Siria, signifieth lorde,&
is attrybute to Iupiter. 



Bab&ecedil;, an interiection of
wondrynge.



Babylon, a great citie in
Caldey, and signyfyeth
confusion or translation.
where was a towre edyfied by Nembroth,
whiche was in height fiue myles, and a hun­
dred thre score and tenne paces, afterward
being enlarged by Semiramis, the wyfe of
Ninus kyng of Assiria, it was so great, that
it conteyned in compasse thre score myles,
and the walles were in height thre hundred
fete, and in thyckenes or bredthe thre score
and fyftene fete, and hadde a hundred gates
of brasse, and there ranne through the mid­
dell therof the noble and moste famous ri­
uer Euphrates, whyche is oone of the ry­
uers, whereof the sprynge or hedde is in
Paradyse.



Babylonia, the countray where the citye of
Babylon stode.



Babylonicus, ca, cum, and Babylonius, a, um,
of Babylon.



Babylonica, are clothes wouen with sondry
colours.



Baccalia, a kynde of bay trees or laurell, but
it hath larger leues, and great plentye of
beryes. It is also called Augusta.



Baccar, caris, & Baccharis, is an herbe ha­
uynge a lefe in facyon and greatnesse be­
twene violet leues and the herbe, whiche
is called Moleyn or longwort, the stalke
square, and somwhat rough, whiche is in
hayght a foote and a half, hauyng a flour
lyke purple, myxte with whyte, the roote
blacke, but that sauouryth lyke vnto Cina­
mome, some do call it Asdrabacca, some our
ladies gloues.



Bacchâri, to do a thynge lyke a madde man
or vexed with spirites.



Bacchatim, lyke a madde man.



Baccaricum, a swete oyntment, made of the
roote of Asdrabaccha.



Bacchius, a, um, of Bacchus. 



Baccifera, a tree bearynge bearies.



Baccula, a lyttell bearye.



Bacillum, a lyttell staffe.



Bactra, trorum, a contray in Scithia, beyond
Assiria, it is also the name of a citie in that
countraye.



Bactriani, people of that countray.



Bactrianum, a countray wherin were a thou­
sande cities.



Badizare, to goo.



Plautus in
Asina.



Bagous, in the Persian tounge signyfieth a
geldyng, or a man gelded.



Bagrada, a ryuer in Affrike by the citie cal­
lyd Utica, where Attilius Regulus, and the
hoste of the Romans, slewe a serpent, whi­
che was in length one hundred & .xx. fete.



Bahal, the ydoll of Tyre.



Balanites, a stone, whiche is a lyght grene,
and hath a vayn in the myddell lyke a flame
of fyre.



Balanitis, a kynde of rounde Chestens or
cheste nuttes.



Balaustium, the floures of wylde pome gra­
nades.



Baleares, two Iles by Spayne, wherof the
one is now called Maiorca, the other Mi­
norca.



Ballistarium, the place where a great brake
or slynge is layde.



Balneatorius, a, um, of a bathe.



Balneolum, a lytell bayne or bathe.



Balito, tare, to blete often.



Balsamum, baulme.



Bambia, a kynde of olyue tree.



Banausus, an artificer that worketh at the fyre.



Banchus, called an haddok.



Baphia, a dyehouse.



Baptæ, men whiche hadde theyr visages
paynted.



Babtes, a stoone greene, of the colour of a
frogge.



Baptismus, & Baptismum, & Baptisma, matis,
Baptym.



Barbula, a lytell berde.



Barba iouis, an herbe called Singreene, and
groweth on tyles.



Barba senis, is an herbe, which groweth a­
monge stones, the leaues wherof be lyke
to long heares. It is also callyd Barba pe­
tr&ecedil;, it hathe a yelowe floure, and the roote
therof is bytter.



Barbatulus, he that hath a yonge berde.



Barbus, & barbo, a fyshe callyd a barbyll.



Barce, a citye in Libia, also an other citye
called Ptolomais.



Bardesanes, was an excellent astronomer.



Bardiacus, a certeyne garment.



Baris, baridos, vel baridis, a bote in Egypt,
wherin they caried ded bodies to burieng.



Bariona, idem quod filius columb&ecedil;, the Cul­
uers sonne. It was the surname of saynte




Peter the apostell.



Barnacida, a garment that childern did wear.



Martialis.



Barrus, a toothe. Quid tibi vis mulier, nigris
dignissima barris? What woldest thou haue
woman, that arte worthy blacke tethe?



Basan, a countray beyond the ryuer of Ior­
dane in Iudea, which was diuyded to two
of the Trybes: whyche may be interpre­
ted moste fertile and fatte.



Martialis.



Bascanda, a certayn vessel, whiche came out
of Englande, whan it was callyd Britayn.



Basil&ecedil;a, a citie in Germanye.



Basilia, an Ile in the northe occean see.



Basilicæ edictiones, the kynges ordynaunce
or commaundementes.
Plaut. in
capt.


Plautus in
Trinummo.



Basilica facinora, actes or gestes of kynges.



Basilica nux, a wall nutte.



Plautus in
Persa.



Basilice agere, to do a thinge royally.



Basilicus, a certayne chaunce at dyce.



Plautus in
Curcu.



Basilides, a certayne heretike, whiche affir­
med to be .CCClxv. heuens.



Basilidiani, the folowers of Basilides. 



Bassaris, ridis, a prieste of Bacchus. 



Bat, is a worde that is spoken to one, whan
we wyl haue hym speke no more, as peace
or huysht.



Batauia, a countraye in Germanye, callyd
Hollande.



Batauus, an Hollander, or man of Hollande.



Batiochus, a lyttell potte, out of the whiche
wyne is poured at the tabel



Batrachion, an herbe, whiche I do suppose
is that whiche is commonly called goldknap,
or crowefoote. It is also callyd of Demo­
critus Chrisanthemon, for it hathe a flowre
as yelowe as golde, and the leafe is some­
what lyke vnto parcily, but that it is moche
greatter.



Battologia, idem quod multiloquium, moche
talke or speche, clatterynge.



Iosephus.



Batus, is a measure for lycour amonge the
Hebrues, whiche conteyned .lxii. measures
of Athenes, callyd Sextarios, euery Sex­
tarius contaynynge .xviii. ounces, which a­
mounteth to foure score and .xiii. li. of en­
glyshe galons.

 

B ANTE D, & E.

BDelium, is a tree growyng in Arabia &
Scithia. also a gumme commynge of
the same tree, lyke to waxe, but clere
as gumme, within vnctuous or fatte, verye
swete of sauour, whan it is rubbed or bur­
ned, and bytter in taste.



Bebrytia, a countray callid the gret Phrigia.



Bebrytius, a, um, & bebrix, bebricis, of the
countray of great Phrigia.



Bebritium, seu Bebriacum, a towne in Italye
betwene Cremona and Verona.



Beelphegor, a gapynge ydoll.



Beelsephon, lorde of the northe, an ydol set
vp in the places of espiall.



Beelsebub, an ydoll callyd god of flyes.



Beemoth, the deuyll, and signifieth a beast.



Belbus, a beast callyd also Hiena.



Belg&ecedil;, people of Gallia, betwene the riuers
of Ryne, Marne, and Seyn, and stretchith
to the northwest see, in the whiche are now
conteyned the countrays of Brabant, Flan­
ders, Holland, Ghelder, part of Friseland,
Gulyke, Hennow, Pycardy, part of Cham­
payne, the great forest of Arden, the cities
of Acon, Colayn, Triere, Rheines.



Belial, the deuyll, whiche is interpreted A­
postata, without yoke.



Bellatula, lyttell swete harte.



Plautus.



Belliatus, ta, tum, beautified.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Belle, welle.



Belle se habet, he dothe or fareth well.



Bellerophontes, seu Bellerophon, was the
sonne of Glaucus kynge of Ephyra, who
beinge a man of moche beautie and prowes
was ardantly beloued of Stenobea, the wife
of Pretus king of Ephyra, next after Glau­
cus, and whan she desyred him to committe
adulterie with her, he fearynge the venge­
ance of Iupiter god of hospitalitie, and re­
membrynge the frendshyp shewed to hym
by her husbande, refused her, and dyd put
hyr away from him, whiche she disdayning,
and beinge in a woode rage, accused hym
to her husbande, that he had rauyshed her,
but he like a sober man wolde nat than slee
hym in his owne house, but delyueringe to
him letters to his wyues father, sent hym in
to Licia, where he than reigned, who per­
ceyuynge therby the mynde of Pretus, en­
couraged Bellerophon, to distroy the two
monsters callid Solymos and Chymera, and
sent him therto that he mought be slayn vn­
der the colour of a valiaunt enterprise, but
he acheuyng it nobly, returned with honor.
Note here
the malyce
of harlots.


Bellica, was a pyllour in the temple of 
Bel­
lona, callyd goddesse of battayle, where
they vsed, whanne warres were proclay­
med, to cast a Iauelyn.



Bellicrepa, a certayne fourme of daunsynge
in harneyse.



Bellator equus, a horse of warre.



Bellatrix, tricis, a woman valyant in warres.



Belligero, rare, to make warre.



Bellona, a callyd goddesse of battayle.



Bellis, seu bellium, the white daysye, callyd
of some the Margarite, in the northe it is
callyd a Banwort. It is also a fyshe with a
longe beake lyke a crane, whiche is callyd
of some a kekehorne.



Bellouaci, people of Beauuosyne in France






Cice. Atti.



Bellum merum loquitur, he speaketh oonely
of warre.



Belon, the name of a citie & riuer in Spaine.



Beluosus, a, um, full of monsters of the see.



Belluatus, ta, tum, paynted or kerued with
great beastes.



Belluata tapetia, Tapistrye wroughte with
great beastes.



Belus, the fyrste kynge of Assiria, father of
Ninus, and it signifieth the sonne. it is also a
ryuer in Syria, which hath sande of the na­
ture of glasse, whiche it casteth vppe. also it
torneth all other mettall that commeth into
it, into glasse.



Bembina, a towne by the forest called Nem&ecedil;­
us. Bembinatus, of that towne or woode.



Benacus, a great lake in Lumbardy.



Bene accipere aliquem, to entreate one well,
or entertayne hym.



Bene acceptus, well entertayned.



Plautus.



Bene agitur, the thynge is wel done.



Bene ambulato, god be with the.



Bene audire, to be well spoken of.



Bene conuenire inter eos, they agreed welle
to gether.



Plinius.



Bene cogitare de aliquo, to haue a good opi­
nion of one.



Plautus in
Pseud.



Bene curare ætatem, to lyue pleasantly.



Bene hercle denuncias, thou tellyst me good
tydynges.
Plautus in
Trinum.


Benedico, dixi, dicere, to prayse, to say well.



Plaut



Benedice, an aduerbe, signifieng in praysing
or saying wel. Cum illiciebas me ad te blan­
de et benedice: whan thou dyddiste trayne
me vnto the with plesant wordes and prai­
synge of me.



Benefacio, cere, to do well.



Benefactum, it is well done.



Benefacta, Benefytes, pleasures.



Beneficium, a benefite, a plesure, or good torne



Beneficentia, is not onelye lyberalitie in gy­
uing of money, or possessions, or other like
thynges, but also in helpynge a man with
counsayle, solicitation, or other labour.



Plautus in
Rude.



Bene ferre gratiam, to do pleasure to one.



Bene habere, to behaue me or hym well.



Plautus in
Epidic.



Bene hoc habet, this matter commeth well
to passe.



Bene longus sermo, a very longe tale.



Bene magnus, very great.



Bene mane, very tymely.



Bene mereri, to do pleasure to one.



Bene multi, very many.



Bene nummatum marsupium, a purse wel sto­
red with money.



Bene nummatus homo, a well monyed man.



Bene successit, it came well to passe.



Bene uale, farewell, a dewe.



Bene ualere, to be in good helthe.



Bene uertant dij, god turne it to good: I pray
god brynge it well to passe.



Bene uiuere, to make good chere.



Beneuolens, beneuolent, he that loueth well
an nother.



Benigna terra, a grounde that is fertile.



Benigne, an aduerbe, whiche signifieth cur­
teysly, graciously, bounteously.



Benignitas, curteysie, lyberalitie, gentylnes.



Berecyntus, a mountayne and citie in Phri­
gia, where Cybele, callid the mother of the
goddis was chiefely honoured.



Berecyntia, callid the mother of goddis.



Bersabe, a citie in Iudea, callyd also Puteus
iuramenti, the pytte of the othe, where A­
braham dwellid, whiche is the consynes of
the lande of behest.



Berillus, a stone whiche is verye clere, and
somewhat inclynynge to a grene colour. it
is not that, whiche we commonly do calle
Berall, in drynkynge cuppes, but it is ra­
ther that, whiche we do call christall, whi­
che beinge wrought into squares, hathe in
them a glymse of a lyght grene.



Beta, an herbe callyd Beetes.



Bethania, a towne two myles from Hieru­
salem, on the side of the mounte Oliuete.



Bethel, a citie in Samaria, where the people
dwelled whiche were callyd Iebusei.



Bethleem, the citie of Dauyd the prophet,
where he was borne and dyed, where alsoo
our sauiour Christe Iesu was borne: there
also dyed Rachel the wyfe of Iacob the pa­
triarche. it was assigned to the tribe of Iu­
da, and was distant from Hierusalem .vi. mi­
les, and was firste called Euphrata, and sig­
nifyeth in the hebrewe tongue, the howse
of breadde.



Bethsaida, or Bethesda, was a great ponde in
Hierusalem, wherin the pristis washed the
shepe, whiche shuld be sacrifised, and may
be interpreted the house of cattell. It was
also the name of a towne, where Peter &
Phylyp the apostels were borne.



Bethsamis, a citie in Galilee, where Christe
dyd many myracles.



Bethsamit&ecedil;, people of Bethsamis.



Bethsura, & Bethsur&ecedil;, a stronge fortresse of
the Iewes.



B&ecedil;ticatus, he that weareth black or broune
garment.



B&ecedil;ticus, ca, cum, blacke or browne.



B&ecedil;tica, a prouynce or countray in Spayne,
callyd nowe Granado.



B&ecedil;tis, a ryuer in Spayne by Granado.



Betonica, an herbe callyd Betayne.



Betonica altilis siue coronaria, I suppose hit
to be Gyllofers.



Betphage, a towne in Iudea, and may be in­




terpreted the house of a mouth, or a iawe.



Betula, a tree, called birche.

 

¶ B ANTE I.

BIæon, wheate whiche is hard to be bea­
ten out of the huskes.



Bias antis, was one of the .vii. wise men
of Grece, and was gouernour of the citie
called Priene, and was very rigorouse in iu­
stice agaynst ill men, and defended his con­
tray longe agaynste outwarde hostilitie: at
the last the towne being taken, and the peo­
ple fleinge awaye, and carienge with them
suche treasure as they had, he went quiet­
ly out of the towne, leuyng all his substance
behynde hym: and whan he was demaun­
ded, why that he onelye caryed nothynge
with hym, he aunswered: I cary al with me
that is myne owne, meanynge therby, that
his wysedome and vertue were his propre
goodes, al other thynges were the goodes
of fortune, & by her appoynted to them that
mought catche them, but wysedome & ver­
tue were constante, and mought by no man
be taken from hym.



Bibisia, bybbynge.



Biblio, blere, to make a sowne as a pot doth,
whan drynke is drawen into it.



Bibliographus, a wryter of bokes.



Bibitur. Mature ueniunt, discumbitur, fit ser­
mo inter eos, et inuitatio vt gr&ecedil;co more bibe­
retur, They come at the tyme appoynted, &
there was among them talkynge and quaf­
tynge, that euery man mought drynke after
the Greekes facion.
Ci. in Ver.
act.3.
 

B ANTE L.


Plautus in
Trinummo.



BLandi loquentulus, a pleasant speaker.



Blande, graciousely, amorousely, fla­
teryngely.



Blanditer, idem.



Blandicia, flatery, pleasaunt motion, intyse­
ment by wordes.



Blapsigonia, losse of generation, proprelye
in bees.



Blatio, tiui, tire, to speke or talke lyke a fole,
or without any purpose or reson, to bable.



Blatero, ronis, a babbler, he that talketh to
noo pourpose.



Blattaria, an herbe callyd Moleyn.



Blatteus, a, um, purple.



Blitteus, ea, eum, vnsauery.

 

B ANTE O.

BOa, is also a sicknes, wherin the body
is full of redde blysters.



Boalia, playes made for the helthe of
oxen and kyne.



Boaria, an herbe callyd a clote or burre.



Boca, uel Bocas, a fyshe, whiche hathe his
backe as it were paynted with sondrye co­
lours, Iouius saythe and affirmeth, that he
is taken in all costes in greate sculles, nat
withstandynge I do nat yet fynde his name
in englyshe.



Bœbis, a lake in Thessaly.



Bogud, a towne in Affrike, alsoo the name
of a kynge.



Bolus, a throw or cast at dyse. also a draught
with a net in waters. it is also a morsell.



Bombax, an aduerbe spoken of him, that set­
teth nought by that whiche is spoken, as
one wolde say, whanne he is rebuked of a
faute, And what than? or tushe, I care not
for that.
Plautus in
pseudolo.


Bomolochus, a common scoffar, or he that
susteyneth all vyllanie for to gette money.
It was also taken for a boye, that stode at
the aulters end, to stele away the candels.



Bona caduca, the goodes of theym that be
damned, goodes escheted.



Bona dea, was she that some callyd fatua, or
fauna, of whom Varro writeth, that in her
lyfe neuer man did see her but her husband,
nor herde hir named.



Bonæ ædes, a substanciall house.



Bona dicere, to reporte well.



Bona fide dicere, to say truely and playnly.



Bona pars, the more parte.



Bona uerba quæso, say well I pray you.



Terentius
in Andria.



Boni frugi, honest, of good condicions.



Bonaria, the calmenes of the see.



Boreæ, Iasper stones.



Borsyrites, a kynde of olyue, hauynge ma­
ny boughes, white & spotted with sanguine.



Bosra, a citie of Idumea.



Botytillus, a lyttell cluster of grapes.

 

B, ANTE R.

BRachicatalecton, where oone syllable
lacketh at the ende of a verse.



Brachicatalecticum carmen, a verse lac­
kynge one syllable or mo.



Breuiculus, a lyttell shorte man.



Breuiter, shortly. Breuis, idem.



Bryon thalassion, or Marinum, a thinge gro­
wynge on the rockes, wheron the salte wa­
ter beateth, somewhat lyke to mosse, and is
called of the northern men slanke.



Bryonia, a wilde vine, hauynge redde bea­
ries, & the leaues more rough than of a vine.



Britanica, an herbe lyke greatte sorelle, but
blacker, thycker, and therwith mosye, the
roote blacke and litell, and in tasting strai­
neth the tounge.






Bromus, one of the names of Bacchus. 



Bronchosela, a waxinge kernell.



Bronteus, the surname of Iupiter. 



Brupeo, ere, old writers vsad for stupeo, stu­
pere, to be abashed.

 

¶ B ANTE V.

BVa, the word of yonge children whan
they aske for drynke, with vs they vse
to saye Bumme.



Bubula, Befe.



Bubonocele, where the bowell is braste by
the share of a man toward his priuy membres.



Bucea, a thynne huske in a beane within the
hulle.



Bucerum pæcus, an herde of rother beastes



Bucolicum carmen, a poeme made of herdmen.



Bulbine, nes, scalions.



Bullula, a lyttell water bell or bobill.



Buphonum, an herbe, wherof if catell eate,
they do dye of a griefe in theyr throte.



Buphthalmon, an herbe, called also Cotula
fetida, and is lyke to camomyll, but it gro­
with more vpright, maywede.



Buprestis, a fly lyke to a blacke bytel, but he
hath lenger legges, whiche if a beast doth
eate, he swelleth, and therwith dyeth.



Burbarus, a fyshe, whiche by the description
of Paulus Iouius, semeth to be a Carp.



Burrum, a depe redde colour.



Busicon, a great figge.



Bustuarij, sworde players, whiche went be­
fore the ded corpsis whan they were borne
to be burned.



Buteo, onis, a bussarde.



Buttubata, a trifle of no value.



Buxeus, a, um, of boxe.


 


C, ANTE A.

C BY HIM SELFE,
sygnyfyeth Caius, the
propre name of a man,
and therfore is ioyned
with an other name, as
C. Iul. Cæsar, Caius Iuli­
us Cæsar. 



Cl. signifieth Claudius. 



Cabala, a tradicion of the Iewes, lefte a­
monge them by Moyses without writyng,
but from the father to his sonne, and so con­
tinually in their generation, wherein is in­
cluded the vnderstandynge as well of the
secretes of nature, as the mysticalle sence,
included in the wordes of holy scripture.



Cabus, a mesure of the hebrues, containing
two sextarios and a half .vi. ounces, and .iii.
drammes of Athenes measure, whyche a­
mounteth to foure pounde, thre ounces, &
thre drammes.



Cacaturio, to desyre to go to the stole.



Cachexia, a spyce of a consumption, which
procedeth of an yll disposition of the body,
and the body and vysage is therwith verye
leane, and yll coloured.



Cacia, viciositie, or that whiche we common­
ly do calle, a faute in a thynge.



Cacoblepa, a lyttell beaste in Egypte in the
bankes of the ryuer of Nilus, whiche hath
suche venenosytie in his eien, that who that
beholdeth them, dieth incontinent.



Cacoethe, a vyce or sore ingendred in oone
frome his infancie, harde to be recouered
or curyd.



Cacologia, ylle speche.



Cacologus, an yll speaker.



Cacophaton, is an yll fourme of speakyng,
or where the wordes do not sowne wel and
conueniently.



Cacozelus, an yll folower or imitatour.



Cacus, a gyaunte, whome Hercules slewe
in Italye.



Cadiscus, a vesselle, wherinto are gathered
scedules, billes, or lottes, where thynges ar
done by a consent of many counsaylours, or
of the people.



Cadmites, a stone, whiche hath lyttell blue
sparkes aboute it.



Cadmus the name of a kyng of Phenicia,
whiche buylded Thebes: by whome some
men do suppose, that dyuers of the Greke
letters were founde.



Cadit animus, the courage faylethe, or is
abated.



Cadere, to be slayne.



Plautus in
Amphit.



Caduceus, the rodde, whiche Mercurius
dyd alway beare in token of peace.



Caduceator, ambassadour or heraulte at ar­
mes, sent to demaunde peace.



Caduca, thynges that wyll shortly peryshe
or decaye, olde wryters vsed them for si­
gnifications of that which shulde happen.



Caduca h&ecedil;reditas, an inheritaunce whiche is
fallen in excheate, for lacke of heyres.
Ci. in phil.


Caducus labor, labour loste.



Caducæ literæ, letters whiche wyl be short­
ly put out.
Plinius.


Caduci tituli, honours and dignities, which
endure but a lyttell while.
Pli. in pan.


Caduci, they whiche are decessed.



Vergili.7.



Caducor, ceris, duci, to be ouerthrowen.



Cadulæ, the dryppyng of fleshe rosted.



Cadus, a vessell contayynge the same mea­
sure that Amphora dothe.



Cæa, an Ile in the see called Aegeum. It is
also called Coa, where sylke wormes were




fyrst founde. the countrey of Hippocrates,
the prynce of Phisitions.



C&ecedil;us uel Cous, a, um, of that Ile called C&ecedil;a
or Coa.



Lucretius.2



C&ecedil;cigeni, they whiche are borne blynde.



Plautus in
pseudolo.



C&ecedil;ca die, Eme die c&ecedil;ca hercle oliuum, id uen­
dito oculata die: bye oyle oliue good chepe
and sell it agayne dere, orels, bye oyle for
dayes, and sell it againe for redy money.



C&ecedil;cus morbus, a siknesse that is hid, or may
not be discerned.



C&ecedil;cihomorroides, emeraudes or piles, whi­
che are within the foundement, and do not
appere.



C&ecedil;ca uestigia, where one may not se his way
that he rydeth or goeth.



C&ecedil;cum uallum, a trenche, which in tyme of
warre is pyght priuily with sharpe stakes,
which are hydde with brakes or bushes.



C&ecedil;cum intestinum, is a bowel, which cometh
from the ryghte syde, at the poynt of the
houkle bone, and goeth to the left syde in
length, and is also called Monoculus.



C&ecedil;citas, blyndnesse, not onely of the bodyly
eyes, but also of the mynde.



Cedes, murdre.



Cedere calcibus, to kycke.



Cic. ad Q.
fratrem.



Ceditur restibus, he is conuict by witnesse.



Vergil.



C&ecedil;dere, to sacrifice. C&ecedil;dunt binas de more
bidentes: Accordyng to the custome they
sacrificed two hoggrelles.



C&ecedil;latus, ta, tum, grauen.



Celestis, te, et hoc c&ecedil;leste, of heuen or heuenly.



Celibaris hasta, was the staffe of a Iauelyn,
which had ben in the body of one of them
whiche were called gladiatores, and was
slayn: with the which staffe the heade of a
mayden newe maried was kempt and stri­
ken, sygnifieng, that lykewyse as the staffe
was stycked faste in the body of hym that
was slayne, so shulde she stycke fast, and be
ioyned with hym that maried her.



Cælostomia, a vyce in speache, where one
speketh inwardely, and maketh rather a
sounde than a pronunciation of his wordes



Cælum, the palate or roufe of the mouth.



Plinius.



C&ecedil;lipotens, all myghty god.



C&ecedil;neus, the surname of Iupiter. 



C&ecedil;pi, I beganne.



C&ecedil;remoniæ, ceremonies.



Cer&ecedil;te, a citie in Thuscana.



C&ecedil;ris, a sore lyke an hony combe.



C&ecedil;roferarii, they whiche do beare candels
in the churche before the crosse in proces­
sion, or do any lyke seruice in the churche



C&ecedil;roferarium, a candell stycke, whervppon
tapers are sette.



C&ecedil;roma, et C&ecedil;romatum, an ointment, wher­
with wrastelers were annoynted, to make
them the more delyuer and stronge.



C&ecedil;sim, edgelynge, or with the edge.



C&ecedil;sitium, a clene napkyn or handkerchiefe.



C&ecedil;sura, a cutte, a garse, an incisyon, also in­
taylyng or caruynge in stone or tymber



C&ecedil;suratim, brefely, succinctly.



Cætera doctus, lerned in other thynges.



Cice. de na­
tura deorum



Calamitæ, lyttell grene frogges.



Calasastri, boyes whyche doo synge with a
shyll voyce.



Calatores, seruauntes whyche are alwaye
callyd for.



Calcaria fornix, a lyme kylle.



Calcata, a house whiche is pargetted.



Calcearium, a showe.



Calceatus, tus, idem.



Calceatus, ta, tum, shodde.



Calceare, to show an horse or mule.



Chalcos, seu æreola, the .xxxvi. parte of a
Dramme.
Sueton. in
Resp.


Calculum album adijcere, to approue or al­
lowe a thynge.



Calculum ponere, to yelde accompte.



Plinius in
panegyr.



Calculosus, a, um, grauelly, or stony.



Caldariæ, hote bathes.



Caldarium, a cauldron wherin water is het.



Calendæ, the fyrst day of euery moneth.



Cales, a towne in Fraunce.



Calim olde writers vsed for Clam, priuily.



Callaria, a cole whitynge, meane betwene a
haddocke and a whytinge.



Callipolis, a citie in Thracia.



Calleo, lui, lêre, to perceyue, to knowe by
longe experience.



Calliblephara, medicines to make heres to
growe in the chekes or browes.



Calliblepharon, a medicine for the eies, spe­
cially whan the eie lyddes doo cleaue to­
gyther.



Calliscere, to waxe harde, proprelye in the
skynne and fleshe.



Callitrichum, an herbe called maiden heare.



Callum obducere, to harden, to make to in­
dure labours or peynes.



Calones, shoes of wodde. Also scullyons
and boyes, whiche do folowe an hooste to
cary baggage, wodde, coles, or other like
thynges.



Calophanta, a mocker.



Calorificus, ca, cum, that whiche heateth or
maketh a thinge hotte.



Calotechnus, a good workeman.



Calpar, a tunne.



Caltha, an herb callid marigoldis or ruddis



Calthula, a garment of the colour of Ma­
rygoldes.



Caluaria, the hole heed of a man or beaste.
It was also a comon place of buriall. some
men do suppose, that it was the place where




Adam the fyrste man was buried.



Caluaster, a man somwhat balde.



Caluor, ueris, ui, to be dysappoynted.



Calx, calcis. masculyne gender, the hele.



Calx, the feminyne gender,lyme made of
stones burned. it is taken somtyme for the
ende of a thynge.



Calydon, a citie in Grece.



Camarina, a stynking herbe, the ayre wher­
of prouoketh one to vomyte.



Cammarus, a fishe callid a creuyse, specially
of the freshe water, a creuyse deaudoulx.



Camerinam mouere, is a prouerbe spoken
to one, signifieng that he hurteth hym self,
which proceded of a fenne so callid which
being dried vp, there hapned a great pesti­
lence, wherfore the peple adioyning, as ked
of Apollo, if they shuld make it drye for e­
uer, who answered, Ne moueas camerinam,
as he shoulde saye, styrre no myschyefe to
thy selfe.



Camuri boues, oxen or kyne, with crooked
hornes.



Canaan the sonne of Cam, the son of Noe,
of whome commeth Cananeus. 



Canalitium aurum, golde dygged in pyttes.



Canan, the countray callyd Arabye.



Iosephus
in antiqui.



Canan&ecedil;a, a part of Siria, now callid Iudea.



Cananitis regio, idem.



Canaria, an yle in the see callyd Atlanticum,
nygh to the fortunate yles.



Canarius, a, um, pertaynynge to dogges.



Canatim, an Aduerbe, sygnyfyenge lyke
a dogge.



Cancellarius, in the old tyme was taken for
a scrybe or notarye, nowe it is callydde a
chauncellour.



Cancellatim, lattyse wyse.



Cancelli, lyttell crabbes of the see.



Cicero de
lege agra­
ria.



Canere sibi, to speake for his owne profite.



Canere sibi & musis, to synge or wryte for
his owne pleasure, and for theym that doo
fauour hym, nothing caring for any other.



Canta, olde writers vsed for cantata.



Cantito, tare, to synge often.



Cantare, to monysshe or exhorte. H&ecedil;c dies
noctesque tibi canto ut caueas, This I exhort
the daye & nyght, that thou mayste beware.
Plautus in
Trinummo.


Cantatio, a syngynge.



Cantator, a synger.



Capere rationem, to fynde the meane.
Rationem cœpi ut & amanti obsequerer, &
patrem non offenderem, I founde the mean
to please my louer, and not withstandyng I
dyspleased not my father. also to knowe the
cause why. Scio tibi esse hoc grauius multo,
ac durius cui fit: uerum ego haud minus &ecedil;gré
patior id qui nescio, nec rationem capio, nisi
quod tibi bene ex animo uolo, I knowe wel
that to you, whom the thynge toucheth, hit
is moche more displeasant and greuous: but
yet it greuith me no lesse, I can not tel why,
but onely bycause I loue you.
Terent. in
Heautont.


Capere rationem oculis, to iudge by syghte.
Hi loci sunt atque hæ regiones, quæ mihi ab
hero sunt meo demonstrat&ecedil;, ut ego oculis ra­
tionem capio, These are the places & stre­
tes, that my mayster shewed me, as farre as
myn eyes can iudge, or as farre as I canne
perceyue.
Plautus in
Pseud.


Capere uoluptatem, to delyte.



Capere uersoriam, to chaunge a pourpose,
to tourne saylle, to doo contrarye to that
he intended.



Capere usuram corporis vxoris alterius, 
To commytte aduoultrie with an nother
mannes wyfe.
Plautus in
Amphitri.


Capidulum, a hoode.



Capillatia uela, be clothes of heare.



Capito, tonis, a see fyshe, greatter commonly
than a Myllet is, whiche as I suppose, we
do call a base



Capitulo, lare, to diuide by chapiters.



Capnion, an herbe callyd Fumitorie. it is al­
so callyd Capnos.
Plinius li.
26.


Capo, a fyshe callyd a Gurnarde.



Caprilis, le, of a gote.



Caprillus, la, lum, idem.



Caprotina, a surname of Iuno. 



Capsis, for cape si vis, take it and thou wylt.



Captare impudicitiæ, to lye in awayt to take
one in the acte of lecherie.



Captare cœnam, to get a supper of fre cost.



Martialis.



Captare sermonem, to harken priuyly what
menne talke.



Captatio, a purchase.



Carba, a wynde that blowethe frome the
Southe.



Carbunculatio, is a faut in vynes, whan the
clusters of grapes are nat sufficiently coue­
red with leaues, by the whyche occasyon,
they be wythered and dried.



Carbunculus, is also a kynde of erthe, the
whiche with the heate of the sonne, waxeth
soo hotte, that it burneth the rotes of her­
bes and trees.



Carchedonius, a kynde of Carbuncle sto­
nes, whiche in the house seme of purple co­
lour, abrode in the aire they ar fyrie, against
the sonne they sende oute sparkles, and yf
waxe by touched with them, it melteth.



Carcinus, a crabbe.



Carabus, a fysshe callyd a lopster, lyke to a
Creuyse, but that he is greater, and is red
whan he is alyue.



Chalchis, a fysshe of the see, of the kynde
of Turbutte.



Charax, a Fysshe, callydde alsoo Dentix,




with teethe standinge out of his lippes, & is
a brode fyshe, and somewhat redde, with a
chaungeable colour.



Cardomine, an herbe callyd water cressis.



Cardopos, an huche or coffar, wherin bread
is layde, In the Northe countraye hit is
callyd an arke.



Carduus, a thystell.



Caricus, ca, cum, of the countrey of Caria.



Carides, a fysshe callydde Pranes, lyke to 
shrympes.



Cariem trahere, to waxe rotten, or to be pu­
trified or vinnewed.



Cariophillon, a spice callyd cloues.



Carnus, na, num, fatte.



Caros, excesse of meate or drynke. also an
herbe and sede callyd carways.



Carpere iter, to take his iourney.



Carpocrates, an heretyke, whiche denyed
that god made the worlde.



Carpophyllon, a tree, which hath leues like
to laurell.



Carthallum, a baskette.



Caryopos, the iuyce of a nutte.



Carynus, na, num, of a nutte: as oleum cary­
num, the oyle of nuttes.



Caryst&ecedil;, & Carystos, an Ile in the see called
Euboicum, wherin is plentie of marbyll of
dyuers colours.



Caryst&ecedil;us, a, um, of that yle.



Casabundus, da, dum, fallynge often.



Caseale, a stable.



Casner, in the Oske tunge is an olde man.



Casito, tare, to falle often.



Cassinum, an olde market place.



Cassiterus, tynne.



Cassiterides, certayne yles, wherein tynne
is dygged.



Cassutha, a wede that windeth about hempe
or lynne, callyd Doddar.



Catabasis, the sonne sette.



Catachresis, a fygure, wherby the propretie
of a worde is abused: as, Facies simillima
lauro, where facies oonely belongeth to a
man, and not to a tree, although it doth si­
gnifye there a similitude or fygure.



Cathysta, a garment close all aboute.



Catacrysis, a condemnation.



Catagrapha, ymages lokyng diuers ways,
and in dyuers fourmes.



Catalepsis, occupation or deprehencion.



Catalexis, a fynyshynge of a thynge.



Catalyma, refection, also an ynne.



Catamidio, are, to sette one vp with a paper
on his heed to be mocked or rebuked for
some offence, as they vse to doo with men
periured, or with forgers of euidences.



Catapultarium pilum, a bolte.



Catatyposis, a fygure, where one thynge is
described by an nother.



Cato, wyse. Also the name of a noble Se­
natour of Rome.



Catoblepas, a beaste full of poyson, callyd
a Basylyske.



Catillo, are, to eate lyke a glutton.



Catorthoma, the ryght exercise of vertue.



Catulinus, na, num, of a catte.



Caudec&ecedil;, lytell coffers of wyckers, or a iun­
ket, wherin eles are taken in ryuers.



Plautus in
Rude.



Caudeus, a, um, of the stemme of a tree.



Caudex, is a dulle brayned felowe, a dulle
hedde.



Caudicalis, ale, pertaynynge to the stemme
of a tree.



Caudicariæ naues, shyppes made of thicke
plankes.



Cauere alicui, to gyue counsaylle to oone
in mattiers of lawe, or concernynge con­
tractes.



Cauere, with accusatiue case, sygnifyeth to
byd to beware.



Cauere sibi ab aliquo, to take a quytaunce or
other discharge for the payment of money
or delyueraunce of any thynge. At uero, in­
quam, tibi ego Brute non soluam, nisi prius a te
cauero, amplius eo nomine neminem, cuius
petitio sit, petiturum, Truely (sayde I) Bru­
tus I wyll not pay the, excepte I haue fyrst
a quyttance of the, that thou shalte nat efte­
sones demaunde it of hym, of whome thou
moughtest aske it.
Ci. in Bru.


Cauere capite, to be bounde body for body.



Plinius li.
34.



Cauere, to prouyde. Quid isti caueam? B. Vt
reuehat domum, Whatte shall I prouyde for
hym? B. one to brynge hym home.
plautus in
Bacch.


Caueri, to be taken hede of.



Caueares hosti&ecedil;, & cau&ecedil;, were partes of the
beastes nexte to the tayle, to be sacryfysed
for the byshoppes.



Cauillatio, a cauillation, a subtyl forged tale



Cauillor, lari, to speake in mockage.



Caulias, the iuyce of colewortes myxt with
bran, and being tossed togider, was brought
into the fourme of a paste.



Causam accipere, to take the matter in hand.
also to take an excuse.



Causam capere, to take an occasion.



Causam dicere, to aunswere vnto that, whi­
che is layde to his charge.



Caussam dicere, to saye contrarye, to deny.
Hoc si secus reperies, nullam causam dico,
quin mihi & parentum, et libertatis apud te
deliquio siet. If thou doest fynde hit other
wyse, I wylle not saye contrarye, but that
it is at thy pleasure, that I shall lose both
my parentes and lybertie.
Plautus in
capt.


Caussam dicere ex uinculis, to aunswere in
warde, or beinge a prisoner.






Causa mea, for my sake. Syro ignoscas uolo,
qu&ecedil; mea causa fecit, I wyll that ye forgyue
Syrus all that he hath done, for my sake.
Terent. in
Heauto.


Liuius.



Caussas nectere, to fayne matters.



Caussam orare, to pleade.



Caussam qu&ecedil;rere, to seke an occasyon.



Cice. Atti.



Caussam sustinere, to beare the blame.



¶ C ANTE E.


Sueton. de
claris grgrammaticis.



CEdere creditoribus, is proprely where
one not being able to pay his dettes,
leaueth all his goodes or landes to
his credytours.



Plautus in
pseudolo.



Cedere ex transuerso, to go sydelynge lyke
a Crabbe.



Plautus in
capt.



Cedere ad factum, to come to effecte.



Cedere pro, to be in the stede of an nother
thynge. Nam pro pulmentario cedit sicuti
ficus, For it is in steede of the meate, lyke
as fygges be.
Colu.12.


Pli. epi.50



Cedentes capilli, heares hangyng down right



Cedrelate, tes, a great Cedre tree.



Cedrium, certayne kynde of pytche founde
in Siria.



Cedrinus, na, num, of a cedre tree.



Cic. de Sc.



Cedunt dies, the dayes passe awaye.



Celatus, ta, tum, hydde.



Celebratus, brata, bratum, moche spoken of,
or haunted.



Celebris locus, a place moche haunted and
knowen.



Accius.



Celeranter, for celeriter, hastily or quyckly.



Sisenna.



Celeratim. idem.



Celeres, olde wryters vsed for Equites,
horsemenne.



Plautus in
Merca.



Celeris copia. Date di quæso conueniundi mi­
hi eius celerem copiam, God graunt that I
may very shortly mete with hym.



Varro.



Censere, to be angrye. Ne uobis censeam, si
ad me referretis, Lest I wolde be angrye,
if ye tolde me.



Plautus in
Stico.



Censere, to speake or tell. G. Quid grauare?
censeas. Telle me, what is that, that gre­
uethe the?



Plinius.8.



Censeri, to be had in estymation, or to be set
by, also to be meruayled at.



Censio, onis, a price, aduyse, or opinion.



Censoria nota, the rebuke or checke of the
maister of maners,



Censoria animaduersio, was a punyshement
of them, whiche were of yll maners.



Censorius, a, um, pertaynyng to them, whi­
che had ouer syghte of the maners of the
people, whyche were callyd Censores.



Centaurium, an herbe, wherof there be two
kyndes: The great, whyche apotycaries
doo call Reuponticum: And the lasse, whi­
che is callyd Centorye. Alsoo fel terr&ecedil;, &
Febrifugia.



Centenariæ cœnæ, were suppers on the whi­
che by a lawe callid Licinia, was bestowid
but one hundred of the brasyn coyne cal­
lyd Asses.



Centesimæ ursuræ, were gaines of the hun­
dred peny value of euery thynge, for eue­
ry moneth lone.



Centesimus, ma, mum, the hundred, as Cen­
tesima pars, the hundred parte.



Centralis, le, that which is sette in the very
myddes of a thynge.



Centurupe, a feld in Sicile, wherof is Cen­
turupinum crocum.



Cephalocrustes, a worme, whyche is in the
leaues of a peache tree.



Cepa, pæ, & cepe indeclinabile, an oynion.



Cepas edere, to eate onions, was a prouerbe
spoken of them, whiche do seme to wepe,
or doo wepe often.



Cephenes, vnprofytable bees, which make
no honye, but onely with the multitude of
them, do kepe warme the yonge bees.



Cera, wexe, also wexed tables.



Ceramion, the same mesure that amphora is



Cerea pruna, wheate plummes.



Cereus, a, um, softe, also fatte.



Horatius.



Cerinum, a garment of the colour of wax.



Actius.



Cerium, a soore lyke an hony combe.



Ceritus, madde.



Cerinthe, an herbe hauing the taste of waxe
and hony togither.



Cerinthus, the meate of bees, whyche is
founde in hony combes, seperate from the
honye, whiche is in taste bytter and is al­
so moyste.



Cernere, to deuyse togyther, or talke oone
with an nother. Verecundari neminem a­
pud mensam decet, nam ibi de diuinis atque
humanis cernitur, Noo manne oughte to be
abasshed at the table, for there men doo de­
uise or talke of matters concernyng as well
god as manne.
Plautus in
Trinummo.


Cernere, to syfte or range floure of corne.



Plinius. 18.



Cerno animo, I doo foresee or consyder
before.



Cernulus, he that is busye ot fynde faute in
an nother man.
Hier. con.
Ruffinum.


Cernus, nus, nui, a certayne showe.



Ceroma, oyle myxt with wex. also the place
where wrastlers were annoynted.
Cic. in ca.


Certatio, debate, stryfe, study, prouocacion.



Certo, tare, to stryue or contende.



Certi, certayne other.



Cicero.



Certi homines, sure men and faithfull.



Salust.



Cert&ecedil; opes, ryches that is permanent.



Certum habere, to knowe surely.



Ceua, a lyttelle cowe that gyuethe moche
Mylke.



Ci. ad Att.






Certo, without doubte.



Ceruchus, a cabyn in the hygheste parte of
a shyppe.



Cessare, to be ydelle.



Cestus, a gyrdell, wherwith the housbande
dydde gyrde his wyfe, whiche was sette
with lyttell studdes.



Ceu, as it were.

 

C ANTE H.

CHære, for salue. 



Chalasis, the knotte wherwith wo­
mens garmentes were knytte about
they neckes.



Chalastricum nitrum, saltepeter, whiche is
very pure, and lyke to salte.



Chalcantum, a kynde of ynke lyke to brasse.



Plinius.24.



Chameleuce, ces, an herbe growynge by ri­
uers, heuynge leaues lyke a poplar, but
moche greatter.



Chamemirsyne, is a busshe or tree, whiche
hath sharpe pryckes in the leaues, & redde
bearies cloustred, I suppose it to be that,
whiche is callyd holy or holme.



Chamitter&ecedil;, & chamitterid&ecedil;, lyttell ymages,
made folowynge a greatter ymage.



Chaniscus, the hyndermost part of a shyp,
by the whiche the anker hangeth.



Chanona, a tarte or marchepayne, or other
lyke delycate thynge.



Chaonides, wolfes that do slee hartes.



Charchesia, a cuppe longe and smalle in the
myddell, and full of handels.



Charisma, matis, a grace or speciall benefite.



Charistium, a grene marble.



Charmesinum, a kynde of sylke, which de­
liteth the beholders. I thinke it be crimsin.



Charopus, amyable, pleasant, or hauynge a
good grace.



Chartula, a lyttell leafe of paper.



Chelonalopices, I suppose to be the byrdes
whiche we do call Barnakles.



Chenotrophia, a house or place where wa­
terfoule are kepte.



Cheospes, a kynge of Egypt, whyche made
the great steple at Memphis, wheron were
so many men workynge, that the same king
spent only in parcely, oynyons, and garlike,
a thousande and thre score talentes, whych
if it were the greate talent, it amounted of
oure moneye, to CCl. thousande fyue hun­
dred and fyfty poundes.



Chirogylius, an hedgehogge.



Leuit II.



Chironomus, a daunser of a moriske.



Choa, a certayn measure. also vessel, wherin
was put lycour, whiche was offred to idols



Chœnix, a mesure conteining .xxvii. ounces.
which is one Sextarius of Athenes, & a half



Chomer, idem quod Chorus.



Chorocitharista, he that leadethe a daunce,
and playeth hym selfe on an instrument.



Chors, tis, a place inclosed, wherin cattelle
is kepte, a barton callyd in some place.



Chortales aues, pultrie fedynge abrode in
a barton or court of husbandry.



Chorus, siue chomer, a measure of the He­
brues, whiche contayneth tenne tymes as
moch as Batus, or Ephi, and amounteth to
as moche as one and fourtye measures of
Athenes, callyd Medimni, whiche in all
maketh two thousand, nyne hundred .xii.
pounde of measure, euery pounde being
xii. ounces.



Chorus, a measure of grayn, salt, and other
lyke thynges, whiche conteyneth as moch
as tenne of the measures callyd Medimni
Attici, where in euerye Medimnus be. lxxii.
Sextarii Attici, Rede in Sextarius. so that hit
contayneth of our galons [missing text]



Chreston, an herbe callyd also cykorie.



Chrysoberillus, a chrystal stone, wherin the
colour of golde shyneth.



Chrysoprassus, a stone grene as a leke, ha­
uynge speckes of golde.



Chus, seu choa, a measure contaynyng nine
poundes of measure, whiche is [missing text]



Chytracus, a tryuet or cradel, wheron pot­
tes are sette to boyle meate.

 

¶ C ANTE I.

CIbum subducere, to take meate away
frome one.



Cibum facere, to make redye meate.
Mane aliquid fiet cibi, There shall be some
meate made redy betyme.
plautus in
Truculen.


Cibi repositi, meate set vp to be kept.



Quintilia.



Cibarius panis, ranged bred or crybbil bread.



Ci. tus.q.1



Cibarium uinum, smalle wyne.



Varro.



Cibatus, tus, tui, vyttayles.



Cicatrico, care, to strike one so that a marke
alway remayneth.



Cicatrizo, idem, also to heale a wounde, soo
that onely a seame or scarre may appere.



Ciceronianus, he that coueyteth to folowe
Cicero in eloquence.



Cicerbita, an herbe callyd Southistell.



Cichorea, & cichoreum, an herb callyd cikory



Cicum, a thynne skynne, whyche is within
a Pomegranate.



Cicur, euery beaste or byrde, whyche ones
beynge wylde, is made tame.



Cicuro, rare, to make tame.



Ciere, to trouble or make hym angry. Quid
negotii est, Pistoclerum Lydus quod herum
tam ciet? What is the mattier that Lydus
thus troubleth or angreth his maister?
Plautus.





Festus.



Ciere, is somtyme to name.



Cinabulum, a cradelle.



Cinara, an herbe, whiche some men do sup­
pose to be an artochoke.



Cinifactum, brought into ashes, as thynges
whiche are bourned.



Circania, a byrde, whiche in his flyght fet­
cheth a compasse.



Cirsion, an herbe, which we do cal buglosse.



Circulo, are, to compasse aboute, or to make
a cerkle or compasse aboute a thyng.



Circumcidaneus, a, um, cutte rounde about.



Circumcisitum mustum, wine, which after that
the grapes are pressed, is taken out of the
same grapes, being cut and newe pressed.



Sueton. de
claris rhe­
toribus.



Circumcise agere, to make an oration by pe­
cis, without comming to the purpose.



Ser. Sul. ad
Ciceronem.



Circumcirca, all aboute.



Circumcurso, are, to run hither and thither.



Circundo, dare, to enuyronne or compasse
aboute.



Paulus de
re iudicata



Circunduco, duxi, ducere, to lead one about.
it is also to abolysshe or put asyde an acte.
Quod si is qui edictum peremptorium im­
petrauit, absit die cognitionis, tunc circumdu­
cendum erit edictum peremptorium. And
yf that he that hath optayned the parem­
ptorie decree, be absent the daye whan the
matter shuld be determined, than the per­
emptorie decree isto be dyssolued or a­
bolyshed.
Vlp. de iu­
diciis.


Plautus in
Pseud.



Circumducere, is sommetyme to deceyue by
cautelles.



Plautus i­
bidem.



Circumducere aliquem argento, to get ones
money by falsehode.



Plautus in
Capt.



Circumductus, ta, tum, ledde about.



Circumductio, deceyte.



Circumferre se, to go braggynge about the
streetes.



Vergilius.



Circumflecto, tere, to turne hither & thyder.



Circumfundo, dere, to caste water or other
lycour aboute.



Vergili.



Circumfusus, a, um, gathered about, as peo­
ple whan they desyre to se a thyng. somtime
wrapped about lyke an adder or serpent.



Circumlino, to annoynte aboute.



Plin. de ui­
ris illustr.



Circummissus, a, um, sente aboute.



Circummunio, ire, to enuyron strongely, to
fortifie with walles or men.



Cicero



Circumpedes, lackayes awaytynge at their
maisters styrop. also fote men of princis.



Plautus.



Circumspecto, are, to beholde about.



Circumspectatrix, a woman that beholdeth
aboute, or watcheth.



Circumsto, stare, to stande aboute.



Plautus.



Circumtego, texi, tegere, to couer al aboute.



Circumuerto, tere, to tourne aboute.



Cirri, be thinges lyke heares about oysters.



Cirratus, he that hath his heares brayded.



Cis paucos dies, within fewe days.



Plautus.



Cis vndique, in all places aboute.



Cisium, aut cissium, a cart with two wheles.



Cispello, puli, pellere, to kepe out oone that
he come nat into the house.
Plautus in
Amphit.


Citta, a pye.



Ciuiliter, lyke a citesyn. Also courteysly, or
with good maner.

 

¶ C ANTE L.

CLauola, seu clabula, a bough or stocke,
wherinto a graffe is sette.
Varro.


Clam me, clam te, I or thou not knowing.



Clam alter alterum, the oone knowyth not
of the other.



Clam omnes, no man knowynge or witting.



Clara pugna, a battayle worthy memorie.



Plautus in
Pseud.



Claritudo, idem quod claritas, also brute, renome.



Classici, they which in a towne were moste
ryche and substanciall.



Classici authores, writers of most estimation.



Classiarius, a man of warre on the see.



Vergilius.



Claudere, to turne about. Claudite nymph&ecedil;
Dicte&ecedil;, nymph&ecedil; nemorum, iam claudite sal­
tus, Tourne aboute ye goddesses of Dic­
tea, ladyes of the forestes tourne youre
daunse aboute.



Clementia æstatis, the temperatnes of somer.



Plautus in
Stich.



Clementer uolo, I am well content.



Clementer tractare, to entreate gentylly or
swetely.



Cliduchus, he that beareth a mace.



Clingo, gere, olde writers vsed for cingere
to gyrde.



Cliuia, al thingis hard to be brought to passe.



Festus



Cloacare, to defyle or pollute.

 

C ANTE O.

COaccedo, cedere, to be added to the
principall somme.



Coaduno, nare, to assemble.



Coccinatus, he that wereth a scarlet gowne.



Coctona, quynces.



Codicarij naues, shyppes or barges made of
thycke plankes.



Suetonius



Codicilli, epistels, sometyme it is taken for
letter patentes of a prince.



Coeli, the part of Siria, that ioineth to Ara­
bie.



Cœnatus, he that hath souped.



Cœnatiuncula, a lyttell drinkyng house.



Cœnare alienum, to sup at an other mans cost.



Plautus in
persa.



Cœnabis hodie magnum malum, thou shalte
haue thy supper soone in shrewde rest.



Coire in fœdera, to make alyance.



Coire societatem, to be famyliar.



Plautus.



Cœpio, piui, pere, to begynne.



Cato.



Cœptus, ta, tum, begunne.



Cœpta, torum, thinges or matters begunne.



Cœpto, tare, to begynne.



Cœpulonus, a banketter or reuellar.






Coercere ignes, to stynte the fyre, whyche
burneth a house or other lyke thynge.



Plautus in
Mili.



Cogitat curas, he thynketh on his matters.



Cogitate, aduysedly. Cogitatum, idem.



Plautus.



Cogere oues, to putte vp the shepe into a
stable or folde.



Cogere in ordinem, to sette in order.



Cohæreo, coh&ecedil;si, h&ecedil;rere, to be ioyned, or to
cleaue to a thynge, also to come to passe.
Nupti&ecedil; non coh&ecedil;rent, The mariage come
nat to passe. also to agree togyther.



Coh&ecedil;res, he that is ioyntelye heyre with
an nother.



Cohibere, to retayne or kepe to hym selfe.



Cic. de Se.



Cohibete intra limen, kepe you within the
doores.



Plautus in
Milite.



Cohibere filium, to kepe vnder his sonne.



Cohibere se, to moderate hym selfe.



Plautus in
Mercator.



Cohibitus, ta, tum, lette, refrayned.



Cohors, is also a company of seruantes a­
boute a noble man.
Ter. in He.


Colina, for culina, a kytchen.



Collabefactari testula, to be banyshed out of
the citie by lottes of shelles, as it was vsid
in Athenes. Se after Ostracismus.



Collacteus, he that sucketh of the same brest
and at the same tyme.



Collatitius, a, um, that whyche is gathered
and brought to gyther.



Collaudo, are, to prayse with other.



Collegium, a company of them, which haue
equall authoritie. also a companye of men
whiche be of one mysterie or crafte.



Collibet, & collubet, collibuit, collibitum est,
collibêre, to lyke, to please. Vtcunque animo
collibitum est meo, Euen as it pleaseth me,
or lyketh me.
Plautus in
Amph.


Colligere uestem, to tucke vp his garment.



Colloco, care, to sette in a place.



Collocare se in arborem, to klim vp on a tree



Plaut. in
Aulul.



Colocare aliquem in soporem, to stryke one
in suche wyse that he is amased, and lieth
as he were on slepe, or to speake hit more
shortly, to laye one aslepe with a stroke.
Plautus in
Amph.


Plautus in
Merca.



Colloces te in otium, drawe the to ease.



Collocatus, ta, tum, put or set in some place.



Collocupleto, tare, to enryche.



Colloqui aliquem, to speake to one.



Colloqui alicui, to deuyse or talke with one.



Colloquor, queris, qui, to talke with one, or
to talke togyther.



Colluuiaris porcus, an Hogge that wallo­
weth in the myre, and there hath meate gi­
uen hym.



Colludo, dere, to play with one, or togither.



Collusor, oris, a playfelowe.



Collus, idem quod collum.



Plautus in
Capt.



Collybus, money receyued by exchaunge,
or in banke, as menne do whiche goo into
straunge countrays, delyuering money of
this realme, to receyue as moche of an o­
ther coyne, where he commeth.



Collybistes, & collybiste, he that deliuereth
money by exchaunge, a banker.



Collyra, a lofe of breadde, or a bunne.



Colere se, to apparayle hym selfe.



Plautus.



Colere officium, to do his duetie or indeuor.



Colere pietatem, to haue his parentes in
reuerence.



Colere vitam, to lyue.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Coloratus, ta, tum, coloured.



Columbulus, a pygeon.



Columnæ Herculis, are two mountaynes in
the see, where menne do entre out of the
myddell see into the occean, the one is in
Europa by Spayne, the other in Affrica.



Colunus, na, num, of hasyll.



Colutea, the tree callyd Sene, wherof the
leaues and coddes are ministred in medi­
cines, to pourge melancoly.



Comedim, olde writers vsed for comedam.



Comest, for comedit, he eateth.



Comessabundus, ouercharged with meate 
and drynke.
Q. Curtius.


Comessans, idem quod comessor.



Comesse for comedere, to eate.



Commessatio, ryottous bankettynge.



Comessator, a ryottour.



Commemini, I remembred.



Commeminere, to remember.



Plautus in
milite.



Commentariensis, was callyd a gayler.



Commereri culpam, to do an offence.



Commigro, grare, to go frome one place to
dwelle in an nother.
Pla. in aul.


Comminuo, to cutte in smalle pieces.



Commisceo, scui, scere, to myxe togither.



Commiseresco, scere, to haue compassion.



Terentius
in Hecyra.



Commissio, a conferrynge togyther by ex­
ercise, as two lerned mens wyttes togy­
ther, or other lyke thynge.



Commissa, confyscations.



Commissus, a, um, commytted to the keping
of oone.



Commissum bellum, open warre.



Ti. Liuius.



Commodare loquelam, to speake.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Commodare operam, to helpe.



Commodare capillum, to kembe his heed,
or decke his busshe.
Plautus in
Mostel.


Commodatarius, he that hathe borowed
any thynge.



Commode, well, or to the purpose.



Commode uerba facere, to speake thynges
to the purpose.



Commode cadere, to happen or succede well
or to the purpose.



Commoditas hominis, the facilitie or cur­
teysie of one, the whiche agreeth to any
requeste.
Terent. in
Adelphis.





Terent. in
Eunucho.



Commodum id non est, it maye not be easily
done.



Plautus in
Asin.



Commoda statura homo, a man of good sta­
ture, nor to great nor to lyttell.



Plautus in
Mostel.



Commoda et faceta mulier, a pleasaunte and
mery woman.



Commodus capillus, a bushe well decked or
kempte.



Idem in
Pseud.



Commodus homo, a tractable or reasona­
ble man.



Commodum obsonare, to vse moderate fare.



Commodum discesseras heri, cum Trebatius
uenit: Ye were scantely departed from me
yesterday, whan Trebatius came to me.



Commonere aliquem officium suum, to ad­
uertise one what he ought to do.
Plautus in
Pseud.


Terentius
in Andria.



Commonere aliquem, to remembre one of a
thynge.



Commonstro, to shewe a thynge that is hyd.



Commorior, riri, to dye with one.



Commoror, rari, to abyde with one: also to
dwell in a place for a tyme: also to tary one
that is goinge. Male facis, properantem qui
me commorare, sol abit: Thou doest naught
to tary me, sens I go in hast, and the sonne
is nowe sette.
Plautus in
Amphit.


Commorari, to cause one to tary. An te aus­
pitium commoratum est? an tempestas con­
tinet, qui non abisti ad legiones ita vt dudum
dixeras? Did the token shewed by the bir­
des, cause the to tary? or elles the wether
kepe the backe, that thou wentest not vnto
the army as thou saydest a whyle a go that
thou woldeste?
Plautus in
Amphitri.


Commossem, for commouissem.



Donatus.



Commotus, ta, tum, meued, troubled, afraid,
angrye: also quicke.



Communes dies, were vnlucky dayes to go
about any thynge, suche as we do call dys­
moll dayes or crosse dayes.



Communiter, in commune.



Commutabilis, le, that whiche may be chan­
ged easyly.



Commutatus, ta, tum, chaunged.



Commutatio, an exchaunge, one thynge for
a nother.



Compareo, rui, rere, to apiere, to be seen.



Plautus in
Amphit.



Comparebunt qu&ecedil; imperas, You shall see all
thynges done, that ye do commaunde.



Plautus in
Trinummo.



Comparet ratio argenti, it doth appere how
the money is spent.



Cicero.



Comparare se, to dyspose hym selfe to any
thynge.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Comparare, to fynde the meane or deuyse.
Nunc hoc tibi curandum est Chrysale. C. Quid
uis curem? M. Vt ad senem etiam alteram fa­
cias viam, compara, fabricare, finge quod lu­
bet, Nowe Chrysalus thou must take good
hede. C. what wylt thou that I shulde do?
M. Deuyse yet to goo an nother waye to
warke, ymagyne, contryue euen as thou
thynkest best.



Compacto rem agere, to conspire a matter,
or to do a thynge by one accorde.
plautus in
capt.


Comparare, to gete or purchace.



Comparare conuiuium, to prepare a banket.



Comparare malum, to purchace an yl turne
or a myschiefe.
Plautus


Comparatus, ta, tum, ordeyned or receyued
in an vsage. Quam inique comparatum est, hi
qui minus habent, ut semper aliquid addant di­
tioribus? What an yll vse is this, that they,
whiche haue but a lyttell, shall gyue more to
them that be ryche ? Quando quidem ita ra­
tio comparata est vitæ natur&ecedil;que nostræ, vt alia
æras oriatur ex alia, Sens the fourme of our
lyfe is so ordeyned by nature, that of oone
age commeth an nother.
Terentius
in phorm.Ci. de ami.


Compedio, diui, dire, to gyue or fettar one.



Varro.



Compelluceo, luxi, lucere, to shyne veraye
bryghte.



Compellucidus, da, dum, very bright.



Compendifaceo, facere, to make brie f or be
shorte in speakynge.



Comperendinatus, ta, tum, adiorned.



Comperendinati rei, they whose iudgement
is deferred vntyll an nother tyme.



Compesce in illum iniuste dicere, leaue to say
ylle of hym.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Competitor, he that sueth for that which an
other man sueth for.



Conpingere in oculos, to thrust it in his eies.



plautus in
Men.



Compita, are places where many wayes do
mete, or where two stretes do crosse.



Complaceo, cui, cere, to please or lyke well.



Complacitum est, it lyketh or contenteth.



plautus in
amph.



Complano, are, to make playne.



Cato.



Complures, complura, & compluria, many.



plautus.



Complusculi, scula, idem.



Terentius



Compluuius lacus, a dyche, whereinto wa­
ter falleth out of dyuers gutters.



Componere lites, to agree menne togither,
whiche are at variance.



Compos culpæ, he that hath don an offence.



plautus in
Truculen.



Compos patriæ, he that is come home into
his countraye.



Compos præda, he that hathe gotten the
praye that he loked for.



Compotio, tiui, tire, to gette one the thynge
that he desyred.
plautus in
Rude.


Compoto, taui, tare, to drynke with an no­
ther man.



Compotrix, she that drinketh with an other.



Compotatio, a bankette.



Comprecor, cari, to desyre or praye.



Compræhendo, hendere, to take holde on a
thyng, to comprehende or contayne. Also
to fauour and defende.
Cicero





Comprimere animam, to hold in a mans breth.



Comprimere manus, to holde his handes
that he stryke not.



Plautus in
Casina



Comprimere se, to cease or refrayne to doo
a thynge.



plautus in
Truculen.



Comprime, let be, pease.



Comprimere aliquem, to beate or torment one



Plautus in
Ruden.



Comptum, a certayne offerynge of lycour,
whiche was made with meale.



Concaleo, lui, ere, to be het, to be made warme



Concalfacio, feci, facere, to inflame, to be
stered or prouoked.



Concameratio, a warke made lyke to a vault
with arches.



Concalleo, lui, lere, to be made harde as a
mannes handes with moche workynge, or
his feete with moche goynge.



Concastigo, gare, to chastise with a nother.



Plautus



Concede hinc, go hense a lyttell.



Concedere fato, to dye.



Concelebro, brare, to celebrate with other.



Plautus in
casina.



Concelebrare plateam hymen&ecedil;o, to make ioye
abrode with synginge and daunsyng in the
honour of mariage.



Concento, tare, to agree in one tune.



Festus.



Conceptiu&ecedil; feri&ecedil;, holy dayes kept at a tyme
certayne yerely.



Columel.



Conceptus, ta, tum, conceyued, purposed.
sometyme gathered: as, Ne cum a uertice
torrens imbribus conceptus affluxerit, fun­
damenta conuellat: Leste whan the streme
gathered by the showers of rayne, shall
runne vnto it, it shall pull vp the foundation
of that whiche is buylded.



Conchyta, he that secketh for the shell fys­
shes, out of the which commeth purple: we
maye take hym for a fysher of oysters and
muskelles.



Concinnatitius, a, um, compendiouselye and
aptly gathered to gether.



Ci. in Ver.
act. 4.



Conciliare pecuniam, to gather moneye of the
people.



Concinnitudo, an aptnesse, a conueniency.



Concinnare, to make. Vt illi mastigi&ecedil; cerebrum
excutiam, qui me insanum verbis concinnat
suis, I wyll surely brayne this knaue, that
with his wordes maketh me out of my wit.
Plautus in
capt.


Concinnare lutum, to make morter.



Plautus in
Trinum.



Concinnare se leuem suis, to put his frendes
to no coste. Nunquam erit alienis grauis, qui
suis se concinnat leuem: He shall neuer be
greuouse to other, whiche wyl not be bur­
denous vnto his frendes.



plautus in
Men.



Concinnare struices patinarias, to make son­
dry bankettynge disshes.



Concinnare vestem, to amende a garment.



Ibidem.
Plaut. in
Sticho.



Concinnare viam, to make rome that a man
maye passe.



Plautus in
Amph.



Concinnare vxorem lachrymantem, to make
his wyfe to weepe. Lachrymaniem ex a­
bitu concinnas tu tuam vxorem, By youre
departynge hense, ye make youre wyfe
to weepe.



Concinnatus, concinnata, tum, apparailled,
trymmed.



Concinne, proprely, honestly, trymly.



Terent. in
Heautont.



Concire, to moue or stere. Disperij scelestus,
quantus turbas, conciui insciens: I am vn­
done wretche that I am, what a busynesse
haue I made vnwares?



Concire lites, to moue debate.



Concionem habere, to make an oration or
sermon to the people.



Concipere oculis, to see or beholde.



Plautus in
p&ecedil;nulo.



Concipere fœdus, to make a leage.



Concipere metum, to be aferde.



Concipere scelus, to imagin to do an yl dede



Conclamo, mare, to cry to one. Vbi abijt con­
clamo, heus quid agis to in regulis? Whan he
was gone, I cried vnto hym, Howe serra,
what doest thou amonge the tyles? Also to
make a cry or pro clamation. Vis conclamari
auctionem fore quidem? Wylt thou haue it
proclaymed that there shall be porte sale.
Plautus in
Milite.Plautus in
Menech.


Conclamata vasa, proclamation made to
trusse, to gather bagge and baggage, as is
vsed in the raysynge of a syege, or remo­
uynge of a campe in battayle.



Conclamito, tare, to make many cries.



Conclauia, many chaumbers or places vn­
der oone kaye.
Festus.


Conclauium, idem quod conclaue.



Concoquere odia, to suffre dyspleasures
or malyce.



Concredo, didi, dere, to delyuer or committe
a thynge vppon truste.



Concorditer, by assent, or agrement.



Concresco, creui, crescere, to grow togither.



Concretus, creta, tum, ioyned or congelyd
to gyther, as a thynge that is lyquide, to
be made harde.



Concubinatus, hooredome, fornication.



Conculco, care, to treade vnder the foote.



Concuro, rare, to care for a thynge.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Concurro, rere, to rounne with an nother,
sometyme to accorde.



Concursus, sus, a runnynge of people togy­
ther to one place.



Condecoro, rare, to honour a thynge in ma­
kynge it more commendable.



Condignus, na, num, worthy, and according
as it is estemed.



Condigne, worthyly, honestly.



Condisco, scere, to lerne.



Condiscipulus, a scholefelowe.



Conditura, saulse or pyckelle made with
spyces.



Condolet caput, my heed aketh.



Plautus.






Condono, are, to gyue, to forgyue a det or
duety, to pardone.



Condormio, ire, to slepe with other.



Condormisco, scere, to slepe a lytell, to nap.



Plautus in
Asin.



Conduci non possum, I cannot be made to
beleue: no man can make me beleue.



Conductus, ta, tum, to be sette to hyre.



Conductor, he that hyreth a thynge.



Condus, a stewarde of housholde, or he that
kepeth the store of housholde.



Conduplico, care, to paye the double of a
thynge.



Conduplicatio, doublynge.



plautus in
Rude.



Conferre, to deuyse, to talke togyther.



Conferre amorem, to loue.



Conferre animum alio, to set his mind els wher



Conferre capita, to assemble for counsaile, to
lay theyr heades to gether.



Plautus.



Confer gradum, come forthe.



Conferre in pauca, to conclude shortly.



Conferre manus, to assayle eche other.



Pli. in pan.



Conferre tempus in aleam, to spend the time
in playenge at the dyce.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Conferre uerba ad rem, to do as he sayth.



Conferre se in pedes, to runne away, to take
his legges.
Plautus in
Bacch.


Confert, it is profytable.



Confertus, ta, tum, full. alsoo in a flocke, or
multitude, in a bushment. Vt nunquam con­
ferti, sed rari, magnisque interuallis pr&ecedil;lia­
rentur, That they mought fyght, not a mul­
titude togyther, but a fewe at oones, and a
greate distaunce on sonder. Turba conferta
iter clausit, The people gathered in a bush­
ment, stopped the waye. Qua parte hostium
acies confertissima uisa est, erupit, He brake
out on that syde, where the hoste of the en­
myes semed to be moste thycke of people.
Cæs. in commentarii.Ti. Liuius.C&ecedil;sar.


Confertim, in a bushement.



Plautus in
Mercator.



Conficere pensum, to spynne out her threde,
it is translatid into this sentence, To haue
done or broughte to an ende that thynge,
whiche he was commanded or appointed.
plautus in
persa.


Conficere prandium, to haue dyned. Pallium
ad phrigionem fert confecto prandio, whan
dyner was done, or whan he had dyned, he
caried hir mantell to the brouderar.
plautus in
Men.


Terentius
in Andria.



Conficere solicitudines alicui, to bryng one
into heuynes, or to make him sorowfull.



Ci pro L.
Flacco.



Conficientissimus literarum, he that putteth
all thynge in writynge.



Cofidentia, trust, hope, certayn assurance,
also madde hardynesse.



Confidentiloquus, he that speaketh boldly,
without feare.



Plautus.



Configo, fixi, figere, to stycke or thruste in
to a thynge.



Confingo, finxi, fingere, to fayne a thynge
to be trewe.



Confingere dolum, to fynde a meane to de­
ceyue one.



Confirmo, are, to confyrme, or assure a thing
to be as it is spoken.



Confirmare se, to make hym self stronge af­
ter his sicknesse.
Ci. Tyro.


Confirmare animum, to take courage.



Confirmitas, assuridnesse.



Conflagro, are, to be on a fyre, to be inflamid



Conflictatio, is where as one thyng beateth
agaynste a nother.
Donatus.


Confluuium et confluxus, a metynge to ge­
ther of many streames.



Confluus, a, um, that which floweth togeder.



Confœdusti, olde writers called them whi­
che were ioyned in leage, confederates.



Confodio, dere, to dygge.



Confore, to be brought to passe.



Terentius.
in And.



Conformo, are, to brynge to a facyon or fy­
gure, to make apt or lyke to a thynge.



Confringo, fregi, fringere, to breke or bruise.



Confringere tesseram, to be out of fauour,
or no more welcome to one.
Plautus in
Cistell


Confringere rem, to spende awaye all his
substaunce.



Confragosus, a, um, roughe, as a grounde
whiche is nat playne, also harde to be vn­
derstande, rude in language.
Ibidem.


Confugere ad aliquid, to resorte for succour
or excuse.



Confundere, to trouble all, also to myxe out
of order.



Liuius.



Confutatio, a disprouynge of that whyche
is spoken.



Congelatur, it is frosen or congelyd.



Congemino, nare, to double.



Congeminatio, a doublynge.



Congermino, are, to grow ioyntly togither.



Congerro, ronis, a mery companion, he that
kepeth company only in pastyme and me­
ry deuysynge.
Plautus in
Mostel.


Congestitius, a, um, caste vp in a heape.



Conglacio, aui, are, to be frosen.



Conglobatim, in a rounde fourme lyke to a
bottome of threde.



Conglutino, nare, to ioyne togyther, as it
were glewyd.



Congræcor, cari, to eate and drynke exce­
dyngly, after the commune worde, to make
good chere.



Congressus, us, is also company with other.



Congruens, accordynge, lyke.



Conijcere in saginam, to put to fattynge, to
go where he may fyll his bealy.



Coniugata, be those wordes, whiche beinge
of one kynde, be diriued one of an other,
as of Iustitia, iustus, & iustum, wherof an ar­
gument may be made in this wyse, If Iu­
stice is to be chiefely honoured and loued




of men, a iust man is to be had in estimation
and reuerence amonge men.



Coniugatio, a ioynynge to gether.



Coniunctura, idem.



Coniunctus, ta, tum, ioyned.



Coniunctim, to gether.



Connato, tare, to swymme to gether.



Connecto, nexui, nectere, to binde together.



Conniuentia, a sufferaunce of a thynge, or a
fayninge not to se or espye.



Connatio, a swymmynge to gether.



Conquassatio, a bruysnge together.



Conqueror, queri, to complayne.



Conquiesco, eui, escere, to cesse, to leaue of.



Conquiro, quisiui, quirere, to seke all about.



Conquisitor, a sercher, also an officer, which
is sent to attache a man for a great offence.



Festus.



Conregione, old writers vsed for e regione,
on the other syde, or agaynst a thyng.



Conscindo, scidi, scindere, to cut with other.



Conscindere sibilis, to whystell oone oute of
a place.



Ci. ad At.



Conscindere, is also to scorne or rebuke one
pryuylye.



Conscio, sciui, scire, to knowe with other.



Conscium facere aliquem, to make one pri­
uie to a matter.



Columell.



Conciscere, to drawe to. Diligens pastor sta­
bulum cotidie conuerrit, nec patitur stercus hu­
morem consciscere, A dilygent shepherde
euery day sweepeth his stable, and letteth
nat the dunge drawe moysture vnto it.



Conscribello, are, to write togyther.



Conscribere, is also to inrolle or register.



Ci. ad att.
Cic. ad Q.
fratrem.



Consecro, are, to putte in remembraunce by
wrytynge.



Consecrare memoriam nominis, to putte his
name in perpetuall remembrance.



Consensus, consent.



Consepio, piui, ire, to inclose with an hedge.



Cicer. off.



Conseruo, are, to kepe, to preserue, to ga­
ther goodes.



Conseruus, & conserua, a felowe or compa­
nyon in seruyce.



Consignifico, care, to shewe by tokens.



Cicero.



Consigno, nare, to seale and close vp, as let­
ters. also to sygnifie or declare, proprelye
by letters.



Cic. Acad.



Consignatus, ta, tum, sygnified, testified.



Consilium est ita facere, I haue purposed so
to doo.



Consimilis, le, in all thynges like.



Consolatio, comfort in aduersitie.



Consolabilis, he that may be comforted.



Consomnio, are, to dreame.



Cic. off.3.



Consortio, cionis, felowshyppe.



Conspergo, spersi, spergere, to scatter or sper­
kyll about aboundantly.



Conspectus, tus, a beholdyng or syght.



Conspirare, to wynde rounde like an adder.



Conspondio, di, dere, to promyse mutually.



Consponsi, they whiche haue mutually pro­
mysed one to the other.



Consponsor, soris, he that bindeth him selfe
by promyse, to hym that hathe made lyke
promyse.



Conspuo, ere, to spette on one.



Consputo, to spette often on one.



Constabilio, liui, lire, to make sure.



Constituere, to be aduised or determined to
do a thynge.



Constituere in diem tertium, to determyne to
do a thing thre dayes nexte folowyng.



Constituere disceptationem, to make his plee
formall, or to foresee that which shall come
in contencion.



Constituere iudicium, after our maner of spea­
kynge is to demourre in lawe, or dwelle in
lawe, to remytte a thynge to the better op­
pinyon of the iudges.
Cicero in
parti. ora.


Constituere maiestatem, to confyrme or ad­
uaunce the reuerence dewe to the supreme
authoritie.
Salust.


Constituere quæstionem, to decree, that vp­
pon strayt examination, execution be done.



Constituere statum caus&ecedil;, is whan the iudge
dothe determyne, where hit be a matter in
lawe, or a matter in dede, which is in con­
trouersye.



Constituere uadimonium, to put in pledges.



Constet modus, lette there be a measure.



Pli. in epi.



Constat ratio, there is a reasonable cause.



Constat hoc mihi tecum, we be both agreed.



Constrepo, pui, ere, to make a noyse to gider.



Constringo, strinxi, gere, to bynde faste, to
wringe harde.



Consuetudo, conuersation.



Consuetus, ta, tum, accustomed.



Consumo, sumpsi, sumere, sometyme signi­
fyeth to fynyshe or make vp, or to bryng to
a poynt. also to spende, as Consumere diem
in apparando, to spende all the daye in pre­
parynge.
Terentius
in And.


Consumere fidem, to lose credence.



Salust.



Consumere operam, to employ labour.



Terentius
in Heau.



Consumere orationem, to telle a longe tale
without a conclusyon.



Salustius
in Iugurt.



Consurgo, surrexi, gere, to aryse to gyther
with other.



Plautus in
Mercator.



Contabesco, scere, to waste away, or relent,
lyke salt put in water.



Contechnor, nari, to inuente somme thynge
to deceyue.
Plautus in
pseudolo.


Contego, texi, tegere, to hyde a faute that it
be nat espied.
Terentius
in Hecyra.


Contemptim, dysdaynefully.



Contemptus, ta, tum, contemned, nat estemed.



Contero, triui, terere, to weare out with oc­




cupienge, also to make warre.



Plautus in
Cistell.



Conteris tu tua me oratione mulier: Thou
makest me wery woman with thy talkynge



Plautus in
Bacch.



Conterere ætatem, to spende his lyfe.



Conterere diem, to spend the day vnprofitably



Te. in Hec.



Conterere operam, to lose laboure.



Conterere questum, to spende al that he hath
goten or wonne.



Contestatus, ta, tum, proued by wytnesse.



Contexo, ere, to ioyne to gether.



Contexere dolos, to fynde crafty meanes.



Conticesco, cere, to kepe sylence with other.



Continere se domi, to abyde at home.



Continebat me tempestas, The foule weder
letted me.
Plautus in
Amph.


Continenti biduo, two dayes continuall.



Contignus, a, um, that whiche toucheth or
is next to a thynge.



Contollam gradum, I wyl go nerre.



Plautus in
Aulul.



Contorqueo, torsi, torquere, to plucke vppe
and drawe with hym.



Vergil.



Contorquere telum, to shoote an arrowe or
darte, and therwith to hit or perce a thing
Geor.


Ver.æn.2.



Contortuplico, are, to wrappe or wynde a
thynge, that with great payne it maye be
vnwounde.



Plaut. in
persa.



Contortuplicata nomina, names soo dyffuse,
that they may vneth be pronounced.



Contra, on the other parte.



Ci. tusc.q.



Contrahere animum, to take thought.



Ouidius in
Metamor.



Contrahere tempus, to abrege the tyme.



Contrahere valitudinem, to gette sickenesse.



Pli. in epi.



Contrahere, to make couenant.



Cicer. off.



Contrahere bona, to geate goodes.



Ti. Liuius.



Contractio animi, stonyinge of the minde.



Cic. Tusc.
questio.



Contractus, ta, tum, gotten.



Contractus, tus, contracte, bargayne.



Contrasto, stare, to be against one, to repugne.



Contrunco, care, to mynishe.



Plautus in
Sticho



Contueor, eri, to defende, to see.



Contumaciter, dissobediently.



Cicero in
clodium.



Contundere facta alicuius, to putte a nother
mannes actes out of estimation or remem­
braunce.
Plautus in
Stich.


Contuor, eri, to see.



Plautus in
Asin.



Conturbo, are, to trouble. also to spende in
wast. conturbare fortunas, to spende al his
goodes in waste.
Ci. ad At.


Conuador, dari, to compell oone to fynde
suertyes.



Plin. II.



Conueho, uexi, uehere, to cary or bryng from 
many places vnto one place.



Cice. Atti.



Conuector, toris, a maryner that conueyeth
ouer many.



Plautus in
Amphitri.



Conuello, uulsi, ueliere, to shake, or pull out
of his place: also to take from one by robery



plautus in
Curcu.



Conuenit, I am content. also it is conueny­
ent or meete.



plautus in
Amphit.



Conueniens, conuenient.



Conuentus, ta, tum, accorded.



Salustius
in Iugurt.



Conuenta pax, peace, accorded.



Conuenticulum, a lyttell assembly.



Cice. pro
Sexto.



Conuerro, rere, to swepe to gether into one
place. also to rubbe.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Conuerse, klenly.



Cato.



Conuexus, a, um, imbosed rounde and ho­
lowe within.



Conuexitas, the imbosynge or roundnesse of
the backeside of that whiche is holowe.



Conuicium dicere, to speke to a mans rebuke.



Conuicium facere, to do a thynge to a mans
rebuke.



Conuiuam abducere, to brynge one to a dy­
ner or banket.



Conuiuiones, companyons at drynkynge or
bankettynge.



Conuoco, care, to calle to gether, or to as­
semble many to gether.



Conuolo, lare, to fly to gether.



Conuoluolus, an herbe called withwynde.



Copen, olde wryters vsed for Copiosum,
plenteouse.



Cophinus, a basket.



Copio, are, to gather moche to gether.



Copiola, some plenty.



Copia, is also ayde.



Copiam dare, to gyue power, or lycence, al­
so to gyue occasion.
Terent. in
Heautont.


Copia est. Nam apud patrem tua amici tecum
sine metu ut sit, copia est, For thou mayste
nowe brynge to passe, that thy wench may
be with thy father without any drede.
Ibidem.


Copia est, I may or mought. Ego in eum in­
cidi infelix lo cum, ut neque eius sit amitten­
di, nec retin endi copia: I am vnhapily come
to that poynte, that I maye neyther leaue
her, nor kepe hir.
Terentius
in phorm.


Copia uix fuit eum adeundi, with great dif­
ficultie or peyn mought I come vnto him.



Copia cuntandi non est tibi, Thou haste noo
leysure to tarye.
Plautus in
Epidic.


Copia est tibi magis, thou mayst more easily.



Plautus in
Capt.



Copia nulla est tibi in illo, He canne nothyng
helpe the.



plautus in
Epidico.



Copiam efficere alicui, to fynde the meanes
that one may come in.



Plautus i­
Milite.



Copiam facere argenti, to lende one money.



pli. in epi.



Copiam facere, to communicate any thinge
with an nother.



Copi, for copioso.



Copiose, abundantly.



Coquito, tare, to boyle often.



Corbito, tare, to caste into a baskette.



Plautus in
Casina.



Cordapsus, a syckenes that is nowe called
Illiacus, whiche is a peyne in the guttes.



Cordate, wysely.



plautus in
p&ecedil;nulo.



Cordilla, the yonge frie of the fysshe cal­
lyd Tunye.






Corgo, olde writers vsed for Profecto.



Victruuius.



Coria, coriorum, are in buyldynge certayne
settyng or layeng of thynges in one order,
or in height, or in thyckenes.



Coriandrum, an herbe and seede callydde
Colyander.



Coriatium, of lether.



Corinthiacus, ca, cum, that whiche is of the
citie of Corinthus.



Corporatura, corpulencie, quantitie of the
bodye.



Corpore uiciati, they whiche do lacke some
membre at theyr natiuitie.



Corrector, an amender of fautes.



Te. in Hec.



Corripere sese ad aliquem, to go to one hastily



Plautus in
mercat.



Corripere se repente, to go his way sodeinly



Corriuales, they whyche do loue to gyther
one womanne.



Corroboro, are, to make stronge or bygge,
to harden.



Corruda, an herbe callyd wylde Sperage.



Salustius
in Iugurt.



Corrumpere rem familiarem, to waste his
substaunce.



Corrumpere igni, to burne vp.



Ibidem.



Corrumpere oportunitates, to lose oportu­
nitie or occasyon.



Corruptor, a distroyer, a waster, a corrupter
of thynges.



Corruo, rui, ruere, to falle downe togyther.



Cors, cortis, idem quod chors, a court, whi­
che serueth for pultrie, to fede at large.



Corus, a southwest wynde.



Corymbifer, an yuy tree.



Cosmitto, for committo.



Cotyle, a measure contaynynge nyne oun­
ces, as well at Rome, as in Grece.



Cotyla hyppoiatrica, that is to saye, whiche
was vsed in medicines for horses and cattel
contayned .xii. ounces.



Cotyla georgica, that is to saye, which was
vsed in thynges concernynge styllage, con­
teynyd .xiii. ounces and a halfe. sometyme
it is vsurped for Sextarius.

 

¶ C ANTE R.

CRacentes, for graciles.



Crambe, a kynde of colewortes.



Cramben repetitiam, is callyd of Iu­
uenalis a Declamation to be often herde,
with moche tediousnes to the herers.



Crapulam exhalare, to vomyte whanne one
is drunke.



Crapulam edormiscere, to sleape out drun­
kennes vntyll he be freshe ageyne.



Crasis, a greke worde, sygnyfieth comple­
ction, temperature, or myxture of naturall
humours.



Crassamen, thyckenesse.



Crass&ecedil; compedes, weyghty gyues.



Plautus in
pseudolo.



Crasso, are, to make fatte.



Crater, is also the bason of a water cundite,
wherinto the water runneth out of pypes
or cockes.



Creator, the fyrste maker of a thinge.



Creber, bra, brum, is also standyng, or being
thycke togyther, as trees.



Crebritas, & crebritudo, oftennesse, or thik­
nes in beinge or growyng togither.



Credere verba alicui, to telle to oone his
counsaylle.



Creditur tibi, I truste the.



Plautus in
Sticho



Creditur male, it is ylle lente.



plautus in
Curcu.



Creduis, uel creduas, for credas.



Cremasteres, the synewes, wherby the sto­
nes of a man or beaste doo hange.
Plautus.
Columel.
6. cap.25.


Cremo, are, to bourne.



Crepa, of olde wryters is vsed for Capra,
a Boote.



Crepare, to be broken, also to speke or prech.



Vergili.



Crepidatus, he that weareth slyppers.



Horatius.



Crepidula, a lyttell slyppar.



Crepitare dentibus, to crashe with the teth.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Crepitat mihi uenter, my bealy courleth.



Crepuit foris, the doore craked.



plautus in
Amphit.



Crispus, he that hath a curlyd heare.



Crista, a kreste, or any thynge growyng on
the heade of a foule or beaste, as a cockes
combe, or the fethers on the heade of a
byrde, callyd a coppe.



Crociatus, ta, tum, coloured lyke saffron.



Crocito, tare, to croke like a rauen or crow.



Crocitus, the noyse that a rauen or crowe
maketh, callyd crokynge.



Crocitatio, idem.



Crocomagma, matis, the duste or refuse of
Saffron.



Cronia, the feastes of Saturne. 



Cruciabilitas, & cruciatus, turment, affliction.



Cruci dare aliquem, to hange one.



Plautus in
Milite.



Crucifigo, fixi, gere, to crucyfie.



Crucio, are, to tourment.



Cruda poma, fruites that are not rype.



Crusculum, a lyttell or small legge.



Crustum, is also a morcel of bread or meate.



Vergili.



Crux, sygnifieth all maner of tourment.

 

C ANTE V.

CVcurbitula, a lyttell gourde or cuppe,
wherwith bloode is drawen out of a
man, whan he is scarified.



Cucuma, a vessell of brasse or tynne, facioned
lyke a Cucumer, wherwith bathes were
fylled and emptied.



Cudetur in me faba, all the blaame shall be
layde to me.



Cuiusmodi, what, what facion, what maner.






Plautus in
Menech.



Cuiusmodi homines erunt? What maner of
men shall they be?



Cicer. pro
cluen.



Cuiusmodicunque mater sit? What so o euer a
mother she be?



Cicer. pro
Roscio.



Cuiusquemodi. Vereor enim cuiusque modi es
Rosci, ne ita humc uidear voluisse seruare, ut
tibi omnino non pepercerim, I feare me that
in what so euer state thou are in Ros. lest it
shall be thought, that I wolde so excuse or
defende hym, forasmoche as I haue nat all
spared the.



Salusti. in
catelin.



Cuiuscunque modi genus hominum, of all ma­
ner of sortes of men.



Culcitrula, a lyttell fether bedde.



Festus.



Culcitula, a lyttell staffe.



Culeus, amonge the Romaynes was the
greattest measure, and receyueth twenty of
the measures callyd Amphora, whyche a­
mounteth to two thousand, eight hundred,
foure pounde of measure, euery pound be­
inge twelue ounces. It was also a sacke of
lether, wherinto they, whiche hadde slayne
their fathers or mothers were sowen, and
with them were also put alyue, a Cocke, a
Serpent, and an Ape, and throwen al togi­
ther in to the riuer of Tyber. And this was
the punyshment of paricides or murderers
of their parentes.



Plautus in
Capt.



Culpa carere, nat to offende.



Culpam commereri, to committe an offence.



Culpam in alterum conferre, to lay the blame
to an nother.



Culpito, tare, to blame often.



Culpo, pare, to blame.



Cululus, a lyttell chalyce or cuppe of erth,
whiche the byshops vsed in sacrifice.



plautus in
p&ecedil;nulo.



Cum, all be it. Nam cum sedulo munditer
nos habemus, uix ægre amatorculos inueni­
mus, All though we do appoynt vs neuer
so kleanly, yet vneth fynde we any louers.



Cum dicto, forthewith, as soone as it was
spoken.



Terentius
in Hecyra.



Cum maxume, to moche.



Cumulatus, ta, tum, augmented.



Cumulate, abundantly.



Vergilius.



Cunabula, is also taken for the begynnyng
of thynges.



Cunctanter, slowely, softe and fayre.



Cunctatio, & contatio, taryenge.



Cunctus, ta, tum, all togther.



Cunilago, a kynde of sauerye.



Cupiens, he that desyreth a thynge.



Cupiens tui est, he loueth the hartyly.



Cupienter, with great desyre.



Cupitus, ta, tum, desyred.



Cupressus, a Cypresse tree.



Curiata comitia, were assemblyes of peo­
ple in places of iudgement, for matters in
varyaunce.



Liuius.



Curio, is also a curate, or he that hathe the
spirituall charge in a paryshe.



Curionatus, the offyce of a curate.



Curionium, money that is giuen to a cu­
rate for doinge his offyce.



Curmundula, peares very delycate, hauing
so thynne parynges, that men dydde eate
them vnparyd.



Curare, to care for a thynge, to take heede,
or be dilygent aboute a thyng. Cura ut va­
leas, Looke to thy helthe. Curasti probe,
Thou haste done euery thynge well.
Terent. in
Andria.


Curare ædes, to take hede to the house, that
nothynge be loste.
Plautus.


Terent. in
Heauto.



Curare aliena, to meddell with other men­
nes busynesse.



Curare amicos, to entertayne frendes or
acquayntaunce.
Plautus in
Sticho


Curare fidem, to kepe promyse.



Plautus in
Trinummo.



Curare munus suum, to do his offyce.



Curabo illi pecuniam, I wylle prouyde that
he shall haue money.



Curabitur, it shall be prouyded.



Curatus, ta, tum, done with dilygence.



Curatus, in good poynt or state.



Curatio, charge. Curatio mea est, It is myn
offyce or charge.
Plautus in
pœnu.


Currens, he that runneth.



Currentem incitare, to exhorte or sette for­
warde hym that of his owne courage is
well disposed to a thynge.



Cursim, with al spede, very spedyly.



Cursura, a course.



Cuticula, a thynne skynne.



Cutiones, they whyche in sellynge make
many prices er they come to a poynte.



Festus.



Cuturnium, a vessell, out of the whiche wine
was poured in sacrifices.

 

¶ C, ANTE Y.

CYanus, a blewe flowre growynge a­
monge corne, callyd a bluebottell.



Cyathisso, are, to syppe or to quafte,
all out, or halues.



Cyathus, the .xii. parte of the mesure callyd
Sextarius, whyche was supposed to be as
moche as commonlye a temperate man dyd
drynke at one draught. Rede more after in
Sextario. 



Cyborium, a kind of appuls of Alexandria.



Cydarum, a bote.



Cynodont&ecedil;, are dogges tethe, whiche doo
growe in the latter age.



Cyperus Babylonicus, Galyngale.



Cypsili, byrdes callyd swalowes.



Cyrnij, people of the Ile of Cors.



Cysthus, a kynde of yuye.



Cytinus, the floure of a garden pomegranate.








D ANTE A.

D##sp##A##sp##G##sp##N##sp##A##sp##D##sp##E##sp##S, were
lyttell byrdes, whyche
in Egypte men vsed to
make faste to garlandis
whan they went to drin­
kynge.



Damascœna, prunes.



Vlpian.L.
aquilia.



Damnas dare, to pay da­
mages. Damnum facere, to suffre damage,
to haue losse.
Cic. Epist.
libr.17.ad
Volunnium


Damnatus, condemned.



Cic. in L.
pisonem.



Damnatior, more worthy deathe.



Danista, an vserer.



Danisticus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to vsery.



Plautus in
Trucu.



Dapsilis lectus, an excellent good bedde.



Daphnoides, an herbe callid Lorell or Lau­
ry, whiche cuseth a vehemente purgation.



Dapsilia dicta, wordes frankely spoken.



Daseia, thyckenes of brethe.



Daucus, yelowe carette, wherof the rootes
sodden in brothe are pleasant and holsom.

 

D ANTE E.


Plautus in
Rude.



DE nocte abijt, he went away at night.



De nocte uigilare, to wake in the night



Cicero.



De die, to day. Ergo ne una orationis
pars de die dabitur mihi, Than shal nat I be
suffred to speake one lyttell worde to day.
Plautus.


De die uiuere, euerye daye, or from daye to
daye, to lyue.
Ci. in phil.


De meo, of my good, de tuo, of thy good.



Plautus in
persa.



De mea sententia, by my counsayle.



Plautus in
Bacch.



De illis verbis caue tibi, beware howe thou
spekest suche wordes.



Plautus in
Menech.



De imperio decertatur, they fyghte for the
empire, or chiefe rule.



Cicero.



De manu in manum, from hande to hande.



Cicero.



De filia te adij, I comme to speake with you
for your doughter.
Terentius
in Hecyra.


Plautus in
Mostel.



De meo exemplo ædificet, lette hym buylde
accordynge to my platte.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



De istac te amo, I loue the for her sake.



De compacto, by agrement.



Plautus in
Capt.



De industria, of purpose.



De integro, eftesoones from the beginning.



Terent. in
Heauto.



De improuiso, at auenture, vnsought for, or
vnlooked for.
Plautus in
Trucu.


De more, as it hath ben accustomed.



plautus in
Epidico.



De nihilo nihil est irasci, It is folye to be an­
gry for nothynge.



De præfacili exores, Thou shalte lyghtely
opteyne.



De proximo senex, the olde man that dwel­
leth hereby.
plautus.


De repente, sodaynly. De subito, idem.



Deambulatio, a walkynge forth, or abrode,
out of the house.



Debilito, tare, to make feble or weake.



Festus.



Deblatero, terare, to speake foolysshely, to
babble rebukefully.
Non. Mar.


Decaluo, to make very balde.



Ci. ad At.



Decaphorus, a lytter borne by tenne men.



Plautus.



Decedere, to gyue place to an other.



Decedere itinere, to tourne out of the waye
for some purpose.
Plautus


Ci. in Ver.



Decedere uia, to go out of the way.



Decedere de suo more, to chaunge his
custome.



Ti. Liuius.



Decedere instituto suo, to do otherwise than
he was wonte.



Ci. in Ver.
Liuius.



Decedere officio, to do agaynste his duetie
to do no more his duetie.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Decedet nihil de summa, there shall be no­
thynge minyshed.



Cic. Att.I.



Decedere, to dye.



Decedi, to haue place or way gyuen. H&ecedil;c e­
nim ipsa sunt honorabilia, qu&ecedil; uidentur leuia
atque communia, salutari, appeti, decedi, assur­
gi, deduci, reduci, For those thynges ar ho­
nourable, whiche seme to be of small effecte
and commune, to be awayted on, to be sued
vnto, to haue the way giuen, to be rysen vn­
to, to be brought to the court, and brought
agayne home.
Cicero de
senectute.


Decem, the number of tenne.



Decemuiri, where tenne men be in one au­
thoritie. Suche were at Rome soone after
that they ceassed to haue kynges, and they
had authoritie to gather lawes, and also to
make lawes: At the laste they conspired to
haue a perpetuall authoritie, and fynallye
were therfore deposed for euer.



Decemuiratus, the dignitie or offyce of De­
cemuiri.



Colu. li.4.



Decenus, na, num, a dosen.



Decies, tenne tymes.



Decennalis, le, of tenne yeres.



Decennium, the space of tenne yeres.



Decenter, comelye, seemely, or as hit is
conuenyent.
Terent. in
Hecyra.


Decermina, thynges pulled away, in making
thynges cleane.



Decernere, to purpose.



Plautus in
Mostel.



Decernere qu&ecedil;stionem, to ordeyne that an
examination be made.



Decernere, to fyght in battayle.



Decet me h&ecedil;c vestis, this garmente becom­
meth me well.



Pli. in epi.
105.



Decidit ab archetypo, he dyd nat folowe his
fyrste example.



Terent. in
Heautont.



Decidere de spe, he loste all his hope.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Decidit fructus, he loste all the profite that
shulde come of it.



Deciduus, a, um, that whiche falleth, as De­
cidua folia, leaues that do fall.






Decies sestertium, was vsed of the Romains
for a thousande Sestertia, whych amoun­
teth of our money to syxe thousande, fyue
hundred, foure score and seuen pounde,&
tenne shyllynges.



Plinius.



Decliuis, ue, that whiche is redy to fall.



Varro.



Decliuis ætate, fallen in age.



Decollare, to fayle.



Decolorus, a, um, lackyng colour, or yl colorid



Decoloratus, ta, tum, idem.



Decoxit domino suo fœtura, the increase of
cattayle came to lyttell aduauntage vnto
his mayster.



Decore, honestly.



Decortico, care, to barke a tree.



Decotes, thredebare garmentes, or garmen­
tes worne to the vttermoste.



Decumbo, bere, to lye downe.



Decures, olde writers vsed for decuriones.



Decuriatio, making of knightes or captains



Ti. Liuius.
de bell. ma­
cedonico
lib.10.



Decurrere, to iuste.



Decussis, ten hole partes, also peces equal­
ly cutte, more ouer the diuisions of tym­
ber sawen in equall partes.



Decussatim, in euen porcions cutte.



Dedecet, it is not honest or conuenient.



Dedecoro, rare, to dishonest.



Dedecus, dedecoris, dyshonestie.



Dedegnatio, dysdayne.



Deditus, ta, tum, gyuen, rendred.



Dedita opera, for a pourpose, by his owne
consente.



Deducere riuos, to tourne the ryuer.



Deducere vocem, to speake smalle.



Deducere, to abate of a somme.



Defæcatus, ta, tum, fyned or cleane from the
lyes or dregges, as wyne, whyche is nat
troublyd.



Defatigo, gare, to make oone weerye, or to
fatygate.



Defatigatio, weerynesse.



Deferre aliquem furti, to appeache oone of
felonye.



Cicero de
lege agra­
ria.



Deferunt de me apud uos, They reporte of
me falsely vnto you.



Priscianus



Defetiscor, sci, I am weery.



Defessus sum, idem.



Defectus, a, um, that which lacketh any thing.



Defectio, rebellion, departing from one cap­
tayn to go to an other. also lacke or defaut.



Plautus in
persa.



Defigere aliquem colaphis, to gyue oone a
cuffe on the eare, or to beate one with the
handes. Definite, shortly, or at few wordis.
Pli. in pan.


Cicer. off.



Definitum est, It is concluded.



Deflectere ex itinere, to turne out of the way.



Deflexit de via consuetudo, The custome is
chaunged or tourned.



Defleo, eui, ere, to wayle or lament, to be sory.



Plautus in
Epidic.



Defloccatus, worne for age. som tyme passed
the floure of youthe.



Defore, to lacke in tyme to come.



Defunctus iam sum, I haue nowe doone my
duetie.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Defuncta morbis corpora, bodies recoue­
red from syckenes or diseases.
Liuius.


Defunctus fato, escaped his destenye.



Ibidem.



Defungi in hac re, to be cut of this busynes,
to be discharged of this matter.



Terent. in
phorm.



Defungi regis imperio, to doo the kynges
commaundement.



Defunctus, ta, tum, deed.



Defunctorie, remyssely, lyghtely, withoute
studye, or dyligence.
Vlpian.


Degero, degessi, degerere, to cary away.



Plautus in
Aulular.



Degerere laborem alicui, to ease one of his
labour. 



Degrummor, ari, to lay a thing by line.
This entry displays on the same line as the previous entry.


Dehortor, tari, to discourage, to exhorte to
the contrarye.



Deijcere de gradu, to bryng out of a constant
or temperate mynd. also it signifieth, to de­
priue of dignitie.



Cic. de off.



Deijcere, to disease or putte out a man of his
possession.
Ci. ad At.
lib.16.


Deiectus, & deiectio, a castynge out of pos­
session, or a disseison.
Cicer. pro
cecina.


Ci. de sen.



Deiungo, xi, gere, to vnioyne.



Deiuro, to sweare depely.



Delabor, lapsus sum, labi, to falle downe of a
hygh place. Also to be consumid and come
to nought.



Delacero, rare, to teare in pieces.



Delachrimo, idem quod delachrimor.



Delauo, uare, to washe myghtily.



Delectamentum, pastyme, solace.



Delibatio, tastynge, or the takynge of assay.
It is also sacrifyce of meate or drynke.



Delibatorium, a place apt for suche sacrifice.



Delibare, is also to hurte.



Columell.



Delibutus periuriis, stayned or defyled with
periurie.
Gellius.


Salust.



Delicate, wantonly.



Delicia, the tymber, whiche maketh the end
of a house aboue, callyd a Gable.
Festus.


Deliciares tegul&ecedil;, the tiles at the gables end



Delici porci, yonge suckynge pygges.



Varro.2.



Delingo, linxi, lingere, to lycke of.



Delirans, dotynge.



Cicero



Deliratio, dotage, foly.



Deliramentum, idem.



Delius, a, um, of the Ile callyd Delus.



Delius natator, was one perfytte in swym­
myng, which became a prouerbe, that whan
a thynge was spoken or written, harde to
be vnderstande, and requyred a cunnynge
expositour, than wolde they say, Delio na­
ratore eget, It requyreth a cunnynge or
subtyll expositour.



Deludificor, cari, to begyle.






Delutamentum, clayenge.



Demensum, a certayne portion of meat and
drynke allowed by the moneth to the ser­
uantes. It is also a measure contaynynge
foure Romayne busshelles.
Terentius
in ph orm.Plautus in
Menech.


Demeter, the name of Ceres. 



Demigro, grare, to goo from one house, to
dwelle in an nother.



Vergilius.



Deminuo, nuere, to mynyshe, or make lasse.



Georg. 2.



Demittere, to dygge.



Demissi homines, men fallen from rychesse
to pouertie.
Cice. pro
Murena.


Demere soleas alicui, to pull of ones shoes.



Demere vngues, to pare ones nayles.



Plautus in
Aulul.



Demogorgon, was an enchaunter, whiche
was supposed to be of suche excellencye,
that he had authoritie ouer all yll spirites,
whiche made men aferde.



Demoliri culpam, to dyscharge hym of the
faute or blame.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Demolio, idem quod demolior.



Demoueo, uere, to remoue.



Demuto, tare, to change his maner or facion



Denarius, in weight is the seuenth parte of
an ounce: In coyne hit was as moche in
poyse and valuation, as our olde sterlynge
grote, of the whiche there wente seuen to
the ounce.
Tonstallus.Cassius he­
mina ani­
malium.2.


Denascor, denasci, to ceasse to be, to dye.



Denominatio, the namynge of a thyng.



Dens, is also euery thynge, wherwith an o­
ther thynge may be holden faste.



Dentatus, he that hath great tethe, stronge
tethe, or many tethe.



Dentifrangibilum, a thynge wherwith tethe
are broken.



Denumero, rare, to paye money.



Denunciatio, menassynge.



C&ecedil;sar.



Denunciatio testimonij, an iniunction to apere



Cicer. pro
Flacco.



Deoro, rare, among our lawyers, is to per­
pleade, or to conclude in pleadynge.



Deorsum uersum, downe ryght.



Terent. in
Adelphis.



Depaciscor, sci, to make couenant, to agree
vpon certayne couenantes.



Depaupero, rare, to impouerysshe, or make
poore. Depectus, kempte.



Dependere operam, to take pein about a thing



Depingo, xi, gere, to paynt a thynge to the
quycke, also to reporte.



Deprecatio, whan we confesse that we haue
offended.



Deprecator, he that sueth or intreatethe for
another man, that he shuld nat be punished.



Depressus, a, um, lowe.



Depropero, rare, to make moche haste.



plautus in
p&ecedil;nulo.



Depugnatus, ta, tum, well fought.



Terentius



Deputare rationes, to r eken, or make accompt



Derado, si, dere, to shaue of, or barke of.



Deriduculum, a skorne or mocke.



Deripere aliquem capillo, to pull one downe
by the heare of the heed.
Plautus in
Menech.


Derogito, to make instant desyre, to praye
hartylye.
Plautus in
Asina.


Des, a poyse of eyght ounces.



Descendere in sese, to humble hym selfe.



Persius



Descensus, sus, a goynge downe.



Descensio, idem.



Deseco, care, to cutte.



Desedeo, dere, to sytte downe.



Desertor, he that leaueth his countrey, and
gothe to his ennemyes.



Plinius in
Epistolis.



Deseruire studijs, to apply lernyng or study.



Desideo, sedi, desidere, to sytte stylle, to a­
byde in a place.
Plautus.


Terentius



Desido, sedi, sidere, idem.



Designare, to chese a thynge, and appoynte
it for some purpose.



Desistere litibus, to leaue suite.



Terent. in
in phormi.



Despectio, a lokynge downewarde.



Despicor, cari, to despise or disprayse.



Despicatus, tus, disprayse.



plautus in
Milite.



Despoliare digitos, to pulle the rynges of
from ones fyngers.



Cicero de
prouinc.
consu.



Despondere prouinciam, to gyue charge or
rule of a countrey.



Desponso, are, to affiance a woman.



Destinare, is also to sende.



Iuuenalis.



De subito, sodaynely.



Desudasco, scere, to labour vntyll he sweat.



Desuefactus, out of custome, or vse.



Desydero, rare, to desyre.



Desyderati, men deed, proprely in battayle.



Desyderium, desyre. also speciall loue.



Cicero



Desyderatio, idem.



Detrecto, tare, to refuse to do a thynge, or
nat to doo it.



Detrudere, to sette forthe one by force.



Detrudere regno, to putte oone oute of his
royaulme.



Deturbare aliquem ædibus, to thruste oone
out of the house.



Deuerbium, the laste ende of a worde.



Deuersus, tourned downewarde.



Deuoro, rare, to deuoure.



Plautus in
Asina.



Deuorare dicta, to take good heede vnto
wordes. Deuorare libros, to reade bokes
with ardent desyre.



Deuorare molestiam paucorum dierum, to in­
dure peyne or displesure for a lytel while.
Ci. in phil.


Deuorare nomen alicuius, to forgete a mans
name. Deuorare orationem, to here a taale
without takynge any hede of it.
Plautus in
Trinummo.


Ci. in Bru.



Deunx, deuncis, xi. tymes the measure callid
Cyathus, whiche was as moch as a tempe­
rate man vsed to drynke at .xi. draughtes.



Dextans. x. tymes the mesure callid Ciathus



Dextera uel dextra, the right syde.






Dextram dextr&ecedil; committere, to promyse faith
and trouthe in hande.



Laur. Val.



Dextimus, olde writers vsed for dexter.



Dextero, rare, to leade in the ryght hande.

 

D ANTE I.

DIabathra, showes that the grekes vsid



Diaulus, a measure of grounde con­
taynyng two furlong, euery furlong
beinge of .Cxxv. fete.



Diacodion, a syrope made of the heedes of
popye and water.



Dibapha, purple twyse dyed.



Dicam impingere, to bryng an action against
one, or to laye agaynst ones charge.
Terentius
in ph orm.


Plautus in
Aulul.



Dicam scribere alicui, to enter an action a­
gaynste one.



Terentius
in phormi.



Dichas, a measure of two palmes, or. viii.
fyngers.



Ci. in Ver.



Dicare operam suam, to offre his seruyce.



Dicere nummos, to promyse money.



Salusti. in
histo.



Dicere ex animo, to speke as a man thinketh



Dicere ex tempore, to make an oration with­
out study. also to speake vnaduysedly.



Dicere, is also to call a thynge by a name.



Plautus in
cur gul.



Dicassis, for dicas.



Dice, for dic.



Ibidem.



Dictamen, a thyng writen by an other mans
instruction.



Dictare rationem, to yelde accompte.



Plautus in
Amph.



Dictatum, a mynute gyuen by one to an no­
ther, to write a letter by.



Dictito, to tell a thynge ofte.



Didragma, a coyne, whiche was of the va­
lue of .viii. of the money callyd Sestercii,
whiche of oure moneye is two olde ster­
lynge grotes.



Didymus, is in latyne Geminus, in englishe,
one man double as moche as an other.



Diffarreatio, a certayne sacrifyce, whyche
was betwene a man and his wife.



Differitas, olde wryters vsed for Differen­
tia, dyfference.



Differre sitim, to endure thyrste.



Differre vadimonium, to gyue to one a lon­
ger day of apparaunce.
pli. in epi.


Differre famam alicui, to sprede ones name
abroode.



Differri, to be soo vexed in mynde, that a
man wotteth nat what to doo.



Plautus in
Cistell.



Difficultas, difficultie.



Difficulter, with great peyne or labour.



Difficul, for difficile.



Difflo, are, to blowe downe.



Plautus in
Mili.



Digestio, dygestion, dystribution.



Digiti, ar muskyls, or a like kind of shel fishe



Iouius.



Digitum tollere, to fauour a matter.



Digitus, is also a mesure, being of thebredth
of foure cornes of wheate layde togyther.



Digitulus, a lyttell fynger.



Digladiatio, a fyght, a stryfe, a debate.



Dignatio, greate estimation, sometyme fa­
uour, or familyaritie with noble men.



Digressus, a departynge.



Diligenter, dilygently, aduysedly.



Dilucide, euydently.



Dimissori&ecedil; liter&ecedil;, letters myssiue.



Dimixos, a lampe with two lyghtes.



Dinumero, rare, to paye money.



Diobolaris, a common and vyle harlot.



Diomedes, a noble captayne of the Grekes
at the syege of Troye.



Dipsacus, a wylde tasyll.



Dirimere litem, to make an ende of a matter
in varyaunce or suite.



Cicero



Dirimere actionem, to delaye a matter.



Dirimere societatem, to breake a felowshyp.



Diripere oppidum, to sacke a towne.



Plinius.



Diruo, rui, ruere, to breke down to the ground



Dirutus, ta, tum, broken down to the ground
dystroyed.



Discalceo, ceare, to pull of ones shoes.



Discalceatus, vnshodde.



Discedere in diuersa, to be of sondry opinions



Discernere armis, to fyght in battayle.



Discupio, to desyre very moche.



Discursus, runnynge hyther and thyther.



plautus in
p&ecedil;nulo.



Discutere, to dissolue humours gathered in­
to an impostume.



Discussoria medicamenta, medicins which do
dissolue or breke thinges congelid or tough.



Disiunctio, a separation.



Disiunctus, ta, tum, separate.



Dispar, vnlyke, vnmete.



Disparo, rare, to seuer.



Disparatum, is that whych is separate from
any thynge by layenge to his contrary.



Dispartior, tiri, to diuyde, or be dyuided.



Dispeream, I praye god that I dye: it is a
worde vsed in the steede of an othe, in the
affirmance or denyenge of a matter.



Disperij, I am vndone.



Displiceo, cêre, to displease.



plautus in
cistell.



Displicina, she that hath displeased.



Dispolio, idem quod despolio.



Dispoliabulum, a despoyle, a place where
all myschiefe or robberye is done.
plautus in
Bacch.


Dispudet, I am ashamed, or he is asshamed
of that, whiche is done.



Dissoluere, to pay that whiche is owed.



Terent. in
phorm.



Dissoluere aliquem, to despatche one frome
longe taryenge.



Plautus in
Mercator.



Dissuadere, to turne one from  doing of a thing



Dissuo, ere, to vndoo a thynge.



Dist&ecedil;det, I am wery of a thynge.



Distinctio, distinction, separation.



Distincte, distinctly in order, as it may welle
be vnderstande and perceyued.






Terent. in
Eunucho.



Distorqueo, si, quere, to sette awrie. Ah illud
uide, os ut sibi carnifex distorsit, O, loke how
the hangeman setteth his mouthe awrye.



Plin. de ui­
ris illustr.



Distractus, ta, tum, pullyd on sunder.



Distractio, a pullynge away or a sunder.



Plautus in
Trucu.



Districte, straytely.



Distrunco, care, to cutte in two pieces.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Diuidia, busynes, trouble, variance.

 

¶ D, ANTE O.


Plautus in
capt.



DAre in ruborem, to make ashamed.



Dare insidias, to deceyue one.



Idem in Aul.



Dare iusiurandum, to take an othe.



In amphit.



Do lego, I gyue by testament or laste wyll.



Dare malum alicui, to do one a shrewd turne



Dare manus, to yelde hym self vanquished.



Dare mancipio, to delyuer on warrantise.
Suo periculo is emat, qui eam mercabitur,
mancipio neque promittet, neque quisquem dabit,
He that wyll haue her, let hym bye her at
his owne peryll: for no man shall promyse
or delyuer her on warrantise.
Plautus in
persa.


Dare mutuum, to lende.



Dare vitio, to disprayse.



Plautus in
in trinum.
in pseudo.



Danunt, idem quod dant, they gyue.



Datu meo, of my gyfte.



Datarius, a, um, that whiche is to gyue.



Datatim ludere, to tosse frome one to an no­
ther, as men playe at tenys.



Doctor, he that teacheth other.



Doccus, a tymber piece.



Dodrans, is also .ix. of the measures, callyd
Cyathi, aldo .ix. inches in length or bredth.



Dogmatistes, he that folowethe an nother
mans doctrine.



Dolenter, sorowfully.



Dolium, a vessel for wyne, som call it a tunne,
and conteyneth .xxx. of the olde measures
callyd Amphoras.



Doloro, aui, are, to cause one to haue sorow
or peyne.



Domi, at home.



Domo, from home.



Domum, to the howse, or home, sometyme
at home.



Cicero de
diuinatione
Tibullus.



Domuitio, a departynge home.



Domitus, ta, tum, made tame, subdewed, or
vanquysshed.



Domator, idem quod domitor.



Dominus, is also an owner.



Domina, the lady or maistresse.



Dominatus, tus, domynation, or authorytie
ouer other, maystershyp.



Domus, is sometyme a temple or churche.
alos a familye or kynrede, alsoo a mannes
countrey, also a neste of byrdes.



Donatic&ecedil; coron&ecedil;, garlandes that in the olde
tyme were worne in playes.



Dormire in vtramuis aurem, is a prouerbe
whiche sygnifyeth to be without any ma­
ner of care. It may be englished, To slepe
soundly on bothe sydes.
Terent. in
Heauto.


Dormisco, scere, to begynne to slepe.



Plautus in
curcu.
in Trinum.



Dormitator, a sleaper.



Dormitorium, that whiche pertaynethe
to sleape.



Dorophorus, he that caryeth a present.



Vergilius.



Dorsum in mari, a heape of sande gathered
in the see, which watermen do cal a shelpe.
Seruius.


Dorsus, idem.



Dotes animi, the gyftes of grace.



Dotes corporis, the gyftes of nature.



Doxa, in greke, sygnifyeth opinion, somme­
tyme glorye.

 

¶ D ANTE R.

DRachma, the coyne, which is in value
v. d. ob. halfe farthyng, somwhat lesse,
after fyfty of them to fyue crownes
of the sonne.



Drac&ecedil;na, the female dragon.



Draguntea, an herbe callid dragons.



Dragma auri, a coyne which in value was
as moche as one ounce & a halfe of siluer.

 

D ANTE V.

DVbenus, old writers vsed for dominus.



Dubitatim, doubtfully.



Vergilius.



Ducere animo, to thynke.



Ducere bellum, to make warre.



Ducere spiritum, to drawe breath, to lyue.



Ci. ad qui.



Ducere vultum, to lowre.



Ducere, is also to suppose. Hanc esse in te sa­
pientiam existimant, ut omnia tua in te posita
esse ducas, Men thynke that wysedom to
be in you, that ye thinke all that whiche is
your owne, to be in youre selfe and not in
Fortune.
Ci. de ami.


Ducere honori, to repute it honourable.



Salustius
in Iugurt.



Ducere minoris, to sette lesse by it.



Ibidem.



Ducere officij, he supposid it to be his dutie.



Ducere probro, to dysprayse.



Ducere mortuum, to be deed. Meos ne ego
ante oculos illam patiar, alios amplexarier?
mortuum hercle me duco satius, Shal I suf­
fer hym to imbrace her before myn eyes?
by god I had rather be deade.



Ductare, to take to wyfe, also to esteme.



Plautus in
Asin.



Ductare restim, to leade the daunce.



Ducatus, the gouernance or condute of men



Plaut. in
persa.



Ductus, ta, tum, ledde.



Terent. in
Adelphis.



Ductus, tus, tui, a coundyte, whereby water
dothe rounne.



Ductor, toris, a guyde.



Plautus in
Capt.



Duellator, a warryour.






Duellica ars, the feate or science of armes.



Duicensus, he that is sette with an other to
pay money for a taxe or subsidie.



Duidens, a shepe of two tethe.



Dulceo, cere, to be swete.



Dulcidulus, a, um, a lyttell swete.



Dulcesco, scere, to be made swete.



Plautus in
Mercator.



Dum, as longe as. Vsque ne valuisti? C. per­
petuo recte dum puidem illic fui: Dyddeste
thou well all that while? C. ye alway well,
as longe as I was there.



Dumosus, a, um, full of brembles.



Duodeuiginti, eyghtene.



Duodecim, twelue.



Duodecimus, a, um, the twelf.



Duonum, olde wryters vsed for bonum.



Dupliciter, two wayes.



Duricoria, thynges which haue harde skins



Duricors, dis, harde harted.



Duratus, ta, tum, hardned.



Duro ingenio, dull wytted.



Dure, cruelly.



Duriter, with moche payne.



Duricies, rudenesse, rygour.

 

D, ANTE Y.
¶ 

Dynastea, a rule or gouernaunce.







E FOR THE MORE
parte signifieth of.



E re nata, consyderynge
the matter.



E re nata melius fieri haud
potuit, quam factum est: 
Consideringe the matter,
or as the matter chaun­
ced, it coulde not haue bene better done
than it was.



E regione, on the other parte, on the other
syde agaynste.

 

¶ E ANTE B.

EBeati, they whiche from great pro spe­
ritie are fallen into mysery.



Ebeo, are, to bringe out of prosperitie.



Ebibo, bibere, to drynke all out.



Eboracum, a citie in England, called Yorke.



Eblandior, iri, to gette a thynge by flatery:
also to lyke.
Ci. ad Att.


Idem planc.



Eblanditus, ta, tum, goten by flatery.



Columell.



Ebriolus, la, lum, a lyttel drunke, or a lyttle
persone drunke.



Laberius.



Ebriulo, are, to make drunke.



pla. in aul.



Ebriatus, drunke.



Ebullo, are, to boble out, or braste out.



Ebulus, an herbe called walworte, which is
lyke to yonge elder tree.

 

¶ E ANTE C.

ECastor, an othe of the paynymes.



Plautus in
mercator.



Ecce me, lo here I am.



Eccere, some vsed it for an othe, as it
were, by Ceres: some onelye for Ecce, lo
nowe, or se nowe.



Plautus.



Eccillum, for ecce illum, see hym.



Terentius



Eccistam, for ecce istam, se her.



Echnephias, a storme, where a cloude is bro­
ken and falleth.



Echi, lyttel narowe valeys or dales betwene
two hylles.



Columel.



Econtra, contrary wyse.



Ci. in phil.



Ectrapeli, they which abhorre the common
facion or olde vsages.



Ectypum, that whiche is made accordynge
to a paterne.

 

E, ANTE D.

EDem, signifieth pleasure, dilectation.



Edentat, he that hath his teth taken out.



Edicto, tare, to declare or pronounce
often tymes.
Plautus in
Epidic.


Edictio, idem quod edictum.



Edor, ederis, edi, to be eaten.



Edo, edis, edidi, edere, to execute or doo a
thynge, or to cause a thynge to be done.



Edere annos, to tell what age a man is of.



Edere cedes, to make great slaughter.



Edere clamorem, to cry out.



Edere exemplum, to shewe an exaumple.



Edere fœtus, to brynge forth fruite.



Cicero



Edere iudicium, to reherce the iugement.



Edere librum, to publyshe a boke.



Edere ludos, & spectacula, to cause playes
and pageantes to be shewed to the people



Edere nomen, to tell his name to be written
or regestrid.



Edere oracula, to gyue answeres, as the di­
uell dyd in the ydolles of paynymes.



Edere pr&ecedil;lium, & bellum, to make warre.



Edere rationem, to yelde accompte.



Edere risus, to lawghe.



Edere scelus, to commyt a myscheuouse act.



Edere scriptum, to shewe by wrytynge.



Edere spiritum, to dye.



Edere stragem, to make a greate slawghter
of men.



Edititius iudex, a iudge whom the one parte
hath chosen.
Cicer. pro
planco.


Edoceo, cui, cêre, to instructe or informe one
of a thynge.



Edormisco, scere, to slepe soundely.



Edormiscere crapulam, to slepe vntyll he be
sober agayne.



Educere, sometyme sygnifyeth educare.



Plautus.



Eduro, rare, to make very harde.

 


Te. in Ad.





E ANTE F.

EFfascino, nare, to bewytche any thing,
as wytches doo, whyche disfygure
chyldren, and distroye grayne and o­
ther thynges with sorcery.



Effata, were certayne prayers, whiche the
diuinours vsed to make at the end of their
diuination or telling the successe of thingis



Effectum dare, to brynge to passe.



Terent. in
Adelphis.



Efferre sese, to prayse hym selfe.



Efferre manum, to lyfte vp his hande.



Cicer. hor­
tentio.



Efferre aliquem laudibus, to extolle oone
with prayses.



Efferre, to deuulgate, or to telle abrode.



Efferre, to aduaunce or promote.



Effero, rare, to make woode as a beaste.



Efferueo, êre, to boyle moche.



Efferuesco, scere, to begyn to boyle or sethe.



Cicero de
oratore.



Efferuescentia uerba, hotte angry wordes.



Effexis, for effeceris.



Plautus in
Casina.



Efficere argentum alicui, to gette money for
a man by some meane or deuyse.



Efficientia, idem quod effectus.



Effigio, are, to counterfayte ones ymage in
payntynge or keruynge.



Effilo, lare, to sowe.



Effilatum, that whiche is sowed or stitched
on a garment, as a garde or purfle.



Plautus in
persa.



Effio, fieri, to be doone.



Effligo, flixi, fligere, to tourment.



Plaut. in
Asin.



Efflare animam, to dye.



Plautus in
persa.



Efflauit animam spes, I haue noo maner of
hope or truste.



Plautus in
Trucu.



Effluet, it shall oute, I wylle nat keepe it, all
men shall knowe it.



Ci. de sen.



Effluxit, it is quyte gone.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Effœtus, ta, tum, hatched, as a byrde that is
come out of the egge.
Cice. tusc.


Effœtum corpus, a weake body.



Effreno, nare, to vnbrydell.



Effringo, effregi, gere, to breake to pieces.



Effractus fame, made feble for lack of meate



Effugit memoria, to be forgotten.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Effugere nuptias, not to be maried.



Effuse, effusius, effusissime, abundantly, more
vehemently, excedyngly.
Terent. in
Andria.
Pli. in epi.
& in pane.
 

E ANTE G.

EGens est consilij, he lacketh counsayle



Egeria, was an ydol, to whom women
with chyld dyd offer, supposyng that
therby they shulde trauayle easily.



Egerit aquam fons, the fountayne pousheth
out water.



Egestio, onis, distribution abrode, it is also
the puttynge forthe of ordure or dunge.



Ego, I.



Egomet, I my selfe.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Ego ne, who I.

 

E ANTE H, & I.

EHem, is a worde spoken, whan a man
is moued with some thynge, which is
newly hapned.



Eheu, alasse.



Eho tu, howe serra, whan one calleth a man
to hym, forgettynge his name.



Eiectus, ta, tum, caste oute.



Eiecto, tare, to throwe oute.



Eiulatio, a brayenge out with lamentation.



Eiurare, to renounce.



Eiuratio, renouncynge.

 

E ANTE L.

ELangueo, êre, to be sycke.



Elanguesco, scere, to waxe feble.



Elauare se bonis, to be cleane wasshed
frome all his goodes, to spende all, and
leaue nothynge.
Plautus in
Asina.


Elapsus, a, um, escaped.



Elapsa est spes, hope is loste.



Elleborus albus, an herbe callid Lyngwort,
the roote wherof is callyd nesyng pouder.



Elleborus niger, an herbe callid beares fote



Elix, licis, a furrow made for water to passe.



Colu. li.2.



Ellobia, thynges whyche were hanged at
the eares of women.



Ellum, for ecce illum, see where he is.



Donatus.



Elops, a fyshe callyd also Accipenser.



Eluceo, cere, to shyne.




Vergilius.


E ANTE M.

EMaciatus, ta, tum, made leane.



Emancipatus, ta, tum, alyened.



Emancipati, are also they, whyche are
out of theyr fathers rule, or they, whyche
are made subiectes to an nother.
Festus.
Cic. in ca­
telinam.


Embata, a shyppe callyd a barque



Embolium, the argument or fyrst entree in­
to a playe or interlude.



Embolismus, the adding of a day in the yere



Emeritum stipendium, the laste wages that a
man taketh in warres.



Emeriti senes, olde men excused frome la­
bour by age.



Emico, care, to shyne forthe.



Emicare, to daunce or leape.



Plautus in
Aulular.



Emigro, grare, to goo frome oone place, to
dwell in an nother.



Vergilius.



Emmanuel, is interpreted, God is with vs.



Emoueo, uere, to put away.



Empyrium cœlum, the heuen, which is next
aboue all the seuen spheeres, and signifieth
the fyry heuen.



Emutio, tire, to humme or make anye other
sowne lyke a man that is dumme.






¶ E ANTE N.

ENarro, rare, to telle a thyng at length.



Enato, tare, to swymme out.



Encaustes, he that fourmeth or facyo­
neth a thynge with fyre.



Encaustice, makyng of images with the fire.



Enimuero, forsothe.



Enixa, a woman late delyuered of chylde.



Sueton. in
othone.



Enotesco, scere, to come to knowledge.



Enterocela, a disease whan the bowelles be
fallen into a mans codde.



Enucleate, clerely.

 

¶ E, ANTE O.

EO setius, neuer the lesse.



Sueton. de
claris grgrammaticis.



Eo loci, in that state.



Eo inficias, I denye.



Eo obuiam, I goo to mete with one.

 

E, ANTE P.

EPacta, thynges added to.



Ephesus, a citie in Grece.



Ephialtes, is that disease, which is cal­
lyd the mare in slepynge.



Ephimeron, the great wylde Lylly.



Ephod, a stole, whiche a prieste weareth a­
bout his necke, whan he is at masse.



Epicœnum, of bothe kyndes.



Epicia, callyd æquum & bonum, equytie,
which is iustyce without rigour of the law.



Epimytheon, the declaration of a fable.



Epiphora, a syckenes of the eyes, callid the
droppynge of the eies.



Epiroticus, ca, cum, of the countray callyd
Epirus.



Eporhedicæ, good breakers of horses.



Epulæ, larum, a banket made to many persons



Epha, seu Ephi, a mesure of the Hebrues or
Iewes, contayning .lxxii. times the measure
callyd Sextarius Atticus. Rede more after in
Sextarius. 

 

E, ANTE Q.

EQuiceruus, a beaste in the oryente, ha­
uynge hornes, and a longe mane to the
shulders, and a bearde vnder his chyn,
and fete rounde lyke a hors, and is as great
as an harte.



Equisetum, an herbe callyd horsetayle.

 

¶ E ANTE R.

ERadico, care, to pluck vp by the rotis.



Eradicare aures alterius, to pulle oone
harde by the eares.
Plautus in
Epidico.


Erasus, a, um, rased or scraped out.



Erogatio, distribution of thynges to other
men, a lyberall gyuynge.



Erogito, tare, to desyre hartily.



Eros, loue.



Erotema, tis, a demaunde.



Erotematicus, he that often demaundeth.



Errare de verbis alicuius, to mysvnderstande
the wordes that one speaketh.



Erratio, a goinge out of the way.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Erratum, an errour.



Erumpo, rupi, erumpere, to braste out, some­
tyme to leape forthe.



Erumpet in neruum istæc fortitudo, is a pro­
uerbe, whiche is dyuersely expounde, for it
may signifie, This courage of thyne maye
brynge the to a halter, or to sytte by the he­
les. or it may sygnify, This great strength
or courage of thine wyl come vnto nothing.
whyche prouerbe is taken of archers, whi­
che oftentymes whan they put forth moste
strength: they breake the strynge of their
bowe, and the arowe falleth downe at their
fete, wherby the shotte is loste, and cometh
to nothynge.
Terent. in
phorm.Donatus.Erasmus
in Adag.


Eruptio, is whan an host issueth hastily out
of a campe or fortresse, and falleth on their
ennemies.



Eruum, the grene peason.



Eryngion, an herbe lyke a thystel, the rote
whereof beinge condite or conserued in
hony with cynamome and cloues, comfor­
teth nature, and styrreth courage, and is
of some men callyd Yringus.

 

E ANTE S.

ESalon, is a byrde, which breaketh cro­
wes egges, and her byrdes be distroyd
by the wolfe, and lykewyse she kylleth
the wolfes whelpis, if she may com by them



Esau, the son of Isaac, & brother of Iacob. 



Essedarius, a charyot man.



Estrix, a woman rauenour or deuourer.



Esurio, onis, an hungrye felowe.



Plautus in
persa.



Esurigo, ginis, hunger.

 


Varro.


¶ E, ANTE T.

ETenim, for, also, semblably, surely.



Etiamne, is it so? is that ynough?



Plaut. in
Asin.



Etiamnum, vntyll than, vntyll that time.



Etiamnunc, vntyll nowe.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Etiamsi, although. Etsi, idem.

 


Plautus in
Amphit.
Cicero de
amicitia.


E ANTE V.

EVangelia, liorum, pluraliter, were sacri­
fices and solemne prayers made after
good tydynges.



Euanno, are, to van corne or other like thing



Ci. de fini.



Euceria, oportunitie.



Cic. ibidem.



Eudoxia, good renoume or good fame.



Euenit ex sententia, it camme to passe as I,




thou, or he wolde haue it.



Euenit præter sententiam, aut pr&ecedil;ter spem, It
happened otherwyse, than I, thou, or he
thought, or trusted.



Euerriculum, a fyshynge nette callid a drag.



Euersus, a, um, destroyed.



Euersio, destruction.



Plautus in
Menech.



Euhœ, a noyse, whyche they doo make that
are in great heuynes and waylyng.



Euidenter, clerely.



Euinesco, scere, to become grene.



Euolo, lare, to flee away. also to escape, It
signifieth sometyme to take away by stelth.
Plautus in
Cistell.


Euoluo, uere, to tourne hyther and thither.



Terent. in
Eunucho.



Euoluere se turba, to wynde hym selfe oute
of trouble.



Euomo, mui, mere, to vomyte, to caste out.



Euomere iram, to wreake anger.



Euomere uirus, to spytte out his poyson.



Eupatorium, an herbe callyd agrimonye



Euphrasia, an herbe callyd eybright.



Eutrapelia, gentylnesse, good maners.



Eutrapelus, gentyll and pleasant.



Euxinus Pontus, a parte of the see, whiche
diuideth Europa from Asia.

 

E ANTE X.


Terent. in
Adelph.



EX aduersum, euen agaynst it, on the o­
ther syde.



Ex æquo & bono facere, to doo iustely
or indifferently.



Ex animo, of good wyll, of a good courage



Cic. Epist.



Ex dignitate nostra, accordyng to our astate
or dygnitie.



Exacuo, cuere, to make very sharpe, to stere.



Exæquo, quare, to make egall.



Ti. Liuius.



Exæuio, uire, to waxe gentyll or mylde.



Plautus in
Trucu.



Exagog&ecedil;, they whyche carie anye thynge
out of the house.



Exagoga, rente, reuenues.



Plin.



Exalburno, nare, to take out the fatte iuyce
that is in some wodde.



Exaluminati, orient perles.



Examen, is also examination or triall.



Examina infantium, a companye or sorte of
chylderne.



Plautus in
Truculen.



Examo, mare, to loue well.



Cic. Tusc.



Exanclo, is also to vanquyshe.



Cicero de
amicitia.



Exardeo, si, dêre, to be vehemently inflamid.



Exardesco, scere, to waxe hotte, or to be ve­
hement.



Plautus in
Mili.



Exarco, rêre, to be drye.



Exaugeo, gêre, to increase moche.



Plautus in
Capt.



Exauspicaui ex vinculis, I haue had yll lucke
sens I came out of prison.



Excalceo, ceaui, are, to pull of hosen or shoes



Excalfacio, cere, to make very hotte.



Terent. in
Andria.



Excessit ex ephebis, he passed boyes age.



Excedere pueris, idem.



Cice. pro
Archia.



Excedere officium, to do more than duetie.



Plinius in
Epistolis.



Excellens, excellent, surmountynge.



Excelsitas animi, the valyantnes or heighte
of courage.



Excidere formula, to lose his action.



Sueton. in
Claud.



Excidit numero ciuium, he is not of the num­
ber of citesyns.



Excidit animo, it is out of my mynde.



Excido, cidi, cidere, to distroy. also to cut out
of a quarrye of stone.



Excipere, to take vnwares or sodaynly.



Excipere furem, to receyue a felone, as an
accessarye.
Plinius in
Aulul.


Excogito, tare, to fynd or inuent by thinking.



Excogitatio, inuention.



Excoquo, quere, to boyle a thynge vntylle
it be drye.



Excrucio, are, to tourment.



plautus in
cistell.



Excruciabilis, le, worthy to be tourmented.



Excubo, bare, to kepe watche.



Exculco, care, to treade out, or wryng out.



Exculpo, psi, pere, to graue or intayle yma­
ges, also to get any thing by hering of one.



Exculpere oculum, to thruste out ones eie.



Terentius
in phormi.



Excurio, are, to put out of company.



Varro.



Excuro, rare, to dresse a thynge curiously.



Excuratus uictus, meate curiously dressed.



Plautus in
Pseud.



Excuratus homo, a galyarde felowe.



Plautus in
Casina



Excurro, rere, to runne out of a place.



Excursus, sus, where one passeth his boundes



Plautus in
Mostel.



Excursor, a currour.



Excusabilis le, that whiche may be excused.



Excusatius, more excused.



Plinius.



Excutere aliquem, to robbe one, to shake oone
out of his clothes.



Excutiunt cerebrum tua dicta, thy wordes do
trouble my brayne.



Excutere iugum, to shake of the yoke.



Excutere lachrymas alicui, to make the tea­
res come out of ones eyes.



Excutere uomitum, to make one to spue.



Excussi grandin&ecedil;, beaten with hayle stones.



pli. in epi.



Excutere, is also to chese. Iuuentutem ex to­
ta Asia excussimus, We haue chosen oute all
the yonge men that are in Asia.
Ci. in phil.


Execror, idem quod execro.



Exegeticon, idem quod expositiuum, uel enar­
ratiuum, by the whyche oone expoundeth
or declareth a thynge.



Exit in fabulam, it is made a tale.



Exequi mortem, to dye.



Plautus in
pseudolo.



Exequi sermonem, to speake.



Exercere ætatem, to lyue.



plautus in
Trinum.



Exercere Bacchanal, to be drunke.



plautus in
Milite.



Exercitatus, exercysed.



Exerere uincula, to stryke of his gyues, or
to take out of prison.



Exfodio, dere, to dygge out.






Exgurgito, tare, to take or caste out of the
chanell or streame.



Exh&ecedil;redatus, disinherited.



Exh&ecedil;resimus dies, the daye whiche maketh
the leape yere.



Exhaurire labores, to spende labour.



Exhebenum, a stone wherwith goldsmyths
do polyshe golde



Exhibere rationes, to make accompt.



Exhibere spectaculum, to make commune
playes or triumph.



Exhillaro, rare, to comforte or reioyce.



Plautus.



Exigere ætatem, to lyue.



Pli. in epi.



Exigere tempus, to passe forth the tyme.



plautus in
Mercator.



Exigi matrimonio, to be deuorced.



Exigere supplicium ab aliquo, to punish one.



plin. de vi­
ris illust.



Exigere nomina, to compell menne to paye
their dettes.
Ci. in Ver.


Cic. in ora­
tore.



Exacta ætate, at the last ende of age.



Exacto mense, the moneth passed.



Exiguus, a, um, lyttell.



Exilica causa, a matter agaynst them, whych
were in exile.



Exigue, an Aduerbe, whiche signifieth ve­
rye lyttell.



Columel.



Exilis, le, sclender, smalle.



Eximie, excellently.



Eximius, a, um, excellent.



Ci. in Ver.



Eximere ex reis, to acquite one of an offence



Cicero de
oratore.



Eximere ex ærariis, where one hath his Qui­
etus est in the escheker, or other like place,
to discharge one vpon his account.



Tit. Li. 8.



Eximere noxæ, to release one of a trespasse
commytted.



Eximere actionem, to barre one of his action.



Vlpia. titu­
lo Ex qui­
bus causis.



Exinde, idem quod exin, afterwarde, from
thenseforthe.



Exloquor, qui, to speake as it is, to speke all.



Plautus in
milite.



Exobsecro, crare, to make great desyre.



Exoculatus, whose eyes be put out.



Exoculo, lare, to put out ones eies.



Plautus in
Ruden.



Exoculasso, sere, idem.



Exodia, were also wanton toyes myxte with
verses in a comedy or interlude.



Exonero, rare, to discharge or vnburdeyn.



Exopto, tare, to desyre feruently, or wysshe.



Plautus in
Epidico.



Exorbeo, bui, bere, to sucke vp.



Exorbo, bare, to make oone that he canne
nat see.
Ci. in phi.


Plautus in
Bacch.



Exorare ueniam, to aske pardon.



Exorabilis, he that is easye to be intreated
in a matter.



pli. in epi.



Expalleo, lui, lere, to be pale.



Plautus in
casin.



Expallio, aui, are, to rob one of his garmentis.



Expectatus, ta, tum, desyred.



Donatus.



Expectati parentes, were yll parentes, and
worthye to be hated, as who saythe, their
death were dayly to be desyred.
Terent. in
Adelphis.


Donatus.



Expectatio, desyre of thynges certayn and
loked for.



Terentius
in phorm.



Expedire se cura, to discharge hym of care.



Expedire rationes, to dispatche matters.



Expedi, telle on quyckely.



Terentius
in Eunuch.



Expedire rem, to declare the matter plainly.



Expeditum erat, it was expedient.



Idem in pho.



Expedibo, for expediam.



pli. in epi.



Expeditus, dispatched.



Plautus in
Truculen.



Expendere scelus, to be punyshed iustly for
his offence.



Expendere, is also to examyn and to consider



Vergilius.
æneid.2.



Expensum, uel expensam, hath also an other
propre signification. Mentio facta est de le­
gione ea, quan expensam tulit C. Cæsari  Pom­
peius.  Mencion was made of the legyon,
whiche Pompeye reckened to be atte the
charge of Cesar. Creditores suæ negligen­
ti&ecedil; expensum ferre debent, The creditours
ought to beare the losse, whiche is hapned
by their neglygence.
Cælius Ci. Sceuola.
qu&ecedil; in frau­
dem. L. pu­
pillus.


Experge te, awake.



Cicero



Expergere facias, idem.



Expergitus, wakened by an nother.



Festus.



Expetunt multa iniqua, many vnhappy thin­
ges chaunceth.
Plautus in
Amphitri.


Expetit tuam &ecedil;tatem illud facere, thyne age
requyreth to do it.
plautus in
p&ecedil;nulo.


Expetere, is also to pourchace. Mirum quin
tuum ius meo periculo expetam, It is mer­
uayle but that I shall pourchase thy ryghte
with my great danger. It is also to redounde
or tourne. Nam deum non par uidetur facere,
delictum suum, suamque culpam expetere in mor­
talem ut finat, It is nat fyttynge for god to
doo, that his offence and faute, shoulde re­
dounde to a mortall person.
Plautus in
Ruden.Plautus in
Amphit.


Expetendus, da, dum, worthy to be desyred.



Plaut. in
persa.



Expetesso, sere, to demaunde.



Expetisso, sere, to desyre vehemently.



Plautus in
Trinummo.



Expilator, a robber, which leaueth nothing
behynde hym.



Asconius.
Ci. in Ver.



Expiare scelera. Tua scelera dis immortales
in nostros milites expiauerunt, God hathe
punysshed oure menne of armes for thyne
offences.
Cicero in
pisonem.


Expiamentum, satisfaction.



Columell.



Explanto tare, to pull vp that whiche is set.



Sueton. in
Tito.



Explendesco, scere, to appere clerely.



Exple animum curis, put all care oute of thy
mynde.
Te. in Hec.


Explicare, is also to telle or shewe a thynge
playnely.
Plautus in
Epidic.


Explica æstum meum, put me out of this fan­
tasy or doubte.
Cicero in
pisonem.


pli. in epi.



Exploratum est mihi, I know surely, I am sure



Cic. de se­
nectute.



Exploratum habeo, idem.



Exporto, tare, to beare or carie out.



Idem de a­
micitia.



Expresse dicere, to speake properly and to
the poynte.



Plinius in
Epistolis.






Exprobratio, a reproche.



Terent. in
Andri.



Exprompta memoria, a redy wytte.



Expuere miseriam ex animo, to put myserye
clene out from the mynde, to forget misery.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Expurgo, are, to make all cleane.



Plautus in
milite.



Expurgare se, to declare hym selfe innocent
of that whiche is layde vnto hym.



Expurgationem habere, idem.



Columell.
planc. Cic.6



Exputare, is also to cut cleane awaye: also to
coniecte.



Plautus in
curcu.



Exputresco, scere, to rotte.



Exquisitus, ta, tum, exquysyte, moche ser­
ched for.



Exquisito opus est, it must be loked for.



Exquisite et exquisitim, exquisitely, with mo­
che study and diligence.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Extendere, is also to continue, to prolonge.



Extentare uires, to thrust out strength in do­
inge a thynge.
pli. in pan.


Plautus in
Bacch.



Extergeo, tersi, tergere, to wype cleane.



Extergo, idem.



Exterus, tera, terum, that whyche is not of
this countrey or place.



Extimeo, mêre, to haue great feare.



Extirpo pare, to plucke vp by the rootes.



Extollere, is also to lyfte vp.



Plautus in
Mostel.



Extollere liberos, to brynge vp chyldren: al­
do to prolonge: also to magnify.



Extortus, constrayned by tourmentes.



Plautus in
pænulo.



Extra precium, aboue any pryce.



Extra, excepte.



Plautus &
Cicero



Extra iocum, in erneste.



Ci. Treba.



Extraneus h&ecedil;res, he that is not the very heire



Sueton. in
Claud.



Extraho, traxi, trahere, to drawe out.



Extrahere diem, to put of a matter from day
to day.
Cæsar.


Ti. Liuius.



Extrahere certamen, to deferre battayle.



Paulus iu­
recon. ad ex­
hiben.



Extrahere iudicium, to deferre iugement.



Exuerr&ecedil;, the swepynges of a house.



plautus in
pænulo.



Exuerto, tere, to preuente.



Ex uinculis causam dicere, to plede in warde.



Exungo, xi, gere, to anoynte.



Plautus



Exungulo, are, to cut of ones nayles.



Exuere, is also to depryue.



Vergilius.



Exue mentem, put away that mynde.



Exurgo, gere, to aryse vp.


 


F ANTE A.

F##sp##A##sp##C##sp##E##sp##T##sp##E, meryly.



Facere aucupium auribus, 
to herken as a spye.
plautus in
Milite.


Plautus in
capt.



Facere carnificinam, to ex­
ecute the offyce of an
hangeman, in hanging,
behedynge, or quarte­
rynge of men.



Cic. Cato.



Facere castra, to set a campe.



Facere certiorem, to ascertayne, or aduer­
tise one by letters or messager.



Facere compendium, to make short, to abrege.



Plautus.



Facere compotem, to gyue to one, that thing,
whiche he desyreth.



Facere coniecturam, to coniecte or deeme.



Facere contumeliam, to do displeasure.



Plautus in
Asina.



Facere copiam argenti, to lende money.



Facere copiam alicuius, to let hym take his
pleasure of one.
Terent. in
phorm.


Facere delitias, to speake for pleasure, or in
mockage.
Plautus in
pænulo.


Fac esse, admyt that it be soo, or put the case
it be soo.
Cicero in
philip.


Facere fidem, to make one to beleue.



Facere frugem, to brynge gaynes.



Plautus in
pænulo.



Facere funus, to minister funeralles.



Facere gradum, to walke or go a iournay.



Cicer. pro
cluen.



Facere gratiam, to gyue thanke.



Facere gratum, to do pleasure to one. or to
wynne a mans fauour.
Plautus in
curcul.


Terentius
in Eunuch.



Facere grauidam, to geate with chylde.



Facere iacturam, to haue a great losse.



Plautus in
Amphitri.



Facere inditium, to tell or to gyue warnynge
of a thynge that he knoweth.



Facere ingenium suum, to do accordynge to
his wyt or nature.
Plautus in
Mercator.


Facere insidias, to lye in a wayte to do harme
to oone.



plautus in
pænulo.



Facere ludos, to mocke or skorne.



Terentius
in phorm.



Facere magni, to esteme moche.



Facere nequiter, to do shrewdely.



Facere ocium, to gyue to one leysure.



Plaut. in
Mili.



Facere palam, to tell a thynge abrode.



Facere periculum, to proue, to assaye.



Facere pluris, to set more by.



Facere propitium, to make hym thyne or his
good lorde or mayster.



Facere qu&ecedil;stum, to gayne.



Facere reducem, to brynge one agayne.



Plautus in
capt.



Facere rem, to get profite or gayne by a thing.



Facere reum, to accuse or sue one in a crimi­
nall cause.
Terent. in
Adelphis.


Facere risum, to laughe.



Quintilia.



Facere scelus, to do a myscheuous deede.



Facere sementem, to sowe grayne.



Cicero de
oratore.



Facere stipendia, to be in wages in the warres



Facere superbum, to sle one.



plin. de vi­
ris illustr.



Facere technam, to playe a craftye pageant.



Facere transacta omnia, to brynge all thyn­
ges to a poynte.
Plautus in
Amphit.


Facere turbas, to make busynesse.



Non. Mar.



Facere uadimonium, to lay in gage or suerte.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Facere uerba aut uerbum, to speake.



Terent. in
And.



Facere uindemian, to gather grapes to make
wyne.



Plautus in
Epidico.



Facere uitium, to fall in decaye.



Ci. in Top



Facere uoluptatem, to satisfye myn thyn or
his pleasure or appetite. also to delyte with




pleasure.
plautus in
Trucu.


Fagineus, et Faginus, a, um, of beche.



Vergili.9.



Falurica, were waypons, which were thro­
wen out of toures.



Falce, falsely.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Falcimonia, deceyptes.



Falsus, a, um, false.



Famam dissipare, to sowe a brute or noyse
in the people.



Famigero, to diuulgate or publishe a thyng.



Varro.



Farrago, ginis, dyuers grayne & pulse corne
myngled for prouander, called in Cam­
bryge shyre, bolymonge. it is sometyme
vsed for a myxture of any other thynge.



Iuuenalis.



Fatuus, a, um, vnsauery, without any maner
of taste.



Fauoniana, peares whiche are redde.

 

F, ANTE E.

FElicones, men whiche are necessary for
no thynge.



plautus in
capt.



Feriæ esuriales, fastynge dayes.



Ferinus, ferina, ferinum, pertaynynge to wylde
beastes.



Ferre conditionem, to proffer, to put to the
choyse, to offer a condition.



Plautus in
mercat.



Ferre gradum, to go forthe.



Ferre grauiter, to take a thinge greuousely.



Fer manum, gyue me thy hande.



Plautus in
Truculen.



Fer me, supporte me, helpe me.



Ferre moleste, to take a thyng displesantly.



Terent. in
Heauto.



Ferre osculum, to kysse.



Ferre sententiam, to shewe his opinion.



Ferre suppetias, to succour.



Festra, a lyttell wycket.



F, ANTE I.

FIctus, ta, tum, made to the similitude of
a thynge.



Fidem deferere, to breake promyse.



Ci. in phil.



Finge animo, suppose or put the case.



Cicero de
senectute.



Fit, it happeneth.



Terent. in
And.



Firmare fidem, to perfourme promyse. also
to accorde to a thynge.



Te. in Hec.



Firme, stedfastly.



Firmiter, idem.

 

F, ANTE L.

FLagrare inopia, to be in great pouertie.



Flamanca, a tree burned with lightning



Flamearius, a dyer of yelowes.



Flameum, a veyle or typ pette of yelowe,
whyche women dydde weare, whan they
were newe maryed.



Flammigena, commen of fyre.



Festus.



Flegmen, is where with moche goynge the
bloudde issueth out of the toes.



Flexipes, pedis, he that hathe crooked fete.



Flustrum, the fulle tyde in the see, or other
water, whyche ebbeth and flowyth.

 

F ANTE O.

FOenusculum, a bottell of hey.



Forago, a skayne of yerne.



Forma stata, a meane beaultie or sta­
ture.



Fors, Fortune.



Fors fuat, god sende the good fortune, god
speede the well.
Terent. in
Hecyra.


Fors fortuna, good chaunce.



Donatus.



Forsitan, & forsan, peraduenture.



Fors, is sometyme vsed for Forsitan, per­
aduenture.



Forte fortuna, by good aduenture.



Fortesco, scere, to waxe or be stronge.



Neuius.



Fortiter, puyssantly, valyantly.



Fortunæ, goodes, good fortune, aduance­
mente.



Forensia, Iudges robes, or the habytes
the whyche are worne in the places of
Iudgemente.
Sueton. in
Augusto.


Fouere in pectore, to thynke pryuyly.

 


Plautus in
Bacch.


F ANTE R.

FRacecre, to be resolued, putryfyed,
or rotten.



Fraces, lyes of oyle.



Frænos inijcere alicui, to lette oone of his
pleasure, to brydell hym that wolde nat
be rulyd.



Fract&ecedil; res, thynges spent or loste.



Fracti bello, werye of warres.



Fractus, ta, tum, broken.



Fragilis, le, frayle, broukle.



Fragilitas, frayiltie or brouklenes.



Fratricida, he that hath slayne his brother.



Fratrueles, brothers chylderne, cousyne
germaynes.



Frequentissimæ ædes, a house moche han­
ted with people.



Frequens adest, he commeth often.



Frontem explicare, to loke meryly.



Terentius



Frontem exporgere, idem.



Plinius.



Frontem contrahere, to loke sowerly.



Fronte exporrecta, with a merye coun­
tenaunce.



Frugaliter, temperately, soberly, withoute
excesse or ryotte.
Plautus in
Epidico.


Fruiscor, sci, for fruor.



Cato.



Frui ingenio suo, to doo as he wyll.



Terent. in
Heautont.



Frustra es, Thou arte deceyued or abused.



Plautus in
Bacch.



Frustra habere aliquem, to abuse or de­
ceyue oone.



Plautus in
Amph






Columel.



Frustrari expensas, to loose his costes and
charges.



Frustratio, abusynge or deceyuynge of one

 

F, ANTE V.

FVat, for fit.



Fugere, is also to exchue.



Plautus in
Amphitri.



Fugit te ratio, thou vnderstandeste not
the matter.
Cicero.


Fugit me, I haue forgoten it.



Fugiens uinum, wyne that hath loste his
verdure.



Fugientes litere, blynde letters.



Fugitiuus, a, um, fugitiue, not abydynge.



Fugitiuarius, a, um, that gladly and quicke­
ly runneth awaye.



Plautus in
Trinummo.



Fulcimentum, a botreulx, or that wherwith
a thynge is sustayned.



Plautus in
Trinum.



Fulguritassunt, stryken with lyghtnynge.



Fulguritum, striken or blasted with lyghte­
nynge.



plautus.



Fullonica, fullars crafte.



Martialis.



Fumos uendere, is the practise of them, whi­
che beinge nygh about a prynce, or in his
fauour, do beare men in hande, that they
speake for them to the prynce, where they
speake neuer a worde: and cause menne
therby to lyue in fooles paradyse.
Lampridius
in vita Al.


Plautus in
Bacch.



Funditus me perdidisti, thou hast vtterly vn­
done me.



Funditus perii, I am vtterly vndone.



Fundere exercitum, to dyscomfite an armye.



Fundus, is somtyme taken for a foundation.
also for the chiefe authour of a thynge.



Fungi officio suo, to do his deuour.



Funginus, a, um, of a mousheron.



Plautus in
Asina.



Funus facere, to cause one to dye.



Futio, tis, tere, to poure out, or runne out.



Futis, a vessel, wherwith water was poured
in to a lauer, to brynge water in to a par­
lour or soupynge chamber.





G, ANTE A.

G##sp##A##sp##B##sp##A, a towne in Galile



Gabalum, a towne in
Fraunce, nyghe to Nar­
bona, where there was
made very good chese.



Gabaon, a Cytie in the
holy lande nyghe to Ra­
ma, where Salomon
doing sacrifice, spake with god.



Gabaonit&ecedil;, men of that towne.



Gabba, a citie in Siria.



Gabriel, signifyeth the puissaunce or myght
of god.



Galatia, a countrey in the lasse Asia.



Galgulus, a byrde, whom if one do beholde
that hath the yelowe iaundise, furthwith
the man becommeth hole, and the byrde
hath the syckenesse.



Galilea, is a countray, whiche marcheth on
Siria, Arabia, and Egypt.
Plinius


Gallaria, a lampurne.



Pau. Iouius



Gallus, a, um, of Fraunce.



Gangarid&ecedil;, people betwene Assiria & Inde.



Columell.



Gangilium, a sickenesse in the hed of a beast,
wherwith the hed becometh ful of water.



Ganzæ, geese.



Garunna, a ryuer in Fraunce, called Gyrond.



Gastrimergia, gloteny.

 

G, ANTE E.

GEbuseus, the son of Canaan, of whom
the olde inhabitauntes of Hierusa­
lem were called Gebusei.



Gedeon, the name of a iudge in Israell.



Gedrosia, a countray in Asia.



Gemellariæ, an instrumente, by the whiche
oyle runneth out of the presse.



Gemmosus, sa, um, that whiche is all of pre­
ciouse stones.



Gemit cymba, the bote cracketh beynge o­
uercharged.
Vergilius.


Generositas, an aptnes to ingendre, to bring
forthe. somtyme it signifyeth nobilitie.
Colum. 3.


Genezareth, a great mere or ponde in the
lande of promission, and it is aldoo called
Mare Tiberiadis.



Genocha, a beaste lasse than a foxe, in color
a darke yelowe, full of blacke spottes: I
suppose it to be a blacke Ienet, the furre
wherof is in Englande estemed aboue all
other furres.



Genselia, whiche is compacte of many fami­
lies or kynredes.



Geodesia, is a science of thinges concerning
sensible greatnesse and fygure.



Gergonia, a towne in Guyen, standynge on
an hyghe hyll.



Gerere bellum, to make warre.



Pli. in pan.



Gerere honores, to be in honour or autorite.



Gerere morem, to obeye.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Gerere negotium, to do his busynesse.



Cicero de
amicitia.



Gerere pr&ecedil;turam, to be in the authirotye of
a iudge.



Plautus in
p&ecedil;nulo.



Gerere pudorem, to be shamefaste.



Gerere rempublicam, to mynistre the pub­
lyke weale.
Plautus in
Amphit.


Gerontocomion, an hospitall, wherin olde
men are kept, an almesehouse.



Gesta, thynges whiche haue benne doone,
actes.



Geth&ecedil;, people, whiche some suppose to be




those, whiche are in Norway and Gothia:
some say that they be more in the northeste
in Scithia parteynynge to Europa.

 

G, ANTE I.

GIbbosus, idem quod Gibber.



Githago, cokyll growynge amonge
corne whiche is rype.



Giruli, fysshes whiche I suppose to be me­
nowes.

 

G ANTE L.

GLomus, mi, et glomus glomeris, a botome
of threde.



Glucidatum, swete and delectable.

 

G ANTE N.

GNafalium, an herbe, which is also cal­
led Chamezelon, whose leaues are so
white & soft, that it semeth to be floxe



Gnafos, a tesyll, whiche towkars do vse in
rowynge of clothes.



Liuius.



Gnarauit, et Gnarauisse, for Narrauit et Nar­
rauisse.



Gnariter, for gnare, wyttily.



Gnauus, quicke, actiue, apt to euery thing.



Gnauiter, dyligently, lustily, valiantly.



Gnitur, et Gnixus, old wryters vsed for Gig­
nitur, et Nixus,



Gnoro, for Noro.



Gnosco, for Nosco.



Gnossos, a citie in Creta or Candy.



Gnosius, a, um, of that citie.

 

G ANTE O.

GOmor, is a measure of the hebrues,
and is the tenth part of Ephi, wher­
fore it conteyneth .vii. times the mea­
sure called Sextarium .iii. ounces, an halfe
ounce .ii. scruples, on halfe obolus, halfe
one siliqua, and the tenthe part of Siliqua



Gobio, idem quod Gobius a gogeon.



Gorgonius, a, um, parteyning to Gorgones



Gorthia, a countray beyond Norway, wher­
of the people are called Gotthi, whyche
destroyed the Empire of Rome, with the
more parte of Europa.

 

G ANTE R.

GRadus, a griece wherby a man goeth
vpwarde. Also a degree.



Liuius.



Gradu mouere, to cause one to steppe
backe.



Ci. Tus.2.



Gradu dimoueri, to beput out of estimation
or authoritie.
Ci. de off. I.


Gradu deiici, to be putte from a constaunte
purpose.



Gradus, honour.



Ci. in phi­
lipp.2.



Græca salix, red wyllowe.



Gr&ecedil;cisco, are, to folowe the grekes.



Græcia, the countray called greece.



Græcus, a greke.



Grandiusculus, a, um, a lyttell greatter.



Gratiam habere, to thanke.



Gratiam inire, to get thanke.



Gramma, idem quod scriptulum, uel scrupulum,
a scruple, the .xxiiii. parte of an ounce.



Gratiam referre, to requite one with a good
tourne or an yll.



Gratia tui, for thy sake.



Gratus, a thankefull man.



Gratitudo, dinis, kyndenesse.



Grate, kyndely.



Grauastellus, an auncient father.



Plautus.



Grauis nuntius, heuy tydynges.



Vergilius.



Graue pretium, an hyghe pryce.



Grauedinosus, a, um, heuy or vnlusty, dispo­
sed to do no thynge.



Grauicors, cordis, he that hath a gret hart.



Grauiloquus, he that speaketh grauely and
seriousely.



Gremium, is the space betwene the twoo
thighes, specially of a woman.



Gruina, herbe roberte.

 

G, ANTE V.

GVesselli, beastes lyke to myse, which
haue their dunge as swete as muske



Guberno, nare, to gouerne.



Plinius in
Epistolis.



Gubernator, a mayster of a shyp. also a go­
uernour of a countray.



Ci. in phil.



Gubernacula nauis, the Instrumentes, wher­
by the shyp is ruled.


 


H, ANTE A.

HAbet eum arcte, he ke­
peth hym short or from
lybertie.
Plautus in
Mercator.


Hbere contionem, to
preache, to declare a
thynge to the people.



Habere rationem cum terra, 
to labour the erthe.



Habitus, ta, tum, had.



Habraham, is interpreted father of manye
dyuerse people.



Hadria, beinge the masculyne gendre, is ta­
ken for the gulf of Venice, or the see ther.
beynge the femynine gendre, it is a towne
by Ferrare.



Hadrianus, a noble emperoure, whiche in al
sciences was excellntly lerned.



Hadriaticum mare, the see, which is betwen
the northe parte of Italy and Illiria, or
Slauony.






Terent. in
Eunucho.



Hac, hense. somtyme by this place.



Hac non successit, it came not well to passe
this way.
Idem in Ad.


H&ecedil;budes, are Iles beyonde Scotlande two
dayes saylynge, wherof be fyue.



Herba, an herbe.



Herbaceus, a, um, that is of herbes.



Herbarius, he that knoweth herbes, & their
vertues.



Herbarius, a, um, of herbes.



Herbesco, scere, to be an herbe.



Herbidus, et Herbosus, a, um, hauynge ma­
ny herbes.



Hagiographa, holy scripture.



Hagiographus, a wryter of holy scripture.



Hallux, the greatte toe, whyche lyeth ouer
the nexte toe.



Halyetus, a faulcon.



Hanus barbatus, a lyttell pot with a greate
bely, wherin wyne and water were wonte
to be brought to the table.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Haud innito, wyllyngly.



Vergili.



Haud nihil, some thynge.



Vergilius.



Hausit cœlum, he sawe heuen.



Cicer. pro
M. Cælio.



Hausit corda pauor, feare made theyr cou­
rages faynt.



Haurire dolorem, to endure heuines or sorow



Augustinus.



Hauritorium, any thynge wherby water is
drawen out of a welle.

 

H ANTE E.

HEana, a foundation.



Hebetesco seu hebetasco, scere, belon­
geth proprely to the eyes, to be dulle
in syght.



Hebr&ecedil;i, Iewes.



Hecatontarchus, the Capytayne of a hun­
dred menne.



Hecta, vel heta, a tryfle.



Hemina, is a measure, whiche is halfe asmo­
che as Sextarius, that is to say, conteyneth
x. ounces, and is also callyd Dextans, in the
pounde of measure.



Hedui, people in Fraunce, nowe callydde
Burgonyons.
Vid. Cæsa.


Helciarius, he that draweth a bote agaynste
the streame.



Helicon, a mountayne in Bœotia.



Heliopolis, a citie in Egypte.



Helleborum edere, is a prouerbe spoken to
men, whyche are very melancholye, or be
wylde brayned.



Heluella, smalle herbes or wortes.



Helxine, an herbe called pelitory.



Hemionitis, siue hemonion, an herbe why­
che we commonly call hartes tunge.



Hemicadia, vesselles callyd a tierce, halfe a
hoggesheed.



Heo, an interiection, Howe.



Heptaphillon, an herbe called tormentill.



Hercle, a worde vsed to ornate a sentence
by affyrmation.



Here, for heri, yesterday.



Herinatius, an hedgehogge.



Hermathena, was two ymages to gether of
Mercury and Mynerua. 



Heros, herois, an halfe god, or he whiche
for the loue of vertue susteyneth great la­
bours and peryl.



Hera, the lady, the maystres, the dame.



Herilis, le, perteinyng to the lord or master.



Hexaplum, vel hexapla, an example.



Hexasticum, syxe verses together.



Hexapeda, a measure called a fathom.

 

H, ANTE I.

HIbisous, wylde malowes.



Terent. in
And.



Hic, Tu si hic fis, aliter sentias, if thou
were I, or as I am, thou woldeste
thynke other wise.



Hieratica, fyne paper.



Hin, a measure of the Hebrues, which con­
teyneth .xii. tymes the measure callyd Sex­
tarius, rede more in Sextarius. 



Hinnus, hinna, & hinnulus, hinnula, a mule
engendred betwene an asse and a mare.



Terent. in
Adelph.



Hinc, an aduerbe sygnyfienge from thense.



Hinc illinc venit, He commeth I knowe nat
frome whens.
Idem in Eun.


Hinc loci mei, from my countray, or towne
that I cam fro.



Idem in and.



Hinc, for that cause. Hinc ill&ecedil; lachrim&ecedil;, For
that cause were the teares, or that was the
matter wherfore he wepte.



Hiant flores, the floures doo spreade.



Vergili.6.



Hiare, to wonder or meruayle.



Hippagogius, an instrumente, wherewith
stones are polyshed.



Hipparchus, captayne of the horsemen.



Hippei, cometes or blasyng sterres, hauing
manes lyke horses.



Hippiades, images of women on horsback, as
the women of Amazon were alway paynted.



Hippias, was a philosopher in Gretia, whi­
che aduauntid hym selfe to knowe al scien­
ces and artes: for in eloquence he was ex­
cellent, meruaylouse in poetry, also in mu­
syke, and made the instrumentes, whereon
he played, and al the garmentes that he did
weare, and the rynge on his fyngar, which
was wonderfully well grauen, andwrought
his gyrdell with nedell worke incompara­
bly, and in philosophy dysputed with al men.



Hippobotos, a feder of horses.



Hippolapathum, an herbe, whiche some doo
suppose to be pacience.



Hypericon, an herb callid saint Johns wort.



Hydropiper, semeth to be the herbe whiche
the potecaries do commonly cal Eupatory.



Histria, [explanation is missing]






H ANTE O.

HOdiernus, na, um, of this day.



Homonymon, where manye thynges
haue one name, but dyuers in effect:
As a man, which is alyue, or paynted, de­
uided by this addicion, a very man, a payn­
ted man.



Honorificentissime, in a very honorable forme
or maner, very honorably.
Cicero.


Honorem prefari, is where one shal speke of
any thynge, that is not honest, than to say,
Sauynge your reuerence.



Hora, is somtime taken for a day: also for time



Hordeaceus, a, um, of barly.


Plinius.



Hordearij, they whiche do lyue with eating
barley.



Horiola, a lyttell fyshers bote.



Horno, an aduerbe sygnifienge this yere.



Horrent agri, the fyldes are vnpleasaunt and
vnfrutefull.



Horti pensiles, gardeynes made on the top­
pes of houses, or vpon pylars.



Hortensis, se, perteynynge to a gardeyne, or
of a gardayne.



Hospitium, a house alwaye redy to receyue
frendes. Sometyme a lodgynge, also an
hospytall. somtyme frendeshyppe shewed
in hospitalitye.

 

H, ANTE Y.

HYades, the seuen sterres.



Hydragogus, he that bryngeth water
to a place by furrowes or trenches.



Hydrargyrum, a certayne thynge, wherwith
syluer is gilt in the stede of quicke syluer.



Hypenium ouum, an egge whiche hath ney­
ther whyte nor yelke.



Hypotheca, a pledge. also a doctryne.



Hypothesis, an argument, matter, or cause,
whervpon one shuld argue, dispute, or speke.



Hycca, a greate fysshe, whiche Hermolaus
Barbarus taketh for a Sturgeon.



 

I, ANTE A.

IA, was the yonger sonne
of Atlus, and sounethe
as moche as a voyse.


Pli. in epi.



Iacet grauiter, he lyethe
sycke.
Cicero de
amicitia.


Iacens animus, a despe­
rate mynde.


Quintil.9.



Iacet oratio, the oration
is without any grace or spirite.


Cicer. pro
Roscio.



Iacent pretia, they are of a lowe pryce.

Cicero.



Iacent, they are without vertue, courage, or
estimation.



Iacêre, to extende out or be of length.



Iacio, ieci, iacere, to caste or throwe.



Iacere fundamentum, to set or lay a foundation.



Iacob, a patriarch, sonne of Isaac. 



Iam, is also incontinent or forthwith.



Iam ne imus? shall we not go nowe?

Terent. in
Eunucho.



Iatros, a phisition.

 

I, ANTE B.
¶ 

Ibidem, there, or in the same place.

 

I, ANTE D.

ID curat scilicet, he careth moch therfore,
whiche is spoken as who sayth, be ca­
reth nothynge for it.
Ter. in An.


Id locorum, for Id.

plau. in ca.
& in pænu.



Id temporis, at that tyme, or suche a tyme.
Id temporis est: The tyme is suche.

Ci. de ora­
tor. & pro
Milone.



Idaspes, a ryuer runnynge by Parthia and
Inde: and at the laste falleth into the gret
ryuer called Indus: in this ryuer is found
moche golde and precious stones.



Idem, also signifyeth lyke or sembable.

Plautus in
Epidico.



Idipsum, the same thynge, or one thynge.



Idomeueus, the sonne of Deucalion and king
of Crete.
Ter. in an.
 

I, ANTE E.
¶ 

Iessen, a towne, where Ioseph met his fa­
ther Iacob, and brought hym into Egypt.

 

I, ANTE G.

IGnarius lapis, a fyre stone, or flynte, out
of the whiche fyre is beaten.

Affranius.



Ignauia, is also lacke of courage.



Ignauit, he made him a foole.



Ignauiter, with a fals harte, or cowardly.

 

I, ANTE L.

ILlabor, beris, labi, to throw hym selfe in­
to a thynge. Medieque minans illabitur urbi:
And thretnynge theym, he threwe hym
selfe into the citie.
Vergili.


Illaboratus, ta, tum, that whiche is made or
done without labour.



Illac, on that syde.



Illiusmodi, of that sorte.



Illepidus, without dilectation or grace.



Illiberalis, vngentyll, withoute kyndenesse
or courtesy.



Illiberale facinus, an vncurteyse pageaunt.

Te. in Ad.



Illinc, from that place.



Illiteratus, vnlerned.



Illo, to the place.

plautus in
capt.



Illotis manibus rem aggredi, to go aboute a
great thynge without reuerence, or disho­




nestely to treate a thynge of greate esty­
mation.

Gellius.



Illotis pedibus, fere idem, also without shame

Macrobi.



Illuc, in that place or there.



Illutibilis, that whiche can not be wasshed
awaye.

 

I, ANTE M.

IMaginosus, sa, um, full of images.



Immemor, forgetfull, he that dothe not
remembre.



Immemorabilis, le, vnworthy remembrance.

Plautus in
Capt.



Immensus, a, um, of suche greatenesse, that
it can not be measured.

Suetonius



Immerens, he that hath not deserued.

Plautus in
Asina.



Immerito meo, without my deserte.



Immerito, an aduerbe, without deseruinge.



Immergo, mersi, gere, to drowne, or to plonge
a thynge in the water.

Cicer. pro
cluen.



Immersit se in alicuius consuetudinem, He
brought hym selfe into deepe acquaintance
with one.
Plautus in
Menech.


Immersit se in ganeum, he is goten into a ta­
uerne: or he hath thraste hym selfe in to a
tauerne or ale house.



Immigro, to go to dwell in a place.

Plautus in
Mostel.



Immigraui in ingenium meum, I came to mine
owne rule, or to be ruled by min owne wit.



Imminere, signifyeth also, to be nygh. Mors
propter incertos casus quotidie imminet,
Dethe, by vncertayne chaunces, is euery
daye nyghe.

Cicero in
philip.



Imminent in fortunas nostras, they be at hand
and redy to robbe vs of our goodes.

Ouidius



Imminet exitio alterius, he is redy to sle one.

Ci. in Ver.
Act. 4



Imminens, that whiche is at hande.



Imminens ingenium, a runnynge wytte.



Imminuere caput alteri, to breke ones hed.

Plautus in
Mostel.



Imminuere pudicitiam virginis, to defloure a
mayden.



Imminuere maiestatem, to commyt treason.



Immisceo, scui, scere, to mengle to gether.



Immisericorditer, without pitie.

Terent. in
Adelphis.



Immitis, te, cruell, without pitie.



Immitia poma, apples whyche are not yet
rype.
Plinius


Immobilis, le, vnmoueable.

Plautus in
pœnu.



Immodestus, ta, tum, without temperaunce.



Immodeste, out of measure: also to moche.



Immodicus, ca, cum, great or moche.

Martialis.



Immodici, many.



Immodice, to moche.



Immola, a citie in Italy, whiche was some­
tyme called Forum Cornelii.



Immortalitas, a perpetuall lyfe.



Immortalis, le, vnmortall, that lyueth euer.



Immoror, rari, to abyde or contynue in a
thynge.



Immustulus, a lyttell byrde, I suppose it be a
wrenne.



Immuto, tare, to chaunge one thynge for a
nother.

Plautus in
Epidico.



Immutabilis, le, vnchaungeable.

Ibidem.



Impancro, crare, to inuade, or go into a place



Impar, not equall, not sufficient.



Imparens, disobedient.



Imparatus, vnredy, vnpuruayed.

Festus.



Impatibilis, le, that whiche can not suffre or
susteyne.
Plautus in
Amphitri.


Impauidus, he that feareth not.



Impendent mala, myschiefe is nyghe.

Cic. planc.



Imperium exequi, to do that is commanded.



Imperare cupiditatibus, to rule desyres or ap­
petytes.



Impertio, tiui, tire, et Impertior, tiris, perti, to
partycipate with one, to giue parte of that
whiche he hath.



Impertire salute, to salute



Impertitur, parte is gyuen.

Terent. in
Eunucho.



Impesco, scere, to putte a beaste in to a good
pasture to feede.
Festus.


Impigre, diligently, without slouthe.



Impio, are, to defile, to stayne him selfe with
a dishonest or foule dede, specially agaynst
god or his parentes.



Implere, somtyme signifyeth to accomplishe
or put in execution.

Sueton.
plinius.



Impluo, ere, to rayne in.

Columell.



Implutus, wet in the rayne.

Non. Mar.



Impluiatus, ta, tum, coloured as it were wet
in the rayne.
plautus in
Epidic.


Imponere legem, to set a lawe on a thynge,



Imponere alicui, to deceyue one.



Importuosus, a, um, without porte or hauen.



Improbus ali&ecedil; rei, good for non other thing.



Improba merx, ill marchaundise.

plautus in
Milite.



Improbi postes, rotten postes, or decayed,
or feble.
Ibidem.
Moste.



Improbe, an aduerbe signifyenge il, nawgh­
tyly, vnhappely.



Improlis, vel Improlus, he whiche is not yet
a cytezen.



Improuidus, he that prouydethe not for the
tyme commynge.



Improuidus, da, dum, that whiche commeth
sodaynely and vnloked for.



Improuisus, a, um, idem.



Improuise, vnthought on, or vnloked for.



Imprudens narum rerum, not knowynge of
those matters.



Imprudentia, lacke of foresyght, that it was
not thought on.



Imprudenter, vnwysely, vnaduysedly.



Imputare, is also to reken one thynge with
a nother, or to accompte one somme with
a nother.
Vlp. Caius





I, ANTE N.
Ci. in Ver.



IN annum, for a yere.

Cicero de
amicitia.



In bonis, amonge good men.



In cœnam, for supper.

Terent. in
Andri.



In conspectum aspice, loke before the.



In diem uiuere, to lyue without carynge for
to morowe.
Plautus in
persa.
Quintilia.



In numerato habere, redy, or at hande.

Plautus in
Asin.



In partem, for thy parte. Age sis, tu in partem
nunc iam hunc delude, atque amplexare hanc:
Goo to nowe for thy parte, deceyue hym
hardely, and take her vnto the.

Cicero.



In pedem, for euery foote. Is se ternis num­
mis in pedem tecum transegisse dicebat: He
sayde, that he bargayned with the for thre
pence a fote, or for euery fote.

Cicer. pro
lege Ma.



In potestatem esse, vnder the rule, or at the
pleasure of one.



In pr&ecedil;sentia, at this present tyme.



In primis, aboue all other thynges.



In procliui, that maye be lyghtely or easyly
done.



In promptu est, it is easy to knowe, it is ap­
paraunte.

Plautus in
pseud.



Inanis accedit, he commeth withoute bryn­
gynge any thynge with hym.

Festus.



Inciens, a woman nygh her tyme to trauaile
of chylde.



Inclareo, uel inclaresco, ere, to be knowen of
all men.



Inconsulte, without counsaile, or vnaduisedly



Incontinens, he that is not chaste, or kepeth
hym not to one woman.



Incoquo, xi, coquere, to seethe or boyle in a
thynge.



Incoctus, ta, tum, vnboyled or rawe.

Festus.



Incoct&ecedil; mulieres, women whiche do trymme
theyr heares to moche.



Incoctile, a brasyn or copper vessell, tynned
within.



In consilio adesse, to be of counsayle in a ma­
ter in lawe. Me quoque Petilius, vt sibi con­
silio adessem, rogauit: Petilius alsoo desy­
red me, that I wolde be of counsayle.
Cic act. 4.
in Verrem
Plautus in
cistell.



Incordio, aui, are, to put into a mans harte,
to perswade hym.



Incubo, bonis, they that set al theyr study on
treasure.

Plautus in
Aulular.



Incumbere, to be inclyned to some thynge.



Incumbere gladium, to thryst hym selfe on a
sworde.
Ibidem.


Indecens, vnsyttynge, vnconuenient.



Indecoris, re, idem quod Indecor.



Indecore, an aduerbe, sygnifyeng vnhonest­
ly, vnconueniently.



Indico, dixi, dicere, to denounce properlye
warre.



Indicere consilium, to call or commaunde a
counsayle.



Indicere iustitium, to commaunde a vacation
or as we do say, to kepe no terme.



Indicere pecuniam populo, to sette a taxe or
subsydie on the people.



Induere postes pice, to laye on pytche on the
postes.
plautus in
mostel.


Induere personam alterius, to speake in the
name or stede of a nother man.
Quintilia.


Induere personam iudicis, to represente a
iudge.



Industrie, wyttyly.



Inire rationem, to fynde the meane.



Inire, to leape, as a horse lepeth a mare.



Ineunte ætate, in youthe.



Ineunte uere, at the begynnyng of the spring
of the yere.



Inexhaustus, a, um, neuer ceasynge.



Inferre crimen alicui, to laye to ones charge.



Inferre sermonem, to talke.



Infectus, infected, stayned, dyed.



Infectum reddere, to vndoo that whiche is
doone.



Infecta pace, without any peace made.



Infector, a dyar of colours.



Infit, he sayde, he beganne.



Inflecto, tere, to bowe or plye.



Influo, xi, ere, to runne into a thynge, as wa­
ter or other lycour dothe.



Infuco, care, to coloure a thynge, intending
deceipte.



Infuscare uinum merum, to alaye wyne with
water.
Plautus in
cistell.


Ingeniculus, a fygure amonge the sterres.
called nowe Hercules. 



Ingenua facta, noble actes.



Ingens animus, of great courage.

Plautus in
milite.



Ingerere dicta in aliquem, to chyde with one,
to say ill of one.
Plautus in
Asina.


Ingerere malum, to do displeasure.



Ingerere pugnos, to strike with the fyste.



Ingratijs, maulgre one.

Plautus in
Amphit.&
in curcu.



Ingratus, ta, tum, vnthankfull, dyspleasaunt,
constrayned, or agaynste a mannes wyl. al­
so vnkynde, and not remembrynge frend­
shyppe, or beneuolence.
Terentius
in Eunuch.


Inguinium, a citie in Liguria, aunciente and
ryche.



Inhabilis, le, vnapt.



Inhabito, tare, to dwell in a place.

Plinius in
Epistolis.



Inhibere imperium, to haue charge or rule.

Plautus in
Sticho.



Inhibere supplicia alicui, to execute turmen­
tes on one, or to put one to dethe.

Ci. in phil.



Inhibere nauem, to caste ancre, or to staye a
shyppe, which is vnder sayle, that she saile
not a full course.

Terent. in
Eunucho.



Inhonestus, ta, tum, dishonesty.



Inhonoratus, ta, tum, lackynge honour.






Inhospes, he that wyl lodge no man.



Inhospita tecta, houses where no man maye
lodge.



Inhospitalis, le, vnapte for lodgynge.

Cicer. pro
Roicio.



Inhumo, are, to put into the grounde.



Inijcere manus in aliquem, to apprehende or
attache one.

Terentius
in phormi.



Inijcere scrupulum alicui, to put one in a fan­
tasye.

Sueton.



Inijcere studium alicui, to cause one to study.



Iniquo animo ferre, to be myscontented or so­
rowfull.



Inique, myscheuousely, or vniustly.

Plautus in
Truculen.



Iniuria tua, throughe thy defaulte.



Iniussu imperatoris, without the emperours
commaundement.
Cicero de
senectute.


Iniusta, ta, tum, vniuste. also excedynge iuste
measure.



Iniuste, vniustely.



Innascor, sci, to be ingendred in one.



Innatus, ta, tum, ingendred.



Innocens, vnharmefull, innocent.



Innocentia, integritie, true intente.

Pli. in epi.



Inoffensus, vnhurte.

Paulus.



Inofficiosum testamentum, where the father
by testament gyueth away from his sonne
his landes or goodes without cause.

Cicer. pro
domo sua.



Inops ab amicis, dyspouruayed of frendes.



Inops amicorum, idem.



Inopia, pouertie, lacke of thynges necessary



Inopinatus, vnthought on or vnloked for.

plin. in epi.
291.



In quantum, in as moche, or for as moche.



Inquam, I sayde.

Plautus in
Aulul.



Insanitas, madnesse.

Salusti. in



Insaciabilis, le, vnsaciable.



Inscendo, dere, to go vp, or to clyme.

Terent. in
Heauto.



Insciens, vnwyttinge. also not thynkynge on
that he doeth.

Cicer. pro
P. Sylla



Inscientia, ignoraunce.



Instaurare bellum, to make warre eftsones.

Tit. Li.4.



Institor, may also be called a factour whiche
byeth and selleth for a nother man.



Institoria actio, an action brought by the ma­
ster agaynste his factour, or by the factour
agaynste his master.



Instituere astutiam, to finde a craft to deceiue
oone.
plautus in
Epidic.


In integrum restituere, to restore a thynge to
as good poynte as it was in.
Terent. in
phorm.
Cicero in
philip



Integrum est, hit is at his pleasure or in his
power.



Integre, truely, and diligently.

Cicero de
oratore.



In integro esse, Sed quoniam h&ecedil;c iam neque in
integro esse possunt: But for as moche as
there is no remedy, or that these thynges
maye not be holpen, or maye not be in as
good poynte as they were.

Cic. de Se­
nectute.



Intemperans, he that doth euery thyng with­
out order or measure.



Intendere formulam, to brynge an action a­
gaynste one.

Suetonius
in Vitell.



Inter cœnam, for In cœna.

Sueton. in
Tyberio.



Inter nos amamus, we loue togyther oone
an nother.

Cic. ad Q.
fratrem.



Inter uias, by the waye rydynge or goinge.



Intercessor, he that letteth a matter, that it
may nat goo forwarde.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Interpellatio, a lette in a mans busynesse.



Interpellator, he that letteth oone that he
may nat speake or doo a thynge.



Intrarius amicus, a speciall frende.

plautus.



Intybum, seu Intybus, is the generalle name
to all kyndes of Cichorye or Succhorye
as commune Succhorie, Scariole, Endiue,
and Dendelyon.

 

I, ANTE S.

Ischiros, idem quod fortis, stronge.



Isatis, Ode, wherewith clothes are dyed
blewe.

 

I, ANTE T.

ITa me deus amet, Soo god loue me, or 
helpe me.
Plautus.
Terentius


Ita ut sit, as it happeneth. Dum rus eo,
cœpi egomet mecum inter uias, ita ut sit, ubi
quid in animo est molestiæ, aliam rem ex a­
lia cogitare, Whanne I wente downe into
the countraye, by the waye rydynge, as it
happeneth oftentimes, whan any displea­
sure commeth to my mynde, I bethought
me of one thynge and other.
Terent. in
Eunucho.


Ita ut erat, as it was in dede.



Ita ne? but is it so? or is it as thou sayste?
Also it sygnyfieth a note of dysdayne. Ita
ne contennor abs te? Settyst thou soo lyt­
telle by me?
Terent. in
Andria.


Itaque, wherfore than.



Itaque, and soo.



Item, euen as, also in lyke maner.



Iter facere, to goo a iourney.

 

I, ANTE V.

IVcunde, merilye, gladdely, pleasauntly,
dylectably.



Iucunditas, dilectation, pleasure.



Iuditio perfundere, to bryng one to the point
to be condempned.
Cicer. pro
Sex. Rosc.


Iurare in uerba alterius, to doo fealtie, or to
be sworne a subiecte.



Iurare in lege alterius, to sweare to kepe the
lawes or ordinances of an nother.
plin. de vi­
ris illustr.


Ius bonum dicis, thy request is reasonable.



Ius dicis, thou speakest reason.

Plautus in
Stico.



Iure, with good cause.

Plautus in
Epidico.



Iure uel iniuria, by right or wronge.





Terent. in
Andri.



Iusta seruitus, seruyce without rygour.



Iusti honores, honours due.

Plautus in
Capt.



Iuuat mihi, It dothe me good, it is a plea­
sure to me.
Ter. in Ad.

 


L ANTE A.

L##sp##A##sp##B##sp##I##sp##O, is a fyshe, whi­
che I suppose to be that 
that is callyd Cod, with
the great lyppes. it was
alsoo the Surname of a
Romayne.



Labrum, a lyppe. also the
brymme of a ryuer. also
a wasshynge basyn.



Laccia, a fyshe callyd a cheuyn.



Lacerare diem, to lose the day, to spende the
tyme aboute nought.
Plautus in
Sticho


Lachrimula, a lyttell teare.

Plautus in
Asin.



Lacio, lacui, & lexi, lacere, to brynge into a
snare, or to wynde one in to deceyue him.
Priscianus
Festus.



Lamia, is alsoo an herbe callyd a blynde or
deade nettyll.



Lagopus, an herbe, whyche I suppose to
be Auyns.



Latheris, an herbe callyd Spurge.



L, ANTE E.

LEchia, a fysshe, whiche some haue ta­
ken to be Tunye, for the symylitude
of them.



Legere, to chese.



Lege agere, to sewe in the lawe, also to doo
execution.



Lens palustris, duckes meate, whyche is in
standynge waters.



Leo, a shelle fyshe callyd a lopstar.



Lepide, pleasantly, pratyly.



Lepista, a lyttell potte or vyole.



Lepta, is the smalleste poyse that maye be,
wherof there ar .lxxxiiii. in one scruple, in
a dramme. CClii.



Leucophlegmantia, a spyce of the dropsye,
where the face and membres are whyte,
and swollen great.



Leuare aliquem onere, to discharge oone of
his burdeyne.



Leuare laborem, to mynyshe his labour.



Leuare morbum, to put out of payne.



Leuia uina, smalle wynes.



Leuita, a deacon.



Leuiter, lyghtly.

 

L, ANTE I.

LIa, oone of the wyues of Iacob the
patriarche.



Libella, the diminutife of Libra, it was
also a smalle coyne, and of them were two
sortes, one was worthe the tenthe  part of
Sestertius, the other the tenthe parte of
Denarius.



Libelliones, caryers of letters.



Libere, frankly, liberally, without constraint



Libere uiuere, to lyue at pleasure.



Liberalis forma, a good fauour.



Liberale ingenium, a free courage.



Libertus, a bondman manumised.



Libra, a pounde weight, wherof were dy­
uers, one was the Romayne pounde, whi­
che contayned .xii. ounces, or foure score &
xvi. drammes, an nother was belonging to
exchaungers or bankers, and was but of
Viii. ounces, an other was callid Mina, wher­
of rede more in Mina.



Lichen, an herbe called Lyuerwort.



Limaria, the fyshe callid Tuny, whan it doth
nat excede one foote in length.



Lingulaca, a fyshe callyd a sole.



Litem contestari, I suppose dothe sygnifie
as moche as that whiche our lawyers doo
saye, to enterpleade whan oone, whiche is
nat partie to the action, cometh in, or is cal­
lyd in to pleade with the other, to thintent
to saue his title or interest, whiche is sup­
posed that he hath with them.

 

L ANTE O.

LOcus obiurgandi, occasion to chyde.

Terent. in
And.



Locare filiam, to bestowe his dowgh­
ter in mariage.



Locusta, a fyshe callid a creuyse.



Locutor, he that speaketh moche.



Log, is the same measure of the Hebrues,
that Sextarius atticus, is amonge the Gre­
kes. Rede more in Sextarius. 
Gellius.
 

L ANTE V.

LVcigena, ingendred of lyght.



Lucto, idem quod luctor.



Ludos reddere, & ludos facere, to mock

Terentius



Ludia, a mery wenche full of sporte.

Martialis.



Luminibus obstruere, to stoppe vp the lyght,
to lette that the lyghte maye nat come in­
to a house.
Cicer. pro
domo sua.


Lumina preferre, to inspyre.



Lumminosus, a, um, full of lyght.


Cic. antequem
iret in exi­
lium.



Lumbrici, lytell fyshes taken in small riuers
whyche are lyke to lampurnes, but they be
moche lasse, and somewhat yelowe, and are
callyd in Wylteshire prides.



Lupus, is a fyshe, whiche some men take for
a pyke.



Lupus salictarius, hoppes, wherwith biere
is made.

 

L ANTE Y.

Lydius lapis, a prouerbe spoken of an exact
iugement, or that whiche is exactly tried.


 






Lysimachia, a cytie in Ponto, whiche felle
downe with an erthquake.





M, ANTE A.

M##sp##A##sp##C##sp##E##sp##R, seu Macir, a spyce
callyd Maces.

 


M ANTE E.
¶ 

Medica, an herbe, whyche
I suppose to be clouer grasse with pur­
ple rounde floures.



Melandria, the leane partes of the fishe cal­
lyd Tuny.



Melanurus, a kynde of perches, callydde
Ruffes.



Melita, an yle lyenge betweene Sycile and
Affryke, whiche is nowe callydde Malta,
where at this tyme the companye of the
knyghtes hospytilers do inhabite, as they
dyd at the Rhodes.



Merula, a fyshe callyd Merlyng or whiting.

 



Minutum, idem quod lepta.

 



Mygala, a felde mouse with a longe snoute,
callyd a shrewe.

 



O ANTE C.

OCymum, an herbe callyd Basyll.



Oculata, a perche fyshe.

 



Olus atrum, an herbe callid Alisander.

 



Orchynus, a great Tuny fyshe.



Orphus, a fyshe lyke to a Gurnarde.



Orcha, a great fyshe of the see, whiche de­
uoureth men and beastes hole, of the whi­
che fysshe we do see great bones hanged
vp in the kynges houses. It is also a great
pytcher, whiche serueth for wyne or oyle.


 


P, ANTE A.

P##sp##A##sp##G##sp##R##sp##I, fyshes, which I sup­
pose are dacis.



Paliurus, some do suppose it to
be a fyrse, or a whyn.



Parthenium, is supposed of some
well lerned men to be tansye, whiche opi­
nion I thynke to be beste.


 
P, ANTE E.

PEctines, shell fyshes callyd Scalopes.



Pectunculi, cockylles.



Perca, a fyshe callyd a perche.



Persicaria, an herbe, whyche is supposed to
be Arssmerte.



Pertica, a measure conteynyng .xvi. fete, and
is callyd a perche or a pole, or a rodde, it
is sometyme but .x. fete, and in wodde land
xviii. fete.



Petasites, a clote, the leaues whereof are
layde on butter.

 

P ANTE H.

PHellandrion, an herbe callid Filipendula



Philago, Cudworte.



Phisides, fysshes lyke tenches, but that
they are greener.



Physiter, a greate fyshe, whyche spoutethe
out of his mouth great goulfes of water.



Phœnix, waybenet or bent.



Phocena, a fysshe callyd Porpuse, or lyke
vnto it.

 

P ANTE O.

POlygonon, knotte grasse.



Pompilus, a kynde of great Tuny.

Iouius.



Populus alba, an aspe tree.



Porca, in mesure was reckned halfe a roude
lande, or the .viii. parte of an acre.
Columel.
 



Pseudonardus, lauander.



Psitta, a fysshe callyd turbutte.

 



Pugillus, as moche as the holownes of the
hande may conteyne.

 



Pychis, a cubyte.



Pygmei, people, whyche are but a Cubyte
in lengthe.


 


R ANTE A.

R##sp##A##sp##I##sp##A, a fyshe callyd skeate.



Ranunculus, an herbe callyd
crowfote or goldeknappe.

 



Rhombus, a Fysshe callyd a
Turbutte.

 



Ricinum, an herbe callydde
Palma Christi.

 

R ANTE V.

RVbea maior, an herbe callyd madder.



Rubea minor, an herbe callid cliuers.



Rumex, dockes, sometyme it is taken
for Sorell.



Ruscum, kneholme or hethbrushe.


 


S, ANTE A.

S##sp##A##sp##B##sp##I##sp##N##sp##A, an herbe callyd
Sauyne.



Sampsuchus, an herbe callyd
Maioram gentyll.



Satureia, an herbe callydde
Sauerye.

 

S ANTE C.
¶

Scarus, is a fyshe, whyche I suppose is in
Deuonshyre callyd a Bekar.



Scilla, some do call it a sturgion.

 


S, ANTE E.
¶

S##sp##E##sp##D##sp##V##sp##M maius, houseleke or syngrene



Sedum minus, an herbe callid stonecroppe.






Selibra Romana, the Romayne half pound
comprehended asmoch as our hole pound.



Sæpia, a fyshe hauyng but one bone, wher­
in goldesmythes do make mouldes, and is
callyd a cuttyll.



Seris, an herb callid white endiue & scariole



Sextula gemina, is the thyrde parte of an
ounce, callyd also Duella.



 
¶ 

Siclus, amonge the hebrewes was halfe
an ounce.



Siliquastrum, an herbe whiche some do sup­
pose to be coste mary.

 



Smilax, lacis, frenche peasyn.


 
 
¶ 

Solanum, an herbe, whych some do sup­
pose to be nyghtshade or morell.



Solanum soporiferum, an herbe, whyche I
suppose to be Dwale.



Solonos uesicaria, Alkakengi.



Sonchus, an herbe callyd Southistell.

 



Sportula, the stipende giuen to dayly awai­
ters, for them and theyr company, amonge
the noble Romayns, amounted to. ii. poyse
grotes, and a halfe grote, or .x. pence of the
olde coynage.

 



Stater argenteus, was a coyne of halfe an
ounce weight, and was also callid Siclus &
Tetradragmon.



Striatus, ta, tum, imbowid or made with rid­
ges and furrowes, or lyke vnto it.



 
¶ 

Symphitum, an herbe callyd Comfrye.



Sysimbrium, horsemynte as I suppose.



Sysymbrium cardanine, water cresses.



 



TIthimallus, a kynde of spurge. Some
take it for wertwort.

 



Tussilago, an herbe callyd coltisfote.

 



Typhonicus uentus, a whyrle wynde, which
plucketh vp trees by the rootes.

 




VEttonica, an herbe callyd Bittayne.



Vettonica coronaria, Gyllofers.

 

Vmbelicus veneris, an herbe callydde
Penygrasse.

 

Verbena, an herbe callyd Veruen.

 

Vitia, a pulse callyd a vetche.

 

Vlua, a flagge.

 




Xestes, idem quod Sextarius.


 

Finis Dictionarij.





TO THE HONEST AND
gentylle readers.


TO THE MORE playne
declaration of these tables
folowynge, briefely compi­
led out of the bokes of Ge­
orgius Agricola, and Rober­
tus Senalis, whiche wrate
last and most exactly of poises & measures,
It shal be expedient to the reder to haue in
remembrance these thynges folowynge.
FYRST whan he redeth in any boke of
poyses, coynes, and measures, to consyder
whither they be of Rome, Grece, or of the
Hebrues, and than to seke the columnes,o­
uer the which those countreys ar written,&
there shal he fynd that which he seketh for.

 Also to remember the valuation of all our
coyns, as they be rated at this present time,
and accompt .xii. d. to a shylling .xi. grotes &
ii. d. to an ounce .xx. s. to a pound .xiii. s. iiii. d.
to a marke .xii. ounces to a pounde, as well
of measure as of poyse.

 Moreouer that euery ounce or ynch mea­
sure quadrate as a dye, is diuyded into the
same minutes or porcions, that an ounce poise
is, and .xii. ounces in measure, concernynge
vesselles, is not callydde there a foote, but a
pounde measure.

 Also that the vesselles or receptories are
first counted by measure, bicause that therin
it is more certain than poise, as a poise ounce
of honye is not in quantitie lyke to a poyse
ounce of wyne or oyle. Wherfore Vncia red
in old authors without addicion of pondus,
is to be taken for the measure ounce, as ye
shallfynde more aboundantly in the bokes
of the sayde Agricola and Senalis. 

 Item in the redyng the mesures of greke,
yf ye fynde them not here declared, ye must
alway remember, that the englishe pynte is
xxiiii. ounce measures, the pynte of Rome
callyd Sextarius, is .xx. ounce mesures, the
greke pynte callyd also Sextarius, and the
hebrue pynte callid Log, is but .xviii. ounce
mesures, & accordyng to that rate, ye muste
make calculation in conferrynge togyther
all other measures.

And this I trust shall at this tyme suffise,
for the vnderstanding of this matter, wher­
by the reders, as well of olde hystories,o­
rations of Tulli, as also ancient phisitions,&
the bokes of holy scripture callyd the Bi­
ble, shall apprehende more vnderstandinge,
with singular dilectation and plesure. For the
whiche I shall require them to giue praises
to god, of whom it hath chiefely proceded,
and thankes to our most excellent souerayn
lorde, by whose most gracious comfort and
ayde, I haue perfourmed it, and to pray to
god to gyue me grace and tyme, to accom­
plyshe suche warkes, as I haue purposed
for the commoditie honour and weale of this
my naturall countrey.





The com­
putation
of Geor­
gius A­
gricola.






¶ Romayne poyse.



SCriptulum, the .xxiiii.
parte of an ounce.



Victoriatus, the .xiiii. part
of an ounce.



Denarius, the seuenth part of
an ounce.



Sextula, the syxte parte of an
ounce.



Sicilicus, the fourthe part of
an ounce.



Duella, the thyrde part of an 
ounce.



Semuncia, halfe an ounce.



Vncia, an ounce, the .xii. part
of a pounde troy.



Sescuncia, an ounce and halfe.



Sextans, two ounces, or the
syxt part of any thynge, ha­
uyng poyse or measure.



Quadrans, a quarterne of a
pounde, or thre ounces, or
the .iii. parte.



Triens, foure ounces, or the
fourthe parte.



Quincunx, fyue ounces, or the
fyfte parte.



Semissis, halfe a pounde or
halfe any thynge.



Septunx, seuen ounces or the
seuenth parte.



Bef, viii. ounces, or the eight
parte.



Dodrans, nyne ounces, or the
nynthe parte.



Dextans, ten ounces, or the
tenthe parte.



Deunx, xi. ounces, or the le­
uenth parte.



Libra, Pondo, seu As, twelue
ounces.



As, is sommetyme taken for
the hole of that whyche is
diuided in partes.

 

Greke poyse.

GRanum, the .iiii. part of
Siliqua, the. CCCCC.
xvi. parte of an ounce
measure or poyse.



Siliqua, the thyrde parte of
obolus, the .Cxliiii. part of an
ounce poyse and measure.



Obolus, the halfe of Scriptu­
lum, or Scrupulus, the .xxxii.
part of an ounce.



Scriptulum, the third part of
Drachma, the .xxiiii. parte of
an ounce.



Drachma, the .viii. part of an
ounce, whiche practysers in
phisyke haue estemed to the
weighte of .lx. barley cornes
taken oute of the myddell of
the eare, the .viii. parte of an
ounce poyse and measure.



Vncia, an ounce, the .xii. part
of a pound poyse and mesure.



Mina Attica, twelue ounces
and halfe.



Mina medica, xvi. ounces.



Mina Alexandrina, xx. ounces.



Talentum atticum minus, contey­
neth .lx. Minas atticas, whiche
of our Troy weight amoun­
teth to .lxii. poundes and half
a pounde.



Talentum atticum maius, con­
teyneth .lxxx. Minas, whiche
is of troy weyghte .lxxxiii. li.
and foure ounces.

 

Hebrue poyse.

SIclus, in poyse is halfe an
ounce or foure drammes.



Mina hebraica, conteineth
two poundis and a half, troy,
or .lx. Siclos.



Talentum hebraicum, contei­
neth. C. Minas, that amounteth
to. CCL. poundes troy.



Talentum Syrum, contayneth
Minas Atticas .xv. that is .xv.
poundes .vii. ounces & a half.





¶ The olde Englysshe
poyse standerde.


 
FOure graynes of wheat 
poyseth the .viii. parte of
a penye, so .viii. graynes
oughte to waye a farthynge
xxxii. graynes a penye.
Peny and farthynge maketh
the .xvi. parte of an ounce.
Foure Royalles maketh an
ounce of golde.
Xii. ounces maketh a pounde 
of troy weight.







Romayne coyne.



AS, before the tyme of
Augustus the empe­
rour, was rated to the
tenth parte of Denarius, and
afterwarde to the .xvi. parte
of Denarius.
The compu­
tation of Robertus
Senalis,
bysshop
of Abrent


Sextans, the .vi. part of As.



Quadrans, the fourthe parte.



Semissis, halfe As.



Sestertius, the fourthe part of
Denarius, contayneth .iiii. As­
ses.



Victoriatus, the halfe of De­
narius.



Denarius, whereof .vii. made
one ounce, was by estimation
of our moneye .vi. d. ob. and
the .vii. parte of a halfpenye,
after .xi. grotes and .ii. d. to an
ounce.



Tressis .iii. Asses.



Senarius .vi. Asses.



Decussis .x. Asses.



Solidus, was dyuersly taken,
sometyme for a brasyn coyn,
contayning .xii. small coynes.
somtyme for Drachma, in sil­
uer, as primi Esdr&ecedil; octano ca.
& .2. eiusdem .7. et Paralipo.
xxix. Some were the value
of Drachma, as in the tyme
of Alexander the emperour.
Also Solidus aureus, was in
the tyme of the same empe­
roure .ii. drammes of golde.
After in the tyme of Iustini­
an .vi. of them made an ounce,
whyche was the iuste poyse
and value of our royals.



Centussis, x. denarij, of oure
money .v. s. vi. d. ob. half far­
thyng, halfe halfe farthynge.
Mille æris, a hundred Centusses,
which is of our money xxvii.
li .xvi. s. vi. d. que.



XX. Sestertij, ar .v. Denarij, of
our money .ii. s. vii. d. ob. half
farthinge, and the .xxiiii. part
of a farthynge.



XL. Sestertij. v. s. iii. d. ferthing
& the .xii. parte of a farthing.



Lxxx. Sestertij, x. s. vi. d. ob. and
the .vi. parte of a farthyng.



Centum sestertij, xiii. s. ii. d.
halfe farthyng, the .vi. parte
of a farthyng, and the .xxiiii.
parte of a farthynge.



CC. Sestertii. xxvi. s. iiii. d. quod.
the thyrde parte, and the .xii.
part of a farthynge.






CCCC. Sestertij, lis. s. viii. d.
ob. a half farthing, a quarter
and the .vi. part of a farthing.



DCCC. Sestertij, v. li. v. s. v. d.
a farthing, half farthing, and
the third part of a farthinge.



M. Sestertij, vi. li. xi. s. ix. d. ob.
or there aboute.



Sestertium, is euen as moch.





¶ Greke coyne.



AEreolum, seu Chalchus 
the .xxxvi. parte of
drachma, by estimation
the poyse of .ii. barly cornes.



Semiobolus, the .xii. parte of
Drachma.



Obolus, the .vi. part of drac.



Drachma argenteum, a coyne
whereof .viii. made an ounce,
which is of our money after
the rate of this present tyme
v. pens halfpeny farthing, an
ounce conteininge .xi. grotes
and .ii. pence.



Didrachma. ii. drachmas, of
our money .xi. d. ob.



Stater, seu, Tetradrachmum. iiii.
drachm&ecedil;, of our mony .xxiii. d



Decem drachm&ecedil;, iiii. s. ix. d. ob.



XX. drachm&ecedil;. ix. s. vii. d.



XXX. drach. xiiii. s. iiii. d. ob.



XL. drach. xix. s. ii. d.



L. drach. xxiii. s. xi. d. ob.



LX. drach. xxviii. s. ix. d



LXX. drach. xxxiii. s. vi. d. ob.



LXXX. drach. xxxviiii s .iiii. d



LXXXX. drach. xliii. s .i. d. ob



Centum drach. xlvii. s. xi. d.



Drachma auri, is in value .xii.
drach. argenti, v. s. ix. d.



Mina, or Mna attica Solonis, a
hundred drachm&ecedil;, of our mo­
ney .xlvii. s. xi. d.



Mina u&ecedil;tus, xxxv. s. xi. d. quod.
lxxv. drach.



X. Mine seu Mn&ecedil; attic&ecedil;,uel com­
munes, xxiii. li. xix. s. ii. d.



XX. min&ecedil;, xlvii. li. xviii. s. iiii. d



XXX. min&ecedil;, lxxi. li. xvii. s. vi d



XI min&ecedil;, lxxxxv. li. xvi. s. viii. d



L. Min&ecedil;, Cxix. li. xv. s. x. d.



LX. Minæ, Cxliii. li. xv. s.



Lxx. Minæ. Clxvii. li. xiiii. s. ii. d



LXXX. Minæ, Clxxxxi. li. xiii.
s. iiii. d.



LXXXX. Minæ, CCxv. li.
xii .s. vi. d



Centum Minæ, CCxxxiv. li.
xi. s. viii. d.



Talentum atticum minus aut
commune, contayneth. lx. Minas,
whyche is of oure moneye
Cxliii. li. xv. s.

Talentum atticum maius, con­
teyneth .lxxx. Minas. of oure
money .Clxxxxi. li. xiii. s iiii. d

V. Talenta minora, DCCxviii.
li. xv. s.

X. Talenta, MCCCCxxxvii.
li. x. s.

XX. Talenta, MMDCCC.
lxxv. li.

XXX. Talenta, MMMMCCC.
xii li. x. s.

SI. Talen, MMMMMDCCI. li.

L. Talen, vii. M. Clxxxvii. li. x. s.

LX. Talen. viii. M. DCxxv. li.

LXX. Talen. x. M. lxii. li. x. s.

LXXX. Talenta, xi. M. D. li.

LXXXX. Talenta, xii. M. D.
CCCCxxxvii. li. x. s.

Centum Talenta. xiiii. M. li.
CCClxxv li.

Mille Talenta, Clviii. thousand
and fyfty pounde.

In the accomptynge of Ta­
lentum attricum maius, adde to
euery Talentum minus, xlvii.
li. xviii. s. iiii. d.





Hebrue coyne.



SIclus argenteus, was in va­
lue. iiii drachmas, of our
money. xxiii. d.



V. Sicli. ix. s. vii. d.



X Sicli. xix. s. ii. d.



XX. Sicli. xxxviii. s. iiii. d.



XXX. Sic. lvii. s. vi. d.



XL. Sicli. iii. li. xvi. s. viii. d.



L. Sicli. iiii. li. xv. s. x. d.



LX. Sicli. v. li. xv. s.



LXX. Sicli. vi. li. xiiii. s. ii. d.



LXXX. Sicli. vii. li. xiii. s. iiii. d



Lxxxx. Sicli, viii. li. xii. s. vi. d.



Centum Sicli. ix. li. xi. s. viii. d.



Mille Sicli, Cv. li. viii. s. iiii. d.



Mna Hebraica, is. lx. Sicli, of
our money. v. li. xv. s.



Talentum Hebraicum sanctuarij
 contayneth a hundred Mnas
hebraicas, of oure money. D.
lxxv. li.



Talentum uulgare, containeth
halfe soo moche. CClxxxvii.
li. x. s.



V. Talenta uulgaria, MCCCC.
xxxvii. li. x. s.



X. Talent. MMDCCClxxv. li.



XX. Talenta, v. M. DCCI. li.



XL. Talen. xi. M. CCCCC. li.



Lxxx. Talenta. xxiii. M. li.



Centum Talenta. xxviii. M.
DCCI. li.







¶ Measure in length
or breadthe.
Romayne and Greke.



GRanum, is the fourthe
part of digitus a finger.



Digitus, a finger brede
is the length of foure grains
iiii. digitimaketh .iii. ynches.



Pollex, seu Vncia, callydde an
ynche is the iuste lengthe of
thre barly graynes, or foure
where cornes, and a quarter,
taken out of the myddelle of
the eare. of this one is vncia
linearis, or an ynche by lyne:
an other quadrata, or square,
that is to say an ynch in length
& brede: an nother cubica, or
in .iiii. quarters lyke a dyse, e­
uery quarter beinge an ynch.



Exod.25.



Palmus minor, containeth. iiii.
fyngers or .iii. ynches.



Palmus maior, contayneth the
handbrede. iiii. fyngers, & the
thumbe in depenes.



Palmus duplex seu dichas, con­
teyneth .viii. fyngers.



Spithame seu Dodrans, a span
whiche is the space betwene
the thumbe and the lytle fin­
ger stretched forth, & contei­
neth .ix. inches, or .xii. fingers



Pes, a fote, conteineth .iiii. pal­
mes .xii. inchis, or .xv. fingers
which measure is made with
a span and the length of halfe
the myddell fynger, or with
the two fistes closed, and the
two thumbes extended me­
tyng togither, but these mea­
sures are nat so certayne as
the ynche before rehersed,
by reason that all mens han­
des are nat like greate. And




therfore as I haue proued,
the foote whiche is made by
the sayd ynche, to be the fote
which Budeus supposeth to
be brought by the Romayns
into Fraunce, as Glareanus
saith, but the Romayn foote,
wherof Portius makith men­
cion, is shorter than that fote
one inche, and the .vi. part of
a fynger. And the fote of the
squire vsed by our Carpen­
tars is shorter than the Ro­
mayne foote of Budeus one
ynche, soo that it conteyneth
xv. fyngers, wherby apereth
the diuersitie of fote mesure,
not withstanding the said first
fote is the true fote, and ther­
by all other mesures shall be
compted most perfitely.



Palmipes, containeth a fote &
a palme, or .v. palmes.



Cubitus, conteyneth one fote
and halfe.



Gressus, a steppe, conteineth
two fote and a halfe.



Passus, a pase, contein .v. fote.



Orgia, a fathome, it is pro­
prely .vi. fete.



Pertica, a perche, amonge the
Romans conteineth .x. fete.



Plethrum, conteyneth a hun­
dred fete.



Stadium, a furlonge, contey­
neth .Cxxv. pacis.



Diaulus, conteinith .ii. furlong.



Milliare, seu Milliarium, a mile
conteineth. viii. furlong, or a
thousande pacis.



Dolichos, conteineth .xii. fur­
longes, or .MCCCCC. pacis.



Parasanga, xxx. furlonges.



Schœnos. lx. furlonges.



Stathmos, Statio, seu Mansio, 
one days iourney conteineth
xxviii. myles.



Porca, Cxx. fete in length, and
xxx. in bredth.



Actus, Cxx. fete square.



Iugerum Romanum. in lengthe
CCxl. fete, in bredth Cxx. fete





Hebrue measures.



ZEreth, a palme.



Cubitus sanctuarij, con­
teineth .vi. palmes.



Gomor, as moche as a man
maye receyue betweene his
two armes.



Calamus sanctuarij, conteinith
x. fete and a halfe.



Calamus vulgaris, conteineth
ix. fete, of our measure three
yerdes.



Chœmis, conteineth .iiii. miles



Castra, seu Stationes, conteine
euery of them .ix. myles.



Iuger, seu Iugerum, as moche
land as a yoke of oxen coude
falowe in a day.



Decem iugera, as moche land
as ten yoke of oxen moughte
falowe in a daye.


 


Measure in vessell or thin­
ges to receyue.



Romayne measure.



LIgula, siue Cochlear, the
iiii. part of Cyathus, and
receyueth .iii. drachmas
and one Scriptulum, of the inch
measure.



Cyathus, wherof one maketh
acetabulum, and is of mesure
one ynche & a half, a dramme,
and a scriple, and receyueth
of oyle one ounce and halfe,
of wyne one ounce .v. drach­
mas and one scriple, of hony
two ounces demi.



Acetabulum, the halfe of Quar­
tarius, is two inches and half
of mesure, receiueth of oyle
ii. ounces and .ii. drachmas, of
wyne .ii. ounces and a halfe,
of hony .ii. ounces demi, and .ii.
drachmas.



Quartarius, the halfe of He­
mina, is .v. inches of measure
receiueth of oyle .iiii. ouncis
and demi, of wyne fyue ounces,
of hony .vii. ounces demi.



Hemina, the half of Sextarius
is .x. inches of measure, and
receiueth of oyle .ix. ounces,
of wyne ten ounces, of hony
xv. ounces.



Sextarius Romanus, is .xx. in­
ches of measure callyd Cu­
bica, and receyueth in poise
of oyle .xviii. ounces, of wine
xx. ounces, of hony .xxx. oun­
ces, & is the .vi. part of Con­
gius, in our measure it is lesse
than a pynte by foure ynches
of measure.



Modius, is of grayn and salt,
and conteineth .xvi. Sextarios
and of our measure a galon a
pottell and a quarte, sauynge
iiii. ynche measures.



Congius, hath. vi. Sextarios,
Cxx. ynches, in mesure callid
Cubica, and receiueth of oile
in poyse .ix. poundes of wine
x. li. of hony .xv. poundes: of
our measure it is .v. pintes, or
a potttell and a pynte.



Vrna, conteineth .iiii. Congios
and receiueth of oyle .xxxvi.
poundes: of wyne .xl. poun­
des: of hony .lx. poundes. It
is of our measure .ii. galons
and a pottell.



Amphora, seu quadrantal, con­
teineth .xlviii. Sextarios, is a
foote square in measure, cal­
lyd cubica, or lyke a dyse, and
conteineth of oyle .lxxii. pound
of wyne .lxxx. pounde, of ho­
ny .Cxx. pound weight. It is
of our measure .v. galons.



Culeus, conteyneth .xx. Am­
phoras, It is of our measure
a hundred galons, a pype sa­
uynge .xxvi. galons.





Greke measure.

 

COchlearium Atticum, seu
medicum, is of ynche
mesure a dramme, halfe
a scriple .ii. graynes, and two
fiue partes of a grayne, and
receiueth in poyse a dramme
and .ii. scriples of oyle, and of
wyne as moche in poyse as
in measure.



Chema, hath .ii. Cochlearia, is
in mesure .ii. drammes one scri­
ple .iiii. graynes, and .iiii. fyue
partes of a grayn, and recei­
ueth in poise double as moch
as Cochilearium.



Mystrum medicum, hathe .ii.
Cochlearia, and a halfe, one
Cheme and a quarter, and is
in measure .iii. drammes, and
receiueth in poyse of wine or




pure water, as moche as in
measure.



Cochlearium ueterinarium, be­
longyng to cattell, is in mea­
sure a quarter of an ynche,
& receyueth in poise of wyne
a dramme .ii. scriples, one o­
bolum, one graine and a thirde
part of a grayn, of honye .ii.
drammes .ii. scriples .vii. grains
and very lytle more.



Mystrum ueterinarium, belonging
to catel, is in mesure halfe an
ynche, and receiueth in poise
of oile .iii. drammes .ii. scri­
ples .ii. graynes and. ii. third
partes of a grayne, of honye
v. drammes, an half .iii. grains
and .v. sixte partis.



Mystrum Georgicum, or of hus­
bandry is in measure halfe an
ynche and half a dramme and
receyueth in poyse of wyne
half an ounce and half a scri­
ple, of hony halfe an ounce &
two drammes, a quarter of a
dram and half a scriple.



Concha, is double as moche
as Mystrum.



Cyathus medicus, a double
as moche as Concha, in me­
sure an inche and a halfe, and
receyueth in poyse of wyne,
one ounce .iii. drammes, and .iiii.
Siliquas, of hony .ii. ounces &
ii. scriples, of oyle one ounce
and .ii. drammes.



Cyathus georgicus, or of hus­
bandry is in mesure .ii. inches
and a quarter, and receyueth
in poyse of wine .ii. ounces &
ii. scriples, of hony .iii. ounces
one dramme and. ii. scriples,
of oyle one ounce and seuen
drammes.



Cyathus Veterinarius, pertai­
ning to cattel, is in mesure .ii.
ynches, & receyueth inpoyse
of wyne one ounce, an halfe,
a dramme .ii. scriples .ii. siliquas
ii. grains .ii. third partes of a
grayne, of oyle one ounce, a
halfe, one dramme, & a scriple
of hony .ii. ounces, a halfe, a
quarter, oone obolum .iii. gray­
nes and a thyrd part.



Oxybaphum medicum, is in
measure .ii. ynches a quarter,
receiueth in poyse of wine .ii.
ouncis and .ii. scriples, of oile
one ounce a half .iii. drammes.



Oxybaphum Georgicum, or
of husbandrye, is in measure
iii. inches a quarter, & a dram
receiueth in poise of wine .iii.
ounces and a dramme, of oile
ii. ounces, a halfe, a quarter,
a half, a dramme, of hony .iiii.
ounces a halfe, a quarter, and
half a dramme.



Oxybaphum ueterinarium, per­
taynyng to cattell, is in mea­
sure .vi. inches, and receiueth
in poyse of wine. v. ounces &
a half, one scriple .ii. siliquas:
of oyle .v. ounces, of honye
viii. ounces, a quarter and . ii.
Scriples.



Quartarius, is double Oxy­
baphum.



Cotyle Medica, is dowble
Quartarius, and is in measure
ix. ynches, and receyueth in
poyse of wyne. viii. ounces a
quartern and .ii. Scriples, of
oyle .vii. ounces and a halfe,
of our measure it lacketh. iii.
inche mesures of half a pynt.
Galenussaith, that there were
dyuers opinions of Cotyle,
for somme affirmed it to con­
teyne .xii. ounce mesures and
some sayd .xvi.



Cotyle georgica, is in mesure
xiii. ynches and a halfe, and
receiueth in poise of wyne, a
pounde and half an ounce. of
oyle .xi. ounces, of honye a
pounde a halfe, and .vi. dram­
mes, of our measure a pynte
and one ounce mesure.



Cotyle ueterinaria, pertaining
to cattel is in measure .xii. in­
ches, and receiueth of wyne
xi. ounces .ii. scriples, one o­
bolum and one siliqua, of oile
x. ounces, of hony one pound
iiii. ounces a halfe one dram,
and one scriple. It is of oure
measure iuste half a pynte.



Sextarius atticus, is .xviii. me­
sure ounces, and conteyneth
in poyse of oyle .xv. ounces,
of wyne a pounde .iii. onnces
v. drammes and a Scriple, of
hony .ii. pound and one ounce.
It is of our measure a pynte
sauynge a quarterne or syxe
ounces.



Chus attica, or medica, recey­
ueth. vi. Sextarios atticos,
and is in measure .ix. pounde
in poyse of oyle .vii. pounde
& a halfe, of wyne .viii. pound
iii. ounces, a halfe & .iii. dram­
mes: of hony .xii. pounde and
a halfe. It is of our measure
a pottell and halfe a pynte.



Chus Georgica, or of husban­
dry is in measure .xiii. pound
and demi, and receiueth in poise
of oile .xi. pounde .iii. ounces.
of wyne .xii. pounde and demi,
of hony .xviii. pounde and .ix.
ounces, and is of our mesure
vi. pyntes, a halfe, and a quar­
ter or .xviii. ounces.



Chus veterinaria, is in mesure
xii. pounde, and receyueth in
poyse of wyne .xi. pound one
ounce .ii. drammes and .ii. scri­
ples, of oyle .viii. pounde, of
hony .xvi. pounde, a half, one
ounce a halfe, and a dramme.
It is of our measure a pottell
and a quarte.



Metretes attica, contaynethe
xii. Choas atticas, & is in mea­
sure. Cviii. pounde, in poyse
of wyne .C. pounde, of oyle
lxxxx. pounde, of honye .Cl.
pounde. It is of our measure
syxe galons a pottelle and a
quarte.



Metretes georgica, is in mea­
sure lyke to attica.



Chœnix, conteyneth .iii. Co­
tylas, and is in measure .xxvii.
ynches. It is in our measure
a pynte and thre ynches.



Medimnus atticus, conteineth
xlviii. Chœnices. It is of our
measure .vi. galons a pottelle
and a quarte.



Medimnus georgicus, is a hun­
dred .lxii. mesure. It is of our
measure .x. galons and oone
pynte, or a bushel a pecke and
one pynte.



Sextarius Medimni, the syxte




parte of Medimnus.



Artaba, fyue Modios, of our
measure, a bushell, a pottell,
a pynte, and .iiii. ynche mea­
sures.






Hebrue measures.



LOg, is the habrue Sex­
tarius, and is equall to
Sextarius atticus, and con­
teynyth in measure .xviii. yn­
chis.



Satum, contayneth .xxiiii. Lo­
gim, and is in measure .xxxvi.
pounde, receiueth in poise of
wyne .xxxiii. pound, and foure
ounces, of oyle .xxx. li. of ho­
ny: 1 pound. It is of our me­
sure .ii. galons and a quarte.



Hin, is halfe-Satum, is in me­
sure .xviii. fete, receyueth in
poyse of wyne .xvi. li. di, and
ii. ounces. of oyle .xv. li. of ho­
ny .xxv. li. of our mesure a ga­
lon and a pynte.



Batus, conteyneth. iii. Sate,
whiche is of our measure .vi.
galons a pottell and a quart.



Ephi, seu Epha, a measure of
drye thynges, as corne & salt,
and is equall with Batus.



Gomor, the tenth part of E­
phi, & lacketh of our pynt .ii.
ounces, and almoste half one
ounce.



Chorus hebraica, contayneth
x. Ephim, whyche is of oure
mesure .vii. bushell & a halfe.





FINIS.


THIS AT THIS TYME shall
be sufficient for the declaration of poi­
sis and mesures. And he that desireth
a more ample and exquisite triall of them, let
him diligently rede the bokes of Georgius
Agricola, and Robertus Senalis, who wri­
tinge last of all other in that kind of matter,
haue found dyuers thinges, which were nat
before of other remembred, as it dayly hap­
neth in all kyndes of writing.I knowe well
that Budeus, Alceatus, and Portius are
men of excellent lernynge, and their bokes
to be made with an exact study & diligence:
But Agricola beinge a great phisition, and
therfore more accustomed to rede the war­
kes of Galenus, than the other, whyche in
their profession be lawyers: semblablye the
warkes of other, whiche wrate of the dis­
eases of cattel, and remedies for them, more
ouer attaynyng the bokes of Cleopatras, a
noble and great lerned woman, whiche also
wrate of measures, specially pertaininge to
husbandry: no meruail though that he more
perfitly hath determined that thing, which
among the other was in contencion. Sem­
blably Senalis an honorable bysshop, folo­
wing Agricola, and approuyng his diligence
by makynge true conference betwene hym
and the other, and more ouer beinge welle
lerned in the hebrue tunge, and consequently
in holy scripture, trieng out studiousely the
poyses and mesures to the hebrues pertai­
ning: hath happily brought vnto lyght that
whiche the other hath remembred, or elles
nat vnderstandyng substancially the hebrue
tounge, they purposely omitted. For these
causes I haue preferred the computation
of these two before any other, exhortynge
nat withstanding al them that do vnderstand
latine, that they do not therfore neglect the
others bookes, but to imbrace and reade
them studiously, as in whom they shall fynd
meruailous knowlege, which els perchaunce
they shal lacke. And as concerning my cal­
culation, whiche I haue done with moche
study and incredible labour for the profit of
other, if I haue therin any thyng fayled, as
I trust that I haue not (although the diui­
sion in breking of numbers callid fractions,
is a thinge subtyll and meruailous harde to
obserue alway truly)Ihartily pray al gen­
tyll reders, fyndyng it by an exquisite tryall
to correct it without indignation: and lyke­
wyse all the resydewe of the dictionarye
preceding, and frendely communicate with
me their labours, for the which I wyll giue
vnto them moste harty thankes, not leauing
vnremembred, god gyuing to me lyfe, their
honest labours, being benefyciall vnto this
theyr countrey.


Tho. Berthelet. regius impressor
excudebat.
ANNO. M. D. XXXVIII.






