





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 5 1 9 2

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )



A most excellent and
LEARNED WOORKE OF CHI­
rurgerie, called Chirurgia parua Lanfranci,
Lanfranke of Mylayne his briefe: reduced from dyuers
translations to our vulgar or vsuall frase,
and now first published in the En­
glyshe prynte by Iohn Halle
Chirurgien. 
Who hath thervnto neces­
sarily annexed. 

A Table, as wel of the names of diseases and simples
with their vertures, as also of all other termes of the
arte opened. Very profitable for the better vn­
derstanding of the same, or other
like workes. 

And in the ende a compendious worke of Anatomie, more 
vtile and profitable, then any here tofore in the
Englyshe tongue publyshed. 

AN HISTORIALL EXPOSTULATION
also against the beastly abusers, both of Chy­
rurgerie and Phisicke in our tyme: With a 
goodly doctrine, and instruction, ne­
cessary to be marked and 
folowed of all true 
Chirurgiens. 
All these faithfully gathered, and diligently set
forth, by the sayde Iohn Halle. 

Imprinted at London in Flete streate, nyghe
unto saint Dunstones churche,
by Thomas Marshe. 
AN. 1565. 








Here beginneth
the Interpretiue Table vpon 
Lanfranke hys worke. 


Abrotonum.  
SOthernwode, is called in Greke
Αβρότονον, and in Latine Abrotonum,
wherof there are two kyndes, the 
male and the female: but that which
groweth wyth vs is the male. And
is (after Galen) whotte and drye in
the thirde degre: hauinge a certaine 
digestiue, and incisiue power, more
then Wormwode: but hathe some sharpnesse, as hathe
Wormwode and also bitternesse: And therfore kylleth
Wormes, and is an ennemye to the stomacke, as is Scri­
phium. 
Abrotonon. 
De symplici­
um medica­
mentorum fa­
cultitatibus. 
libro. 6. 


Absinthium.  
OF Wormwode (called in Latine Absinthium, and
in Greke Αψίνθιον,) there are . iii. kindes, (beside the
common stinkinge Wormwode, wyth broade
leaues called Absinthium rusticum. ) The fyrste is
called Seriphium, and Marinum, in Englishe sea Wormwode, 
and groweth plentiously in Kente, by the sea bankes, and
salte marishes. The seconde is called of Dioscorides Absinthi­
um Ponticum, of Mesues Romanum, and in Englishe pontike,
or Romane Wormwode, or Wormewode Gentille, in Es­
sexe Cipers: and groweth now in diuers gardines of Lon­






don, Kent, and Essexe. The thirde is Santonicum, so called of 
Santonis, (a region in France named nowe Xantongue,) and 
therfore in Englishe not vnaptlye Frenche Wormwode. 
The best of these to be put in inward medicines, is the Pon­
tike or Romane Wormwode: neither oughte anye other 
kinde to be vsed in steade therof: thoughe none of them be 
wythoute their singuler vertues. Pontike Wormwode,
(saith Galen) is lesse whot then all the rest, hauing muche
adstriction, but no lesse drying. Santonicum is next in faculties, 
but somwhat weaker then Seriphio: in heating, drying, and
extenuation. Seriphium is colder then Abrotono, but whotter
then Pontico, and enemy to the stomacke: for that it hathe
(with hys bitternesse:) a certeyn saltnesse, and also some ad­
striction, thoughe but litle: so are also Abrotonum, and Santoni­
cum: onlye Ponticum is acceptable to the stomacke, and of tem­
perament whot in the first degre, and dry in the thirde.  
Apsinthion. 
Absinthium ru­
sticum. 
Absinthium Se­
riphium, uel marinum. 
Absinthium
Ponticum, uel Romanum. 
Absinthium
Santonicum. 
De sym. med. 
facul. li. 6. 

The term "wormewode gentille" was only found in the quotations section of the OED. 



Acacia.  
MEn vse commonly the iuyce of Sloes for Acacia, which
is not so: for Acacia is a thorny tre, growing in Egipt,
hauinge whyte sedes closed in coddes, wherowte is
pressed a iuyce: whiche beinge dryed is occupied in medi­
cines, vnder this name Acacia. It dryeth after Galen in the
thirde degree, and cooleth (being washed) in the second: but 
vnwashed in the firste, (for by washinge it loseth his sharp­
nesse:) and is of an earthly substance, hauing therwith wa­
tery, and also whotte and thin partes. Where it is layde, it
leaueth the place dryed &  contracted. The gumme of thys
tree is the true gumme Arabike. 
De sym. med. 
facul. li. 6. 


Acanthus.  
BRanca Vrsina: (whiche is called in Greke άκανδα, in la­
tine Acanthus, and Pæderota,) is called in English beares 
breche, and no beares foote, as some abusiuely bothe 






saye and vse, despysinge suche as woulde reforme their ac­
customed error. Dioscorides appoynteth to Acantho leaues
lyke letuce, but larger, longer, and indented as Eruca: wher
by it is euident, that it can not be bearefote. 
Beares breche groweth in gardines, the leaues wherof
(saithe Galen) obteine a moderate digestinge faculty. The
roote is desiccatiue, and lightly incisiue, consisting of thin or
tender partes, and is one of the . iiii. principal mollificatiues. 
Li. 6. de sym. 
medi. facul. 


Accidentia.  
Accidens generally, betokeneth thinges chauncing, or
belonging to substances, whiche they maye haue or
lacke, wythout corruption of the same. But accidentes
are Phisicallye of Galen thus defined, in the ende of hys firste boke. De methodo medendi. 
Those thinges, that doe necessarilye folowe that consti­
tution, from whence groweth and action: in vs being whole 
are named Accidentia: but if we be sicke Σύμπτωματα. Yet
are accidentes notes also of griefes, after his mynde, li. i. de
locis affectis, sayinge. Ex propriis accidentibus etiam innotescit af­
fectus locus: nam ore Ventriculi affecto, fastidium infestat. That is
a place affected is knowen by hys proper accidentes: as the 
mouth of the stomacke affected, lothsomnesse infesteth the 
same. And these are termed of oure Englishe Phisike wry­
ters, wythfalles. 
Symptomata. 
σύμπταμα. 
id est incursus
concursus, uel
casus. 


Acetum.  
CAlled in Greke Οξος, consisteth of substances, bothe
whotte and colde, and they bothe of tender partes,
(wherin yet colde hathe the masterye,) and dryeth
in the thyrde degree, and hathe Repercussyue, Tenua­
tynge, and discussyue vertues. But yet dyffereth it in fa­
cultyes, accordynge to the temperamente of the Wyne 






wherof it is made. As if it be made of smalle wynes, it co­
leth effectuallye inflammations, and repelleth whotte co­
lerike swellinges, as in Oxicrato. 
Oxos. 
Galenus de 
sym. med. fac. . 
li. 8. &  de com­
positione me­
dicamentorum se
cundum loca li. 3. 


Acorus.  
WHiche the Grecians calle ἄκορον, hathe a roote
somewhat bitter, and of pleasante odour, and is
whotte and drye in the thirde degree, and of sub­
tille consistence and therfore moueth brine, dis­
solueth indurate splenes, extenuateth, and wypeth awaye
the hardnesse of the panicle Ceratocides: whervnto the iuyce
serueth best. And because it is thoughte not to growe with
vs, we maye after the myndes of some, substitute for it Ca­
lamum odorantum or as Galen willeth, Radicem Asari. For truly
they erre verye muche, that vse Gladiolo luteo for Acoro. But
Doctor Turner taketh rather Galangam maiorem for dyuers
reasons to be Acorum, then Calamum aromaticum, as dyuers
have thoughte. 
Acoron
Galenus de
Symp. medi. 
lib. 6. 
for the pani­
ris Ceratoi­
des looke in
myne Ana­
tmye. 
Calamus ado­
ratus. 
Radix asari. 
Galanga maior


Adeps.  
FOr the better vnderstanding of these words Adeps, Seuum,
Axungia, (called in Greke Οξύγγιον) and Pinguedo, (na­
med in Greke Πιμελη) and their differences: I refferre
you to my Anatomye a place for that moste mete. All the
whiche are in compositions of medicines (thoughe the In­
terpretors of Galen doe muche frequente thys woorde
adeps,) wythout precise difference vsed for suche greases, su­
ets, or fattines as are tried from the bodyes of beastes. &c. 
Of the whiche Adeps Leoninus, (saithe Galen) dothe moste
valientlye as well heate as digeste. Wherunto adeps pardi:
hathe the nexte place, whiche mollifyeth moderatly. The
power of adeps anserinus, is lesse heatynge and digestynge,
but somewhat more mollifyinge, and consisteth of subtille
partes, as dothe the fatte of all byndes. A little differynge






from this is adeps gallinaceus, consistinge as in a meane: and
is a moste familiar medicyne for inflammations. Adeps Suil­
lus, is of all other fattes, the softest, moystest and weakest
and therefore is conueniente for tender bodyes. How Adeps
Capranum, &  Boum: how much the stronger they are, then adeps
porci: so muche the more fyttlye agree they, wyth bodyes
of harder, or stronger nature, &  vnto scirhous hardnesses. &c. 
The fattes morouer of masculyne beastes are alwaies the
whotter and dryer: of the female contrarye, and of the male
gelded, it is euer like to that of the female. 
Oxyngion. 
Seuum. 
Pimele. 
Galenus li. 4
5. et. 11. de
symp. med. 
facultatib. 
ac li. 7. de
comp medi. 
secundum ge­
nera. 


Adustio.  
ADustion, is as well the burnynge of medicynes,
by materialle fire, as of humores in the body,
by the excessiue distemperature, of potencialle
heate therin: Wherof they are called aduste, or
burned humores. 


Ærugo.  
LOke for it at Flos aris, and at Viride æs. 

The term "aris" appears to be a derivative of the Latin "aurum. "



Æsvstum.  
BVrned brasse is of a desiccatyue, and vehemente
scouringe faculty: but whotter, and more abster­
siue, then burned leade. It bindeth, drieth, repres­
eth, thinneth, and draweth. It purgeth also and
healeth vlcers, amendeth the faultes of the eyes, consumeth
fleshye excrescentes: and restreigneth crepinge, and corro­
dinge vlcers. 
Dioscorides
li. 5. 


Aggregatiua medicamenta.  
MEdicines aggregatiues, are suche as haue vertue to 
gather, or brynge together, the brimmes of a wound,






or vlcer. Whiche is to be done after perfecte mundificati­
on and Incarnation. 

Agresta.  
ALthoughe Agresta whiche the Grecians calle όμφὰ­
κιον: be properlye the liquor of vnripe grapes, pres­
sed oute, (whiche some haue ignorantly interpreted
the iuyce of Sorell. ) I thinke the iuyce of Crabbes, whiche
we calle commonly veriuce, may be safely, or without great
error, vsed for Agresta. And that the rather, because Lanfran­
cus in the cure of Carbunculi. Willeth sunnum pomorum Agre­
stium, to be taken in suche sorte as be often before had done
Agrestam. 

Veriuce is of colde and drye facultye, whereby it aswa­
geth and represseth the inflammations of ardent humors,
and sharpe, wherby it cutteth and thinneth grosse, &  tough
Phlegme. And is muche praised, in comforting the weak­
nes of the hart, and in swounding. The Crabbe tree is na­
med in Latine Malus syluestris. 
Omphacton
Latine etiam
Omphacium. 
Malus sylue­
stris


Albula.  
THat whytnesse of the Puppill, or vtter part of the eye,
which Lanfranke calleth Albulam, interpretyng it Ci­
catricem, is called of others Albugo, and of some Panus,
accomptyng therof . ii. sortes: namely Albugotenuis, called in 
Greke Νεφέλιον id est Nubecula, that is a little cloud, and Al­
bugo Crassa, which is thought to be called in Greke ἂργεμα
και ἄργεμος wherin the blacke of the eye is whyte, and
the whyte of the same redde. 
Albugo
Nephelion. 
Argema. 
Argemos. 


Algebra.  
THis Arabye woorde Algebra sygnifyeth as well frac­
tures: (as of bones, &c. ) as somtyme the restauratyon
of the same. 
Fractura aut
restauratio
rins. 







Allium.  
Allium domesticum uel Satiuum, whiche the Grekes calle
σκὸροδον ημερον , heateth and dryeth by the sentence
of Galen in the . iiii. excesse, wherin όφυοσκοροδ ον 
σκοροδον κίόγριον (id est Alium Agreste, that is wilde Garlike)
is the more potente. 
Scorodon Eme
ron. 
Ophioscoro­
don. 
Scorodon A­
grion. 


Aloe.  
ALoe is commonly numbered (among wryters) of two
kyndes only, although ther be found amonge the A­
pothecaries in common practice thre sortes to be sold:
namely, Succotrina, Hepatica, &  Cabalina. But who so readeth
Dioscoridem, and other auncient wryters, shall perceiue that
they knewe but of two sortes, as one fyne and pure, which
some calle Aloen Hepaticam. The other, which (because it is
full of drosse and sande) semeth to be the bothome or refuse
of the pure iuyce, they name Aloen Cabalinan, because (as I
suppose) it not beinge mete for man his bodye, was only u­
sed to heale the diseases of horses. But of the purest I iudge
there is none other difference, but that the same whyche
one author calleth Hepaticam, an other calleth Succotrinam,
whiche also moued Iacobus Syluius to reporte that Dioscorides
and Haliabbus praise Aloen Hepatican: but Auicenna and Mesues
Aloen Succotrinam. It is the iuyce of an herb, called in Greke
ἂλοή and in Latine Semper Viuum Marinum: In English herbe
Aloes or Sea Aigren: whose iuice is brought to vs from India
(for ther groweth the best,) is a proffitable medicin for ma­
ny thinges, through the drying that it hathe, without cor­
rosion. It bindeth moderatlye, but is verye bitter, and ther
fore loseth the belly. It drieth in the thirde degre, &  heateth
stronglye in the first, or lightlye in the second: and is grate­
full to the stomacke. It glueth together holowe places, and
healeth vlcers hard to be cured: Maxime quæ in ano &  puden­
dis sunt, and stieped in water, healpeth the inflammatyons
in them, and also in the mouthe and Eyes. In summe,






It repelleth, digesteth, and so gently scoureth: that it hur­
teth not cleane sores. 
Aloe Succorri­
na
Aloe Hepati­
ca. 
Aloe Cabalina
Galenus, de
sym. med. li. 6


Althæa
WHiche hathe bene of longe time taken, (not with
out manifest error,) for Holihocke: is called in 
Greke αλδαια, και Ιβίσκος, in Latine Althæa, and
Ibiscus, of the Apothecaries Bismalua, and Maluauis­
cus, and in Englishe marshe Malowe. 
It discusseth, digesteth, breaketh, and Cicatrizeth, as
saithe Dioscorides, and hathe power (sayeth Galen,) to digeste,
lose, and take awaye inflammations: to mitigate also, and
concoct. But the roote, and the sede are of tenderer partes,
and shewe a more dryinge, and scouringe vertue. 
Ibiscos. 
Bismalua. 
Malua Viscus
De sym. med. 
li. 6. 


Alumen.  
OF Alum, (called in Greke στυπτηρί α,) saythe Diosco­
rides, there are manye kindes. But for the vse of
medicine, Alumen Scissile, or Fissile, called στυπητρία
σχιχὴ, Alumen Rotundum called therfore στρογγύλη, and ΰγρα
hoc est Liquidum, uel Humidum: are saythe he, moste bled. Prai­
singe also amonge them Fissile for the best. 
Alumen (saythe Galen,) dothe in all hys kindes vehemently
binde and are al of grosse partes, but the subtillest of all the
rest is alumen fissile, uel scission, next unto it is Alumen Rotondum
and Astragaloton: but πλακίτις id est crustarum, πλινθίτις, hoc est 
latercularium, because it is like brickes or fyles, and alumen
liquidum, are grosse. There is also Φόριμος, id est lacteum:
παράφορος, hoc est Scabrum, as it were perverted, or wyth
soyle adulterate. And τριχίτης quasi Capillare, for that it is
divisible, as the heares of the head. But more frequent are
now a daies there names of Alum, Alumen, Catinum, Alumen
fortis, Alumen fecis, (which Lanfranke mencioneth, among
his corrosiues,) Alumen Saccharinunt, Alumen Vitreum, &c. 






Alum naturalle (for the sortes last rehearsed, are artifici­
alle,) is a vaine of the earthe, wherof there is founde in I­
talye great plentye, in the manner of a rock. And is saythe
Discorides, of heatinge, binding, and purging facultye. Be­
inge after the minde of Plini, quasi Salfugo terræ. Alumen liqui­
dum, saythe Brasauolus, is called also Alumen Rochæ: who also
afirmeth Alumen Schiston, &  Trichitin, to be not two but one
kynde.  
Diosco. li. 5. 
Stypteria. 
Stypteria Schifte. 
Stypteria Strongyle. 
Styp. Hygra. 
de symp. li. x. 
Stypteria pla
citis. 
Stypteria
Plinthitis. 
Stypteria
Phorimos. 
Stypteria pa­
raphoros. 
Stypteria 
Trichites. 
Thys is also 
called of some
Alumen plu­
mæ. 


Ambulatio.  
AMbulation is the wanderinge, or goinge aboute of
accidentes, (as paine, inflammation. &c. ) in any place
affected. 


Amphemerina Febris.  
SO vnderstand I Lanfranke, by Anfimerina, as I fynde
it in the Latine bookes. Of this Galen in his . ii. boke de
differentiis Febrium. Cap. 7. sayth, That feuer, whiche vex­
eth a man daily, wyth intermission: (commonlye called In­
terpolation:) caused of Phlegme, to be cauled Αμφημερινὰ 
και αμφημερινος πυρετος id est Quotidiana Vera: a symple
quotidian, and happeneth rarelye wythoute the hurte of 
the stomache. But if it be wythoute intermission: then is 
it Quotidiana continua, but contrary to this in order, seme the
wordes of Lanfranke, in the common printed Latine copye
howe so ever it commeth. 
Amphemeri­
ns, uel Am­
phemerinos
Pyretos

Ammoniacum.  
OR Hammoniacum, in Greke ἀ μμωνιακὸν, whyche we
abusedlye calle Armoniacum: Is the liquor or gum of
a tree, or shrubbe, growinge (as saythe Dioscorides) in
Aphrica, nighe to the Oracle of Ammon, wherof (as some will)
it hathe that name. But others, affirminge it to falle and
be founde, by Iumpes in sande: would therfore calle it am­






moniacon, of ἄμμος, whiche is sande. This shrubbe, wyth
hys roote and frute, is called αγασυλλις. Galen saythe, that
Hammoniacum in mollyfyinge obteineth the principalitye,
and digesteth meanlye. 
Ammoniacon. 
lib. 3. 
Ammos. 
Agasyllis. 
de compositione
med. secun. ge
nera li. 6. 


Amygdala.  
IN Greke αμυγδάλη. Of Almondes, that sort whiche for
their bitternes are called Amara, &  in Greke πίκρα: haue
tenuating faculty, wherby they purge, both out of the bely
and the brest by excreations, grosse and tough humores: &
help obstructions, sprong of grosse and viscous iuyce. They
also helpe the paines of the side, of the splene, of Colon, &  of
the reynes, comming of the same. Howbeit they moue not
the bely, neither doe they nourishe muche. The swete Al­
mondes, thoughe (in the vertues abouesayde) the weaker:
yet are they moderatly whot, &  mete for meates. They al­
so moue vrine, and amend the moist vices of the stomacke. 
Amygdala. 
Amara. 
Picra. 
Dioscori. li. 1. 
Galen, de ali­
mentis, lib. 2. 
& de symp. 
med. li. 6. 


Amylum 
WHich we corruptly calle Amidum: is that which the Gre­
cians haue auncientlye called Amelon, and is nothinge
else, but the milke or iuyce, of wheate certaine daies steped
in water, and then pressed oute, whiche for his myldnes, is
vsually put in Collyries, as a moste apte medicyne for ma­
ladyes of the eies. For beinge exactlye washed, it hath saith
Galen, neither sharpnesse, nor adstriction: neyther heating
nor coolinge. 
De com. med. 
ii. loca,lib. 4. 


Anacardus.  
OR after Ruellius anacardium: is the frute of a tre, growing
in Sicilia, and Apulia, called vulgarly, Pediculus Elephantis. 
The iuyce wherof is called Mel Anacardi: which is a ruptory
medicine. Anacardium (saith Ruellius) of the later Grecians, (for the 
auncients make therof no mention,) is a familiar tre among
the Indians, &  groweth also in the hilles of Sicilia, the throwe
out flames of fire: wyth a frute like a birdes harte, (wherof
it is thoughte to haue his name,) hauinge therin a redde or
bloudy iuyce, whiche floweth oute lyke bloude. 
Pediculus Ele­
phantis. 
Mel Anacardi
Aetna







Anatomia.  
Ανατομὴ is the dissection or cutting vp of man his body,
or the bodyes of beastes: wherby knowledge may be attai­
ned, by discerning, and considering the partes therof, with
their formes, offices, processes, and colligations, one wyth
another: Wherby certeintye is hadde, as wel howe ware­
ly to worke, as wiselye to Prognosticate. 
Anatome. 


Anethum.  
DIlle: whiche the Grekes name ἄνεθον, heateth either som
what beyond the second degre, or within the third: &  drieth
either in the ende of the first degre, or in the beginninge of
the second. And therfore being botled in Oyle, it deuideth,
asswageth paine, causeth sleape, &  digesteth raw humores. 
Anethon. 
Galenus de
symp. li. 6. 


Antimonium.  
CAlled also Stibium and Stimmi, is a veyne of earth found 
in siluer mines, like in colour vnto leade, but it diffe­
reth from leade whiche wil melt &  not be pouldered. 
Antimonium wil be pouldered but rather wil it burn, then melt
otherwise then by a certein art, &  then not easily as lead wil. 
It hath saith Galen with his desiccatiue facultye (beinge
vnwashed) a mighty adstriction, which by washing is made
wel nere vtterly wythout biting, it is necessarily vsed with
medicines for the eies, &  for his vertues therin, obteined to
be called πλατυοφθαλμόν, because it openeth the eyes. 
Stibium. 
Stimmi. 
Galen de sym. 
li. 9. de comp. 
med. secundum
loca. li. 4. 
Platyophthal­
mon. 


Anthrax.  
ALthough many haue ignorantly deuided Anthracem, from
Carbunculo: as though they were sondry and seueral tu­
mores: it is moste euident that it is one thinge: &  that
ἄνθραζ, is the same in greke, wherof Carbunculus, is the name
in Latyne and signifyeth a burnyng cole, whyche thys tu­
more dothe verye muche resemble (in the augmentation,)
bothe in colour and nature, hauing also in the declination a
blacke crustous eschare, made by adustion, representinge a
quenched cole, whiche euidentlye sheweth, howe excessyue
heat, ioyned for the moste part wyth venemous matter, is
cause of this tumore. 






Yet is it notwythstandynge deuided into kyndes: wherof
the greatest and most dangerous sort, appeareth common­
lye in the time of Pestilente infection: and consysteth (as 
saythe Galen,) of melancholye aduste. The other sort (beinge
not so fearfulle, and comminge at other tymes,) is made of 
whotte boylinge or burned bloude: whiche semeth to be
made, or turned into Melancholy, or as he sayth in an other
place, of whotte bloude, turned by adustion into the nature
of Melancholye. And surelye thus is Lanfrancus, and other
wryters of his time to be vnderstanded, when they speake
of Anthrax or Carbunculus, for so shall they in the reste agree
with Galen, and other aunciente wryters. 
Carbunculus. 
In lib. de tumo
ribus præter
naturam. 
In lib. de diffe­
rentiis Febri­
um. Cap. iii. 


Namelye in
the aunciente
and most ler­
ned wryters. 
Apium. Palustre. 
Risus &  
Hæmorhoidum. 
APium is of diuers kindes: But where Apium is founde
in Recepies or otherwyse, wythoute anye other ad­
dition in the name, it is onlye mente of Persly: thou­
ghe Smalache haue abusiuelye bene used for it. And for the
better vnderstanding of Apium, take this note. 


Selinon Ce­
pæo. 
σέλινον 
κηπαιον  Apium Hortense. Persley, or gardin persley. 


Selinon Agrion
σέλινον 
ἄλριον Apium syluestre. Wylde Persley. 


Oreoselinon. 
ὀρεοσέλινον   Apium Montanum,
uel Montapium. Mountaine Perslye. 


Elcoselinon. 
ἐλεοσέλινον   Apium Palustre,
Paludapium Siue,
Apium Rusticum. Smalache, Marche, or
Marshe Persley. 


Hydroselinon. 
υδροσέλινον   Apium Aquaticum. Water Persley. 


Petroselinon. 
πετρσέλινον   Apiuum Saxatile, uel
Saxeum, Saxaphium, aut
Petrapium. Stone Persley. 






ἴπποσέλινον  Apium equinum. 
Equapium siue. 
Olus atrum. Alexanders, or
greate Persley. 
Hipposelinon


σέλινον Φραγ­
μϊτυζ  Apium sepis, uel
Apium sepiculare. Hedge Persley. 
Selinon
Phragmites. 


And whersoeuer thou fyndest anye kinde of Apium, disa­
greinge, (whether in sense or Interpretation) to this order,
holde it for false. 

Batrachion. 
As for Apium Hæmorrhoidum, and Apium Risus: It is but an
abuse and confusion, to reckon them emonge the kindes of
Apium: amonge whome, (either in forme or faculties,) they
can haue no place. But are kyndes of Ranunculus, called in 
Greke βατράχιον, in English Crowfote, and Frogmarche
wherof also ther are very manye kindes, and all of whotte
and blistering property: wherof loke more in Flamula. 

De sym. med. 
fac. li. 8. 
Apium saythe Galen, is so whotte: Vt Vrinam &  menses cieat. 
It breaketh wynde, but that dothe the sede, more then the
herbe, and is to the mouthe of the stomacke moste accepta­
ble. The seade of Oreoselinum, and Hipposelinum, are of lyke
vertues, but Oreoselinum is the stronger, hitherto Galen. Api­
um is whotte in the seconde degre, and dry in the middes of
the thirde. 

"Frogmarche" is not found in the OED but must be a variant of "march," n. 1 ("Wild celery, Apium graveolens"). 



Apostema.  
AS αποςημα. Hoc est Spatium, siue interuallum, whyche
signifyeth distance or space, is the same whyche the
Latines caule Abscessum, of Abscedo. And Galen calleth
it Particularum diductionem, and are certyne dispositions,
wherin suche bodyes as before touched together, are nowe
differente, and seuered one from an other. Wherof (saythe
Galen,) there must nedes be made a void space, conteining
some substance, eyther flatuous, or moyste, or compound of
bothe. Whiche (if it hange, or tarye longe therin,) receiueth
divers alterations. Wherof the greater, is usuallye called






Apostema, and the lesse Pustula. So is for Exitura, in Lanfranke
and others of that age, and also of a Avicenna, to be vnderstan­
ded Tumor suppuratus: that is a suppurate aposteme, or riped
tumore. But of these I nede here make the lesse declarati­
on, for so much as matter Gale, hathe so worthilye, and
most exquisitly in his Institution of a Chirurgien, opened
these thinges at large. Where thou maist, bothe in thys &
many other maters, be right sufficiently satisfied. 
Apostema. 
Abscessus. 
Dudictio par­
ticularum. 
Li. de tumori
praternaturam. 
De arte cura­
tiua ad Glau­
conem. lib. ii. 
Cap. 6. 
Pustula. 
Exitura. 
li. 4. sen. 3. 
tractatus


Aqua.  
WAter is of temperament cold, contrarye to fier and of
all other thinges (saithe Galen) the moistest: and that,
as it is vtterly without qualities, (as wythoute taste, with­
out sauor, and moste cleare,) so is it moste pure: And as it
bendeth from this, so receiueth it qualities, to heat or coole,
according to the thinges, therwith mixed. 
lib. 1. de com­
positione me­
dicamentorum
& lib. 2. de
symp. med. fa
cul. ca. 8 &  . 5


Aristolochia.  
Αριστολόχια is of . iii. kindes, as Dioscorides saith: &  obteineth
that name, of the precious helpe that women receiue ther
by, in their hard labours of children: which doctor Turner
hathe therfore moste aptly called in English Birthworte. 
The first is called Aristolochia rotunda. The second Aristolochia
longa. The thirde Clematitis: bisyde these Plinius addeth a 
fourthe kinde, called πιπστρισολόχια. 

The Apothecaries haue of longe time erred, in sellinge
Holoworte for Aristolochia rotunda: but some of late haue in
the selues reformed this euel, &  doe sel the true thing. But
surely many women &  midwiues do erre muche more gre­
uously in my iudgment, who plant in their gardens, a use in
womens labours. Bistorta in the stead of Aristolochia calling
it Astrologia: whyche is of a coolynge and verye astringente
nature, &  therfore causeth rather retention, then expulsion:
I aduertise all good women therfore, that are willynge to
helpe them selues and others, to seke for the true thynge,
whiche thy maye be sure to obteine, by the aduise of some






learned Phisicien, or experte Chirurgien, at the trustye A­
pothecaries hand. It groweth plentiouslye in Italye, and
Aristolochia longa, or at leaste Clematitis: groweth nowe
in diuerse gardens in Englande, as in London: in a gar­
den of master Holande, late Chirurgien to the Quenes
highnesse: of whome I had rotes, whiche growe nowe in
my garden at Maidstone. Of Aristolochia and his kindes, read
more in master Turners Herballe. And for Bistorta reade
Fuchsius, de historia Stirpium. The rote saythe Galen is bitter
and somewhat sharpe, but the rounde is the subtillest. Of 
the other. ii. Clematitis smelleth swetest, but yet is the wea­
ker. The longe is so subtille as the rounde, and hathe hea­
tinge, and scouringe power, degesting, and scouring away,
lesse then the rounde: but heateth rather more then lesse. 
Pistolochia. 
Bistorta. 
Galenus de symplicibus
lib. 6. 


Aschachilos.  
EVen as Aschachilos: (whiche Galenus calleth σφὰκελον,
and Syderationem,) is (saythe he) an vniuersall corruption
of solid or massiue bodies, not sparing the very bones:
So is Gangrena, the mortification of such solide bodies, with­
out corrupting the bone, & foloweth great inflammations. 
In libro de tu­
moribus præ
ter naturam. 
Sphacelos. 
Syderatio. 
Gangrena. 


Asphodelus 
CAlled also Albucum, and Hastula regla, and of the Apo­
thecaries Affodilus: is called Greke ασφόδελος,
and in English Affodill. And this doubtles it is, that
Lanfranke meaneth: whose vertues, (as by Dioscorides it
is euident), do most exactly serue to that intent: and not the
herbes that we cal Affodils, or Daffodils: whyche are no
kindes of Albuci, but rather of Narcissi. 
Albucum. 
Hastula regia. 
Libro sucundo. 
Narcissus. 


Auripigmentum.  
IS called in Greke ασρενικὸν, and in English Orpiment. 
It hathe power or facultye to gnawe, to bynde, to re­
presse, to corrode, to excoriate, and to rayse blysters,






euen like fier, and is found: as saythe Dioscorides, in suche
mynes of metalles, as Sandaracha is. 
Arsenicon. 
Lib. 5. &. 6. 
Sandaracha. 


Axungia.  
Loke in Adeps. 



Balaustium.  
ΒΑλαυστιομν is after Dioscorides the floure of the wylde
Pomgranate, as Κυτινος, Latine Cytinus is of the tame:
and σίδιον, Latine Sidium uel Malicorum is the roughe
rynde or shelle of the same frutes, all the whyche do migh­
tilye coole and dry: and therfor saythe Galen, li. 6. de sympli­
cium facultatibus. They Cicatrize vlcers, and are vsed of all
men in medicynes for reiections of bloude, fluxe of the be­
lye, and Dysenteria. 
Cytinos. 
Sidion. 
Mali Corium. 


Baucia.  
THat whyche the Apothecaries calle commonly Bau­
cias, is cauled in Englysh wylde Persnippe, in Greke
Ελαφόβοσκον άγριον, in Latine Elaphoboscum Siluestre, 
and of the Herbaries Abstertion that it is of temperament
after Fuchsius, lyke to Elapboboscian Satiuum, sauinge that by 
reason of a certaine bitternesse, and lighte Abstertion that it 
hathe it is dryer. 
Elaphoboscon
agrion. 
Elaphoboscum
Syluestre. 
Branca leonina


Baurach. 
Whether it weare the mynde of Lanfrancus, or of some
other that hathe since corrupted his worke, to inter­
prete Braurach, (so called of the Arabians) Sal gemmæ, it is
somwhat doubtfulle but by the oulde learned wryters, it
semeth farre otherwyse, for Baurach, as by them it is evident
is Αφρονιτρον, id est spuma Nitri, that is the spume or scumme
of Nitrum. It is by the testemonies of Galen and Mesues: of
the facultye and nature of Nitrum, thoughe somewhat wea­
ker. What sal gemmeus is, you shall fynde at Sal. 
Aphronitron. 
Spuma Nitri. 








Bdellium.  
Βδὲλλιον, whiche (as saith Dioscorides) some calle βόλχον,
and others μαδελκον: Is the teares, or gumme of a tree,
whiche shoulde be bitter in taste, thinninge like glew, fatte
wythin, easily meltynge, wythoute wode or filthinesse, and
smelleth beinge burned lyke a houe: It heateth, and molli­
fyeth hardnesse, moueth vrine, breaketh stones. &c. It mol­
lifieth sayeth Galen sufficientlye, digesteth, and discusseth
moderatelye. 
Bdellion. 
Bolchon. 
Madelchon. 
De com. med. 
secundum lo­
cos, li. 8. 


Bolus Armenus.  
TErra, Lapis, Gleba, or Bolus Armenus, after the sentence of
Galen, of colour pale. And concerning substance, moste
apte to be resolued into an equall smothnesse, as lime, and
is of a mightye dryinge power and therfore is precious for
the Dysenteria, the fluxe of the wombe, spittinge of bloude,
Catarhes, and putrefyinge vlcers of the mouthe. Howbeit
the kinde therof, which is commonly vsed in exterior grefes:
as it is muche more grosse, then this here of Galen descri­
bed, so is it in eche poynt, of muche lesse vertue, or efficacy. 
Libro. 9. de
symplicium
medicamen. 
facultatibus. 


Bothor.  
THoughe this Arabye name Bothor, be (after the mind
of diuers learned,) taken for Pustula generally: yet is it
taken of Lanfrancus, Guido de Cauliaco, &  others of the age
more streightly for a kynde of pustule, or exiture, growing
in the eye: which is of Iesu Hali, thus described. Bothor (saith he)
is a certeine eminence, or litle Aposteme, as they calle it, 
whyche commeth of moysture, gathered betwene the rindes
of Cornea: wherof sayth he ther are. iiii. Galen in his defini­
tions, calling it σταφύλωμα, (id est Vua uel acinus Vua) saith,
that it riseth in parte of the pupille, lyke the grayne of a
grape. And is made, when throughe peyne and inflamma­






tion, the pupille is reysed vp vpon highe, shewinge the figure,
of a graine of a grape, as afore. 
Staphyloma. 


Botium.  
ABoute this Aposteme, called in greke βρογχοκήλη,
hoc est Tumor gutturis Lanfrancus, and others aboute
that time, (thoughe they agree of his place,) do vary
in the substance, and mater therof. For Guido saythe, it is an
aposteme growinge oute of the necke, engendered of hu­
mores, turned into euel mater. Brutus, and Theodoricus, saye
it is a fleshye aposteme, ingendered in the throte: Whyche
hapneth chiefly to women, and is of colour like their skin. 
and Lanfrancus in his greater worke, (agreing wel with ne­
ther of them:) saith it is made of corrupt humores, &  chiefly 
of Phlegme corrupted: But often of whot Apostemes, cor­
rupted by longe retention of the mater, in the place affec­
ted. Howe be it we oughte not to be astoned, at this varie­
tye: since neyther of them, is therof a true description: But
rather doe seuerally serue, to seueral kindes therof. Which
are of Celsus seuerally described. 
Bronchocele
Tumor guttu
ris


Brassica.  
IN Greke Κὸάμβν, is of . iii. kindes. Esculenta, Agrestis, &  
Marina, but Esculenta, or Satiua Brassica, (which is our com­
mon garden Cole,) is that whiche Lanfranke mentyo­
neth: as well forbidding the vse therof, in the diet of those that
haue Cancrum, because it ingendereth grosse, and melancho­
like iuyce:) as also teachinge proffitablye to vse the same, in
resolution. It is of temperamente whot and dry in the first
degre. It hathe by the testimonye of Galen dryinge power,
bothe eaten and outwardly applied, but is not very sharpe. 
It cureth Erysipelata, Phlegmonnasque, that are indurate and
harde to heale. 
Crambe. 

The phrases "common garden cole", "garden cole", and "common cole" were not found in the OED. 



Bubo 
Βουβὼν (id est tumor inguinarius) Φύμα, Φύγεθλον, Bubo, Phy­
ma, and Phygethlon, saythe Galenus, are affectes of the Glan­ 






dules. Bubo being only an inflammation of them. Phyma, is 
that whych forthwyth augmenteth, and hasteth to supura­
tion. And Phygethlon is eyther Erysipelas in them wyth in­
flammation or inflammation wyth Erysipelate. But Guido (al­
ledginge Auicenne in the end) taketh it three wayes thus. 
Firste saythe he, Bubo is properlye a sole Aposteme, lur­
kinge in the arme holes, as dothe the Owle in the walles
of houses. Otherwise it is more larglye taken, for the Apo­
steme, that ingendereth in anye of the emunctorye places. 
And thirdlye for all apostemes (generallye,) that growe in
glandulous members. Theodoricus also defineth it to be a great
harde, and depe collection of mater, expelled from the prin­
cipalle members, to the places aforesayde: wyth heate and
burning. But hereof in Lanfranke I finde no description. 
And note that as of Guido it may be gathered, this tumore
to haue thys name Bubo, or the Owle so called in Latine: so
is as well the herbe Bubonem
in the grindes,) called Bubonium, as also those partes it re­
ceiuing Bubones.  
Boubon. 
Libro. i. cap. i
de arte curati­
ua, ad Glauco­
nem. 
Phyma. 
Phygethlon. 
For the emunc
torye places,
loke in myne
Anatomye. 
Bubonium. 



Butyrum.  
For the substance and nature of butter, loke vnder Lac. 




Calx viua.  
OR lime unslicked: dothe vehementlye burne, and
Cauterize. But being utterly extincted, it remo­
veth the eschare: and in processe of tyme, it wyll
make no eschare: although it beat and liquify the
flesh. And being often washed, it fryeth much, wythout bi­
ting. It is a kinde of ashes, but of substance more subtil then
the ashes of woode. The Grecians calle it τίτανον. 
Gale. de sym
wed. li. 8. &. 9


Cancer.  
OF the Aposteme Cancer, ( whiche the Grekes calle
Καρκίνωμς,) with hys causes, sygnes, and cure: hath
Lanfrancus so largely and sufficiently spoken, that
here nedeth no more therof be sayde. 






but onlye to aduertise men of vnderstanding, rather to be­
leue, not onlye Lanfranke, but also Galen: then by sole
hardinesse, (standinge to muche in theyr owne conceytes,)
to deceyue them selues and others, by takynge on them
thynges vncurable. 
Καρκὶνος, id est Cancer fluuiatilis. The river Crabbe, as it
is a specialle medicine against venim, and the hurts made
by virolente beastes: so is it of power to draw out thornes,
and slivers in the fleshe. 
Carcinoma
Carcinos
Galenus de
Theriaca, ad
Pisonem. 


Cantharis 
Κανθαρις, is a certeyne flye, of a grene colour. Which being
geuen wyth other mete diuretike medicines, dothe purge
the renes, and helpeth the difficulty of pissing: otherwise it
dothe as wel exulcerate the blader inwardly, as burne and
blister the skin, whersoeuer it be applied outwardly. 
Galenus, libro
de theriaca ad
Pisonem. 


Caphura.  
OF Camphora, there is a varietye of opinyon, because the
aunciente Grekes wryte not therof, neither anye
saue only the Arabians. For Platearius denieth it flat­
lye to be the gum of a tree, affirminge it to be the iuyce of
an herbe, colde and drye in the fourthe degre. But Pandacta­
rius and Antonius, Musa, Brasauolus, alledginge Auicennam and Se­
rapionem, say it is the gum of a tree, or rather saythe Brasauo­
lus, the pithe of the same, colde and drye in the third degre:
of a redde and spotty coloure. And is by sublimation (as by 
the heate of the sunne, or of fire,) made whyte, erre it come
to vs: takinge the name Camfor amonge the Arabians, of
Panzor the place where it groweth. Or otherwyse, because 
it will hardlye be kepte. It coleth inflammations, stayeth
the fluxes of bloude, of the bellye, and of the eyes. And hea­
leth whot vlcers, comforteth the senses, and taketh awaye
watchfulnesse. 






And because it colynge (as before) in the third degre: yet
is easilye set on fyre, and yeldeth a cleare flame: and also be­
cause nothinge is more odoriferous: Pandactarius moued be­
like wyth the common principle, that euerye odoriferous
thinge is also whotte, accompted it a miracle: contrarye to
the minde of Galen, who iudgeth them to erre, that gesse
the faculties of medicynes by theyr odores. For neither is
euerye thinge whotte, (saythe he,) that smelleth well: nei­
ther dothe euerye thing smell well, that is whotte. Ney­
ther yet oughte any man to pronounce, euerye thinge that
stinketh coulde: nor euerye colde thinge, to haue a stync­
kinge sauore. 
Camfor. 
De sym. med. 
fac. li. 2. cap. 3


Carbunculus.  
Loke for it vnder this worde Anthrax


Cardamomum.  
CArdamomum, is of the later wryters distingued into ii. 
kyndes, Maius &  Minus. Antonius Musa Brasauolus reco­
neth . iii. sedes to be amonge the Apotheries vnder
that name extant, but neither of them as he also noteth, a­
greeth wyth Cardamomo Dioscoridis, who havynge first she­
wed from whence it is broughte, saythe thus. It ought to
be chosen whiche is fulle, fastened, and harde or toughe to
be broken, (for that whiche is not so is iudged olde,) sharpe
in taste and bitterish, whose odore greveth the head. With
thys saythe Brasauolus agreeth iustlye bothe in descriptyon
and facultyes Cardumeni Serapionis: but so doe none of the for­
mer of the Apothecaryes, and therfore menne thinke we
have it not. Galenus measuringe the qualities of Carda­
momum, wyth the temperamente of Nasturtii saythe, howe
muche the more swete, and fragrante it is, then Nasturtio. 
So muche the weaker is his facultye of heate: neyther is
it mete to ulcerate. yet hathe it therwyth adioyned a cer­
taine bitternesse: wherby it killeth wormes, and with vi­
neger, mundifieth scabbes strongly. Loke more for this in
Grana paradisi. 
Dioscorides. 
libro. 1. 
libro. 7. de
symp. medi. 
facultatibus. 







Carnes variæ 
THe ingenderinge of fleshe, and what it is: you maye
reade in the nynthe Chapiter, of the first treatice, of
myne Anatomy. Fleshe (sayeth Galen,) Beinge well
sodde, maketh good bloude: namelye if it be fleshe of good
iuyce. Of al meates caro suum nourisheth moste. bubula
also giueth not a little nourishmente, but is harde to put o­
uer, bredeth bloude to grosse, & apt to cause melancholike, af­
fected. And, as to yong men in good habite of body, the flesh
of a grown hogge, is better than a pigge: so is veale better
than beffe, and kiddes flesh better than gotes fleshe: whych
are muche better & easier concocted. Lambes fleshe is very
moist &  Phlegmaticke: but mutton maketh more iuyce, and more
excrementes. The gotes flesh hath a sharpe & vicious
iuyce. Kiddes fleshe is not euel for old persons. Caro hircorum
is both of iuyce and concoction the worst. The like may be
sayde of beffe or rammes fleshe: but of all these the gelded
are the better: as the olde fleshe is worse. Hares fleshe bre­
deth grosse bloud, but better iuyce then beffe. Hartes flesh
or buckes flesh, is hard to concoct. And make as euel iuyce 
as any of the rest: & therfore are Hartes flesh, Gotes fleshe
and beffe, profitable neither for old nor yong. To yong men
mutton is admitted, though to old men it be not commodi­
ous: and muche lesse lambes fleshe. 
Euery kinde of flying foule, geueth very litle nourysh­
ment, in respect of beastes. The fleshe of foules is easye to
concoct, chiefly of the bird called Attagen, (which some thinke
is the woodcoke. ) The fleshe of the blacke bird, the owsel &
the smal sparowes, are harder: but harder then they, is the
flesh of the turtle doue, the wood doue, &  the ducke. But to
conclude. Cum Cibis etiam animalium mutantur carnes. That is the 
flesh of beastes &  fowles are altered, by theyr feding. And 
therfore are the birdes alowed, that are conuersant on the
swete billes, in the holesome grauelly woodes, and plesant
groues: as suche as liue in marishes, or fennes, and fede in
the water, are vtterly escheued. 
De alimentis. 
li. iii. 
Hogges flesh
Beefe. 
The he gotes
fleshe. 
De sanitate
tuenda. li. 5. 
De sym. li. ii. 







Caryophilli.  
Loke at Garyophilli. 


Causon.  
Κάυσος, id est febris ardens: is one of the continuall feuers,
and hath to name tertians continua: caused of yelow choler,
putrefied in the veines, (none otherwise then Quotidians con­
tinua, commeth of putrefied phlegme and Quartans continua of
corrupted melancholy,) and differeth from Tertiani intermit­
tente, for that therin the cholericke humor is caried over all
the body. But in Ardente febre, it is together with the bloud,
conteined in the vessels: causyng muche payne & burnyng. 
Whervnto (saith Galen,) if rigor at any tyme chaunce: the
Feuer is therby disolued. 
Yet some neuerthelesse, make a certain obscure differens
betwene Causon &  Synocho,) and that rather of the colde temperature
of that tyme, then of hys owne nature. 
De sympto­
matum causis
li. ii. ac de tre­
more, palpita­
tione, conuul­
tione, et rigore


Casia.  
Casia Fistularis, or Cassis syringa, is (by the testimony of A­
uicen and Mesues,) meane betwene whotte and colde. 
But inclining rather, to heat and moisture in the first
degree. it is the frute of a tre, brought forth in hard blacke
coddes. Wholse inwarde pulpe, is resolutiue, and lenityue,
clenseth the blood and purgeth gently Choler &  Phlegme. 
And thys out of the Arabians, for amonge the old Grecians
it is not found: who yet haue their Cassion fistularem, whych
is of some taken for oure Cinamome. 


Cataplasma.  
Κατάπλασμα, quasi figmentum Crassum: Is that grosse kinde
of Plaster forme, that is made of sodden hearbes, Oyles
Peales, poulders, &c. 







Cepa.  
CAlled in greke Κρόμμυον, is of diuers kindes, as this
oure common Onion, called Cepa Escalonia, and wyn­
ter onion, called Holekes, in greke Κρόμμυον σχιστον,
id est Cepa fissilis. Siues also are thought to be a kinde of O­
nions. &c. Onyons are of grosse substance, whot and drye in
the fourthe degre. They doe maturate, attract, &  inflame,
beinge layde to, they open the Hemorrhoides, and sharpen 
the syghte made dulle by grosse humores. 
Crommyon. 

The term "winter onion" was not found in the OED, while "common onion" was only found in the quotations section of the OED. 



Cera.  
WExe: (wherof Galen praiseth that for the best, whiche
is called Tyrhenica, or Pontica:) is of it self amonges thin­
ges concoctiue, but weake. Yet hathe it a certayne whotte,
and digestiue power, leanynge to the nature of Hony. And
beinge put wyth other medicynes, bothe liquide and dry, it
is to them as a body: or common receptory substance. 
Tyrhenica ce­
ra uel pontica,. 
Li. 4. 7. &  . 9
de sym. med. 
fac. &  li. 8. de
com. med. secun
genera. 


Cerussa.  
Is of coolinge, dryinge, and astringente faculty, called in
Greeke ψιμμύδιον, and is made of Leade: by hanginge
plates of the same ouer the vapor of vineger, close coue­
red. It is vsed wyth profitte, and good effect, agaynst whot
inflamed vlcers. Cerussa burned til it become in colour lyke
Sandaracha, is therof called σανδυξ, &  is therby the more sub­
till, but heateth not: so φύκος kepeth the coldnes of Cerussa
but lacketh the subtiltye therof. 
Psimmythion
Gale. li. 9. de
sym. med. fac. 
& li. 1. de con. 
med. secun. 
genera. 
Sandyx. 


Chamæ;melum.  
CAmomille is called in Greke αυθεμις. There be ther
of three kindes. That is to saye λευκανθεμον, id est
Chamæmelum Album, χρυσάνθεμον, hoc est Chamæmelum
Luteum. Ηράνθεμον, Chamæmelum Purpureum. The first hauing
whyte floures. The seconde yelowe. The thirde Purple. 






They are whotte and dry in the firste degree, consisting
of the tender partes, and haue tenuatyng, losing, and digesting
facultye. 
Anthemis. 
Leucanthemon. 
Chrysanthemom. 
Heranthemon. 
Galenus de
sym. li. 6. 


Chelidonium.  
CAlled in Englishe Salendine, or Swallow Wurte,
in Greke χελιουόνιον, hoc est Hirundinaria, (so called ei­
ther because it bloweth, aboute the returne of swal­
lowes in the spring, and wythereth agayne at their depar­
ture: or else as Plinius wryteth, because the Swallowes did
fyrste fynde and use the same, so restore again their birdes
to syghte, beinge made blinde:) is of heatinge, and scou­
ringe propertyes. His roote is giuen (in Vino albo cum aniso,)
to the Iaundies that come of the liuer obstructed: and be­
inge chawed, helpeth the tothake. The iuyce of the herbe
is used in the eye, to sharpen the syght. And thus muche of
Chelidonium Maius. For ther is also Chelidonium Minus: which
(as it is sharper than the greater,) doth swiftly exulcerate. 
And the iuyce therof purgeth the head by the nosethrilles. 
It heateth and byndeth in the beginninge of the fourthe de­
gree, the greater onlye in the thirde. Wherfore that the
herbe called of the Latin wryters and apothecaries Ficaria,
& Scrofularia minor, in Englishe Pyle worte, (whose Picture
is vsually put, and not of the worste Herbal wryters
for this:) is not Chelidonium Minus, it is evident. Whose tem­
peramentes, (though the description of Chelidonium in Dios­
coride will suffer it in forme to agree:) are one to an other
cleane contraries. 
Chelidonion
Hirundinaria
Galenus li. 8. 
de sym. medi. 
facultatibus. 
Ficaria
Scrofularia minor
Dioscordes
libro secundo


Chirurgery.  
Χειροργια is sayd of euery arte, whose function consisteth,
in manualle action or handye operation. But here it is to 
saye Curatio mantualia: that is manualle or handy curinge. 
Cheirourgia







Cicatrizatiua med.  
CIcatrix is the scarre or token, where a wounde, vl­
cer &c. hathe bene, Wherof commeth Cicatrizo, id est
ad Cicatricem perduco, to heale or brynge to a skarre. 
And therof riseth Medicamina cicatrizatius, Cicatrisinge, con­
founding, or skin bringing medicynes. 


Cicer.  
IS a flatuous pulse, of greate nourishment, mouynge the
wombe, apte to ingender mylke, and to prouoke vrine
& Menses. Called in Greke Ερεβινθος. and is after Di­
oscorides of . iii. kyndes: namelye Satiuum, wherof afore. Areti­
num, whose decoction breaketh the stone in the reines. (which 
is also of . iii. sortes,) and Syluestre. They are all whotte, mo­
deratlye drye, and partners of bitternesse. Wherby they
purge the splene, the liuer, and the reines. They mundifye
scabbes, and lepryes. They also discusse the hardnesse of the
stones, and Apostemes vnder the eares, and doe heale in
composition, maligne vlcers. Thoughe a Domestico: as it is
(then it) sharper, and bitterer. 
Erebinthos. 
Diosco. lib. ii. 
Cicer satiuum
Cicer aretinum
Cicer sylue­
stre
Galenus, li. 6. 
de sym. med. 
fac. 


Cichorium.  
IT is playne by Dioscorides and others, that thys Greke
worde σέρισ, is a name common and indifferente, bothe
to Cichorium, (whyche is also called πικρις,) and to Intubum,
wyth also al theyr kindes. They are cold, somwhat bitter,
and moderatly astringente: and therfore moste comodious
for the stomacke, and conueniente in chiefe for the heat of
the liuer. Being eaten wyth vineger, they stay the belly. 
Intubum domesticum is colder than Agreste, whiche is cold and
drye in the seconde degre, and bitterer then the tame, (and 
is surelye the righte Cichorium,) and therefore not at eache
poynte so commodious to the stomache. They are (in Cata­
plasmatibus,) good medicynes for the gowte of the feete, and
the inflammations of the eyes. Theyr iuyces cum Cerussa,






& aceto, are for all griefes profitable, that nede coling. And
yet that dothe it so moderatly, that euen to colde distempe­
ratures it hurteth not. 
Seris. 
Picris. 
Dioscori. li. 2
cum Galeno
li. 8. de symp. 
medi. faculta­
tibus. &  li. 8. 
de compositi­
one medicamen­
torum secun­
dum locos. 

"Cichorium" antedates the earliest OED entry (a1806). 



Colla de corio.  
LAnfranke meaneth heare by Colla de Corio, that glewe
that some (saythe Dioscorides) caule υλόκολλαν, and o­
thers ξταόὸὸκολλαν, hoc est Gluten, Vel Glutinum taurinum,
made of Bullockes hydes. The best is whyte, and shinyng
throughe, but the blacker it is, the worse. It resolued in A­
ceto, deliuereth the skin of ring wormes, and lepyres. Bur­
ned blisters, are by washynge them in the decoction therof
kept from breaking. And Cum Melle aut aceto, It is pro­
fitable for woundes, and confoundeth them. 
And as thys beinge made of the skinnes and eares of
dyuers beastes, is of diuers sortes, and maye so varye in
name: so is there glewe made of diuers sortes of Fyshes,
whych is generally called ιχδυοκολλα, and may in names
particularly vary as the other. 
They haue all drying faculty, but doe vary in heatynge
and cooling, as the substances wherof they are made. 
Xylocollan. 
Taurocolla. 
Gluten,
Glutinum tau­
rinum


Colocynthis.  
Κολοκύνδις, called in Latine Cucurbita Syluestris, and of the
Apothecaries Coloqunintida, is whot and dry in the thyrd de­
gre. It purgeth vehemently, and aswageth the pain of the
tethe: beinge plastred to the nauel, it kylleth wormes. And
the iuyce therof grene, helpeth the Ischiada paine. 
Cucurbita
Syluestris. 
Diosco. li. 4. 
& Galenus de
sym. med. fa­
culta. li. 7. 


Concauitas.  
Holownesse. 


Conglutinatiua medicamina.  
ARe medicynes that combyn, and fasten together the
sydes, or borders of woundes, vlcers &c. Whych co­
meth of Conglutino, that is to fasten, or ioyne toge­
ther, as wyth glewe. 







Contusio.  
Contusion is here brusing, of Contundo, to beat or bruse. 


Consolidatiueæ medicinæ 
COnsolidatyue medicynes, of Consolido, to make fyrme
and sounde. Lanfranke sayth, that they are all one with
Cicatrizatiues, because theyr effectes doe so well ac­
corde, in finishyng the cure of woundes, vlcers, fistules, &c. 
whyche saythe Galen they doe not by drawing and liquy­
fyinge the fleshe: but by hardeninge and dryinge the same. 
De symp, li. 5


Coperosa.  
It is by Lanfranke all one with Vitriolo. Loke there. 
Vitriolum. 

Corallium.  
WHiche some haue called  Λίθοδένδρον, semeth (sayth Di­
oscorides) to be a shrubbe of the sea, which being drawn
oute from the depthe: as sone as it commeth into the aer,
dothe by and by congeyle and harden. It groweth in Syra­
cusa, about the Promontory Pachyno. It is of diuers colours,
(other saye kindes,) wherof the redde is the best. It coleth
and bindeth moderatly, it taketh awaye the scarres of the 
eyes, and filleth holowe vlcers and woundes. It is agaynst
reiections of bloude, verye efficacious and helpeth the dif­
ficultye of vrine: drunke also wyth water, it wasteth the
splene. The blacke coralle (which resembleth a bushy tre,)
called ἀντιπαθὴς, agreeth in vertues wyth the former, and
is thought to differ only in Specie. 
Dioscor. li. 5. 
Lichodrendron
But Brasa­
uolus noteth
it to obtayne
the second de­
gre in heate, 
for it is bitter
saythe he, and
hath a certain 
sharpnesse. 
Antipathes. 


Corrosiua medicamina.  
MEdicines that eat and consume suche partes as they
are applied vnto, inducing an eschare theron: & com­
meth of Corrodo, properlye to eate or gnawe aboute. 







Corrigiola.  
SO called of the Apothecaries, and of the Frenche men
Corrigiole, is oure common knottgrasse, called in Greke
πολύγονον, in Latine Seminalis, and Polygonum mas. For
of Sanguinaria, or Proserpinaca, Dioscorides and
Galen make onlye two kindes, as Mas &  Femina. Thoughe
Plinius and other later wryters haue moe. Polygonum after
Galen is of suche a watrye coldnesse, that it cooleth in the
seconde excesse, or in the beginninge of the third: And ther­
fore beinge applied colde, is a remedye for whotte burning
stomaches, for the tumor Erysipelas, and whotte inflamma­
tions. And farther it stayeth all fluxions, by the which rea­
son it semeth to haue drying power, and therfore is a good 
remedy to Vlcers, and Teters, and glueth together blou­
dy woundes. But the male sayth he (aledginge Dioscorides,)
is in all these the more potente. 
Polygonon. 
Seminalis. 
Galenus li. 8. 
de sym. med. 
fac. Cum Di­
oscoride. li. 4. 


Cortex pini.  
Loke at Pini Cortex.  

Cortex Olibani 
Loke at Olibanum. 

Cotonea malus 
COtonea malus, in Greke Κυδπνιοζ μελεά is the Quince
tree. Quinces called Cotonea Mala, or Cydonia, are profi­
table to the stomache, &  moue vrine: but that being rosted
more gently. They are good for the Dysenteria, for the fluxe of the
bely, &  for rotten coughes: &  that chiefly being raw. And the 
iuyce of them infused is geuen to the fluxions of the stomache
& bely. Being boyled with hony they are the more plesant,
bothe to the mouthe and stomache, but then they thycken
lesse. They are put rawe in Cataplasmatis, to restreigne the
belye, for heate of the stomache, vomites, inflammatyons,
and harde Splenes. 
Cydonios me­
lea. 
Dioscor. lib. 1. 







Cotyledon.  
VMbilicus Veneris, (called in Greke Κατυληδὼν, in La­
tine of some Acetabulum, and in Englishe Penyworte.)
Is coulde of temperamente, somwhat moyste, and fulle of
iuyce. It groweth on stone walles, and hathe after Galen,
a light bitternes, and also a certayne obscure adstringente
facultye. Wherby it dothe coole, repercusse, scoure away,
and discusse. And therfore healeth wel Erisipelatous inflam­
mations, & Phlegmonus Erisipelata, and is to a whotte sto­
mache in a Cataplasma most commodious. An other kinde
of this herbe ther is growinge in marishes, whyche is cal­
led Cotyledon Aquaticum, and is of nature very whotte, lyke
to the whotted kindes of Ramunculus. 
Acetabulum. 
Li. 7. de sym. 
med. fac. 
Cotyledon a­
quaticum. 


Crassula.  
IS amonge the Apothecaryes of two kyndes: Maior for
the whiche looke in Fabaria, and Minor, whiche you shalle
finde at Semper Viuum. 


Crocus 
SAffron called in Greke Κρόκος, dothe heate in the se­
conde degree, and drye in the first. Wherof the yelow­
est, and moste odorifferous is best. It mollifyeth and
digesteth, namelye Erysipelatous inflammations, rawe hu­
mores, and virulent affects. It moueth vrine and maketh
a good coloure. beinge drunke cum Passo, it defendeth surfe­
tynge: and applied wyth womans milke, restraineth the
fluxions of the eyes. Howe be it the continualle vse therof,
and the smelling therto, hurteth the head. 
Crocos. 
Dioscori. li. 1. 
Galenus de
sym. med. fac. 
li. 7. &  de
com. med. fe­
cum. loca. 
Li. 2. 6. &. 9. 


Cubebe.  
THe thin odoriferous frutes, (tasted like the rootes of 
Phu,) whiche the Arabians calle Cubebas: is that which
Galen calleth Carpesium, as Auicen, Aetius, Actuarius, &  
Ruellius, wryte, (whiche yet Leonicenus denieth, and others
make therof a doubte. ) And is saythe Serapio, the frute of a
tree, growinge beyonde the seas, whose leaues are sharpe
lyke a speare. The frute is found among the leaues, round 






and somwhat flat. Whiche when it is ripe, is of coloure re­
dishe. Wherin is found a trianguled grain. But this is by 
the iudgemente of Antonius Musa, the description of Myrtus
Syluestris, and the frutes of the same dothe Serapio call Cube­
bas, whiche differ from our vulgar Cucubis. Carpesium, saithe
Galen is like to Valerian, bothe in taste and facultyes, but
hathe more subtiltye, and therefore clenseth, and scoureth
more, the obstructions of the bowels, moueth vryne, and
purgeth the renes, pained wyth stones. 
Galenus de
simplici. lib. 7
Carpesium. 


Cucumis asminus.  
THoughe ther be diuers kindes of Cucumers, (& they
not wythout their singuler, &  eximious vertues:) we
haue here only to speake of the wilde, or leaping Cu­
cumer, called σίκυς άγριος, &  of the Apothecaries Cucumis
asminus. It is very bitter, and beinge layde to wyth Barlye
floure, breaketh every old coughe. The iuyce of the leaues,
instilled into the eares, helpeth they paines: and being ap­
plies with Terebinthin resin, it breaketh smal Apostemes. 
It easeth also the gowte, the tothe ache, &  the Ischiada paine. 
The roote therof is of abstersiue and mollificatyue facul­
tyes. The iuyce wherof and the rynde, (which drieth more
strongly,) geuen together doe purge Choler and Phlegme
chiefly in Hydropicis, and putteth forth deiections, wythout
hurting the stomacke. 

Out of the frute saith Dioscorides, is prepared a iuyce, (or
else pressed out of the rotes &  leaues saith Galen,) called Ela­
terium: whot in the seconde degree, and meruailous bytter. 
And therfore digesteth, moueth vryne, and healeth paynes
of the head. And finallye it dothe all, that the herbe, rote or
frute doeth, and that more strongly. 
Sicys Agrios. 
Dioscorides
li. 4. &  Gal­
nus, li. 8. de
sym. med. fa­
cultatibus. 
Elaterium. 


Cucurbita.  
Called in greke Κολόκινθα, is a frute apt to be eaten raw,
and is of diuers sortes, differing rather in forme then in fa­
culty. It is cold &  moist in the second degre, & therfore stai­
eth thirst. The iuyce of gourds, mixed with the iuyce of ro­
ses, is profitable to the pains of the eares, caused of inflamation. 






The slyces or peeces therof, are layde to the nodle of chil­
dren, againste the vehemente heate of theyr heades, called
Syriasis. They coole also the inflammations of the eyes, and
the gowte of the fete: and do helpe moreouer, the adustion
of the skin, and the vehement heat of feuers. The iuyce al­
so drunke, cum Melle &  Nitro, dothe easilye loose the bellye. 
Colocintha. 
Dioscor. li. 2. 
Galenus li. 7. 
de sym. medi. 
facultatibus. 
Syriasis. 


Cupressus.  
CIpresse is a tree called in Greeke Κυπάρισσος, in La­
tyne Cupressus, and of the Apothecaries Cypressius. It
cooleth and dryeth as Dioscorides saythe, Libro. 1. . The
leaues and nuttes therof , are used for those purposes in
medicynes. The leaues, braunches, and yong tender nuttes
of Cypres doe drye (saythe Galen) wythout great sharpnes
or heate, and heale greate ulcers in harde bodies. 
Cyparisses. 
De sympli. 7. 


Curcuma. 
AS saythe Syluius vpon Mesuen, is that wyth the Ara­
bians, whiche the Grecians calle Ερυθρόδανον, the
Latines Rubiam and Rubeam tinctorum, and we Ma­
der: Thoughe some applye that name to Chelidonio, and o­
thers corruptly to Saffron. And as this hys assertion hath
manye learned fautores, and therfore seemeth moste true:
so is it verye lyke to be that whiche Lanfranke meaneth,
for that it agreeth with his purpose, (Who putteth it a­
monge his consolidatiues,) whiche the other doe not. 
The roote of Rubia is sharpe, and bitter: and therfore ex­
purgeth the Liuer & the splene: Prouoketh muche grosse,
and sometime bloudye vrines, and scoureth meanlye. And
therfore helpeth Ischiada payne also, and loosed members. 
Erythrodanon. 
Rubia. 
Galenus de 
sym. li. 6. 
Diosco. lib. 3. 

"Curcuma" antedates the earliest OED citation (1617). 





Defensiueæ medicinæ.  
DEfensiue medicynes (of Defendo to guarde, defend
and prohibite. ) Are of no smalle profite to the
Chirurgien hys worke, whose vse and vtilityes






may by the circumstances (where so euer they are mencio­
ned) be easily gathered. 



Desiccatiua medicamina.  
DRying medicines (which commeth of Desicco to dry vp)
serue often the office of Cicatrizatiues, loke there. 


Diminutio.  
Diminution or abatemente. 


Dipsacum.  
DIpsacum called also Labrum Veneris, and of the Apothe­
caries Carduus Fullonum, is called in Greke δίψακοσ
and in Englishe Teasell. Ther are two kindes ther
of. The one the shermen occupye: The other whiche is cal­
led Dipsacum album, serueth after the minde of some,) chiefly 
for medicines. 

Radix dipsaci (saythe Galen) dryeth in the seconde degree,
and hathe not a little abstersion. It healeth (by the testimo­
ny of Dioscorides,) fistules, and chappes of the fundamente,
beinge brused and boyled wyth wyne, til it be as thycke as
were. And further is thoughte to be a remedye, for ryng-
wormes, and hanginge wartes. 
Labrum Ve­
neris. 
Dipsacos. 
Galenus de
sym. li. 6. 
Dioscori. li. 3. 

Dyscrasia.  
δυσκασία id est Intemperics, (that is distemperance) is after
Galen Aequalis, which is wythout payne, because ther is in
the place affected, a desired nature, (for no bodye is by hys
owne nature infested) or Inaqualis, whiche is when a bo­
dye is troubled bothe wyth heate and cold at once, or with
drinesse and moisture, more then to nature is conuenient. 
Which sometymes chaunceth, though it seeme vnlyke:
and how greate so euer it be, so muche dothe it moleste. 
These are eighte in number, and may seuerally chance, to 
the eyghte symple members: requiringe also, so manye dif­
ferences of curation. And are eyther symple, whyche maye
be . iiii. wayes, whot, cold, dry, or moiste, and maye be cured 
by theyr contraries: or compound as many wayes, as whot







and drye, whotte and moyste. &c. With these dispositions
one part, or moe, or the whole body may be affected. 

De sympto­
matum causis
li. 2. 
De methodo
medenci,li. 7. 
8. &. 9. . 
De arte cura­
tiua, li. 2. 




Embrocatio.  
Εμβροχὴ. i. Infusio, Irrigatio, Inspersio, uel liquor e sublime de fusus:
a pouringe on, waterynge, sprinklynge of Oyle. &c. or let­
tynge it falle, on the affected parte. The late learned wry­
ters calle it in Latine Embrocha, wherof commeth Embro­
cation, as we calle it. 
Embroche. 


Ephemera.  
WHyche (by changing . κ. into . ί:) hathe accustomablye
bene wryten Ephimera: Is a feuer happeninge chieflye
to melancholike persons, thoughe sometime it chaunce of
rawnesse, to bilious temperamentes: springinge of a pro­
catarctike cause, (which is therof an inseparable token, yet
therto not proper:) as weariness, drunkennesse, wrathe,
furye, sorowe, and suche other vehement affectes of the 
minde: and sometyme of bloude inflamed, or of the tumor
Bubo: contynueth wyth a swete or pleasant heate, and incly­
neth wyth some swete dewe or good vapor: after the whiche
commeth healthe. The naturalle tyme of continuance, is
one naturalle daye: wherin it is apte to be resolued, and
therfore is called Febris diaria, and in Greke Εφήμερα 
και
πυρετοσ ἐφήμεροσ. But thys end it taketh, by good gover­
nance in the beginninge: which if it passe, it sometyme
changeth bothe name and nature, and sometime only the
name referrynge the nature. And this state of Ephemera I
iudge Lanfranke to meane where he speaketh of Ephemera
continua. 
De differentiis
febrium, li. 1. 2. 
De methodo medendi, li. 8. 
9. ac. 10
De arte cura­
tiua ad Glau­
conem. 
Pyretos E­
phemeros. 
Febris diaria. 

Erysypelas.  
Ερυσίπελας: Is properlye an affecte of the skyn, sprunge of
pure choler (beynge made whot:) of coloure yelow, or pale,
or of bothe mixedly consisting: much whotter then Phleg­






mone, and is therefore called Ignis facer, uel S. Antonii, and of
some Ignis persicus. whiche names I thinke in ded may all
be applied, to it or hys kindes. 
And as for Erysipelas nothum, which Lanfranke mentio­
neth, I take rather by hys owne narration, to be Inflamma­
tionem Erysipelatosam. For Erysipelas nothum, may come . iii. 
wayes by receiuinge into it selfe by admixtion, anye of the
other three humores in lesse quantitye:and hathe to name
Ερυσίπελας Φλεγμονώδες, hoc est Erysipelas Phlegmonosum, uel
inflammationis particeps, if bloude be therwyth mixed: Ερυσι­
τελας 
φιδηματὼδης quasi Erysipelas pituitosum, uel oedematis
particeps. When Phlegme hathe a parte. Or Ερυσίπελας
σκιρρὼδης, id est Erysipelis indurantum, aut duritiei consors, be­
cause it is harde, throughe the felowshyp of Melancholye
therwyth. 
Galenus de
atrabile,
de tumoribus
præternatura
de meth. med. 
li. 14. de arte
curatius. li. 2. 
Erysipelas
Nothum. 
Erysipelas
Phlegmonω­
des. 
Erysipelas
oedemalωdes. 
Erysipelas
Scirrlωdes. 

Euphorbium 
Ευφόρβιοη: is the gum or teares of a tree, called Euphorbia,
growinge in Lybia, found out (by the testimonye of Dioscori­
des,) in the time of Iuba: and was called by that name, (as saith 
Ruellius,) of his Phisicien. It hath a vehemente whotte, and
burninge facultye, and profiteth verye muche againste the
Spasme, caused by the pricking of tendones. But for that 
oughte it not to be vsed to newe, (which is of colour cleare
whyte,) for the vehemente heate therof: Neyther to olde,
(which then waxeth yelow or pale,) because it is numbred
among suche symples, as doe soone lose theyr heat and ver­
tues. And yet continueth it . vi. yeres. 
Euphorbion. 
Galen. libro. 3. 
de symp. li. 6. 
de com. med. 
secun. genera
li. 3. de comp. 
med. secun. 
loca. li. 1. 


Eunuchus.  
A man is called υνοουος
, id est Castratus, when he is gelded,
and therthrough becommeth foggy or fatte. 
Eunouchos. 


Excoriatio 
Excoriation: is a taking off the skin, by flaing, or blistering,
which commeth of Excorio, to flea, or take away the skyn. 








Exitura.  
Goe to Apostema. 




Faba.  
CAlled in Greke Κυαμος coleth & drieth meane­
lye. Yet hathe the meale therof, some abstertion,
as also the hulles haue not a litle adstringente fa­
cultye. To be eaten they are flatulent, though they
be neuer so muche sodden: harde to be concocted, and cause
spittinges out of the brest & lunges: but they nurish much. 
In medicynes outwardlye, they drye vnhurtfully: and be­
inge boyled in water, were often vsed of Galen, cum adipi
suillo, to the goutes of the fete. The meale is incarnatyue,
and is put to bruses, and in wounds of sinewes, cum Oximi­
lite, and to inflammations cum Polenta. And is in Cataplasma­
tis moste apte, for swellinges of the pappes and stones. 
And although many learned men, by diuers reasons (which
I omitte) moued of late, doe doubte whether oure Beane
maye be taken for Faba, or for Phasiolo, or otherwyse howe:
Yet nede no man doubt (in my iudgement) that Lanfranke
as well as many other wryters bothe before him, and long 
tyme since haue for Faba vnderstanded the Beane. 
Cyamos. 
Dioscorid. li. 2. 
Galenus de
sym. med. li. 7
Phasiolus. 


Fabaria.  
THat whiche the Italians calle Fabariam, is thought of 
some to be Telephium, and called of others Cymbalion,
but neyther of bothe trulye. The later wryters calle
it Crassulam maorent, Lacobus Mantius wyth dyuers other, Fa­
bam grossam, we (and also the French men,) cal it Orpin, and 
aunciently Lempke. whervnto some haue added, (as a kind
therof,) the herbe that D. Turner, thinketh to be Capea of 
Dioscorides, calling it Fabaria minor, or Fabaria aquatica, and eng­
lishly brooke Lempke. But Crassula minor, is *by the common
consente, of almoste all the learned,) that kind of stone






croppe, that groweth commonly upon stone walles or hou­
ses, as Sedum dothe, hauinge round blunte leaues, like pud­
dinges or litle wormes, ful of iuyce, called also of the forme
aforsayde, Vermicularis, in Englishe Wormegrasse: wherof
more at Semper Viuum. 
The later wryters, (for the olde make therof no menci­
on,) doe praise theyr Crassulam maiorem, for the greate efficacy
that it hathe, in curynge woundes, in stoppynge of bloude,
chieflye for inwarde woundes and ulcers: and for the mer­
uailous profit it giveth, in healinge ruptures. 
Telephium. 
Cymbalion. 
Crassula ma­
ior. 
Crassula mi­
nor. 


Farina Volatica
THe flyinge meale of the mylle, commonly called mill
stuffe: beinge not one, but the meale commonlye of
manye graynes together, muste nedes possesse suche
facultyes, as the composition maketh: (As wheat is
of temperament whot in the firste degre, but neither moi­
steth nor dryeth manifestly: And barlye cold and drye in the
first degree. Yet dothe wheat flower manifestly moiste, as
also Barly meale dothe, somewhat more then the grayne: 
thoughe Polenta doe drye muche more.) But Farina Volatica,
is commonly colde and drye of complexion, and therfore is
conueniently put into restrictiues, and consolidatiues. 
Galenus de a­
linentis. li. 1. 
ae de atenuan
te Victus ra­
tione. 


Felles quium
CHoler naturalle, or the gaule, called in Latyne Fel,
and Bilis, in Greke Χολη: Is of all iuyces in every li­
uing thinge the whottest. Whole heate is yet varia­
ble, according to the creatures theyr temperamentes. For
as the gaule of the Hogge, is of al other beasts the coldest:
so is the gaule of the shepe, of the gote, of the Bull. &c. eue­
ry one in theyr degrees whotter. 
But the gaules of fowles, (which only Lanfranke hath,
are bothe sharper and dryer, then of . iiii. foted beastes. Of 






the whych also, the galles of Hennes and Pertriches, are
moste alowed in medicynes. The gaules of the Kite, of the
Egle, and suche like, are excedinge sharpe and biting: yea
of a grene coloure, and somtime sworte. And therfore Ga­
len doth warne the same, that Lanfranke neglecteth not:
That is, to put vnto any of them the iuyce of Fenell, Mel,
and Opobalsamum: whensoeuer you vse them to the eyes. 
Chole. 
Galenus de
symp. med. 
li. 10. 


Fermentum.  
CAlled in Greke ζύμη: is meanlye whot, consistinge of
subtille partes coparcioner of a certaine colde sharp­
nesse, and also of heate, sprunge of putrefaction: and
hathe in common, bothe the nature of salte and meale. 
Wherefore leuen, especially if it be olde draweth from the
depthe, grosse spirites, and superfluous humores, and dyge­
steth them. But what nedeth here thus much, when Lan­
franke hathe so ouertly spoken therof in hys antidotarye. 
zyme. 
Galenus de
sym li. 6. &
de comp. med. 
secun. genera. 
li. 3. 


Ficus.  
THe Figge (and also the tree,) is called in Greeke συκη. 
The drye Figges haue a certaine subtiltye, and doe
heate in the firste degre, or in the beginnynge of the
seconde: wherfore as well they as theyr decoction, doe con­
cocte, and digest hard swellinges. But where conction is
chiefly required, they ought to be mixed with Farina trtrieticea. 
And where rather digestion, Hordeacea. Fatte fygges haue
the more concoctiue power, and soure figges and doe bothe
scoure more and digest. Grene fygges are weaker yet doe
bothe the moyst, (which hurt the stomache) &  the dry purge
the belly. But the fluxe by them moued, is sone stayed. 
Syce. 
Galenus de
symp. li. 8. 


Fistula.  
FIstula saythe Galen, (in his boke of tumores against na­
ture,) Sinus est angustus &  longus. &c. A fistule is a strey­
ght and long bosome, lyke to other bosomes, whyche is
muche drawen together, and after also agayne opened. 
That caue or holowe roome in the fleshe, which I haue






Englished a bosome, is there also of Galen thus defyned. 
When rotten mater, dothe excoriate bodyes, and deuyde
the conteinynge from the conteined, or subiecte: And far­
ther, it beinge emptyed howe so euer, the partes dissidente
one from an other, can not recouer their pristinate consti­
tution: thys affecte is called Sinus. Whiche (if it be not with
spede cured) dothe gather to it selfe Callum, and in tyme be
commeth harde: and then can not be adglued to his partes
subiecte. &c. And then doubtlesse it is no longer Sinus, but 
Fistula. 
Sinus. 


Flammula.  
FLammula: is one of the kindes of Ranunculus, (wherof ther
are very manye,) as are also the herbes, called of Lan­
franke and others, Apium risus, and Apium Hæmorrhoidum,
and also Pesmilui (as above vnder Apium:) and hathe so exce­
ding burninge, and blisteringe powre: (as haue also all the
rest,) that it exulcerateth the entraelles, but chiefly the ly­
uer; and therfore is moste pernicious fro sheepe, and other
beastes feedinge theron. It is called also of some Lanceola,
and in Englyshe speare worte, for that the leaues therof,
haue the forme of a speare head. 
Lanceola. 


Flosæris.  
IS called in Greke χαλκου ανθος: some men saith Dioscori­
des haue called it Claucram Veterum psegma, that is the scra­
ping, rubbing, or dust of old brasse naues or rivets. But
a litle after chewing the makinge therof, he saythe it com­
meth of melted brasse, by pouring cold water theron forth
with as it runneth by certain conducts, but of the fornace. 
Wherby this Flos aris breaketh forthe, and congealeth in
many small partes, whiche of theyr formes, some haue cal­
led litle graines. It is by the sentence of Galen, of more sub­
til substance, then as Vstum, or Squama aris: doth vehemently
scoure, &  also biteth much. Wherfore wyth collyries made
therof, the greate roughnesse or ruggednesse of the eye
browes are taken away, &  other superfluous excrescentes. 






And although it be (as you see) moste evident, that Aeru­
go and Flos aria are two thinges: yet maye the one in some
cases, be circumspectly bled for the other: after the myndes
of divers learned. Loke more at Viride æs. 
Chalcuan­
thos. 
De symp, li. 9

Fœniculum.  
FEnell, whyche the Grecians calle Μάραθροη, doothe
heate in the firste degre, and dry in the second, whyche
eaten, or the seade drunke wyth parley water, fylleth
the pappes wyth milke. Whose iuyce also healeth the web
in the eye, and sharpeneth the sighte moste commodiously. 
The roote and seade of Hippomarathrium doe drye more then
Foeniculum domesticum: and therfore seme to stay the belly, and
also are able to breake the stone, and to heale the iaundies. 
Marathron. 
Galenus de
sym. med. li. 7
Dioscorides
li. 3. 


Fœnum græcum. 
IS called in Greke τἥλις. The seade wherof beinge well
sodden, discusseth and mollifyeth, chieflye wyth some
kynde of fatnesse. The decortion therof hath discussyue,
and moderate heatinge propertye, and therfore loseth, and
maturateth: and is wonte to mitigate manye paines. It is
whotte saythe Galen in the seconde degre, and drye in the
firste. Wherby it kyndleth, and augmenteth inflammaty­
ons. For the whiche cause Lanfranke hath frendlye war­
ned us, to eschewe the sayinge of Fenigreke, to whotte in­
flamed members. Yet doth it by his deuiding power, heale 
suche inflammations, as are more hard than whotte. 
Telis. 
Dioscor. li. 6. 
de sym. li. 8. 
de com. med. 
secun. gen. li. 7
de com. med. 
secun. locos
li. 4. 


Formica.  
OF this tumore called in Greeke μυρμκκια. Auicenna,
(of whome Lanfranke semeth to take his definition
therof,) saythe: it is a pustule, that commeth out, and
causeth a pure aposteme, and is abulatyue. Whiche per­






happes vlcerateth, or els wyll be resolued: hauynge a sub­
stance, rounde lyke a lyttle warte, inflamed, and of coloure
somwhat citrine. But Galen (rekening it with Veruca, A­
crochordine, and other lyke affectes of the skinne,) teacheth
how with a holowe quille to plucke it out. Affirming also,
that some men at Rome in his tyme, vsed to byte them a­
way with their teeth. Neyther of the which wayes, can in
any wyse be mete for pure apostemes, eyther vlcerated, or 
apte to be resolued. 

Of the little Ante or pismire, called μύρμκξ doth this tu­
mor take his name, both in Greke and Latin. Of whose
egges Lanfranke maketh an oyle, whose vse and vtilitie: 
there may you fynde. 
Myrmecia. 
li. 4. fen. 3. 
Primi tracta­
tus. 
Li. 4. De me­
thodo medendi. 
Myrmex. 


Fraxinus.  
IT should seme that Lanfranke, taketh the rynde of ash,
to be of vertue lyke vnto myrtils, in driyng vp the bru­
sed places, kepyng the same from putrefaction: If it be
not added by some other, for I haue perused some copies,
whiche haue it not. But Ashe is vertuous againste the
swolne splene, and hath dyuerse properties, agreyng with
the Mirte tree, as in learned authors may farther reade 
both olde and newe wryters. The Ashe tree is called in 
Greeke μελία, and in Latin Fraxinus. 
Melia. 
Fraxinus. 


Furfur.  
BRan hath qualities variable, after the kynde of grain
that it cometh of. Howe be it, Furfur is commonly ta­
ken for bran of wheate: whiche is sayeth Galen, not
so whotte, but dryeth more then the meale, and dothe som­
what scowre. 
De symp. 
med. fac. lib. 5. 

"Furfurt" antedates the earliest OED citation (1621), but its sense here is quite different. 






Galbanum.  
GAlbanum, or as some wryte Chalbanum, after the 
Greke, which is χαλβάνη: is sayth Dioscorides,
the liquor of a tree, called Metopium, of a countrey
in Syria, where it groweth. Which name doth 






the Gum also sometymes obteine: For the vnguente Me­
topion is so called, of the admirtion of Galbanum therwith. And 
he sayeth that it is adulterate with hulled beanes, resin, &
ammoniake. Diosco. lib. 1. cap. 6 &  lib. 5. cap. 79. 
It ought to haue Similitudinem Thuris, uel Ammoniaci. It ta­
keth his name ab Albedine (sayeth Antonius Musa Brasauolus:)
and therfore the whiter is the better, and contrariwyse,
the worse. Wherfore the Galbanum that we commonly haue,
may well be iudged adulterate, or else the dregges &  drosse
of right Galbanum. It heateth after Galen, in the end of the
seconde degree, or in the beginning of the thirde, and dri­
eth in the beginning of the second. Wherby it hath com­
forting, mollifying, and degestiue powre, aswageth paine,
and is put in maturatiues: and in the prickes or hurtes of
sinewes, it helpeth not a lytle to mitigate payne, if the ner­
ues be not bare, for it hath as haue all other mollificatiues
some putrefiying propertie. 
Chalbane. 
De symp. li. 8
De com. med. 
secun. genera. 
lib. 3. 5. &. 7. 


Gallæ 
GAlla (saieth Dioscorides,) is a fructe of the Oke, wher­
of the lesse is rugged, without holes, and as it weare
but half growne, &  called Ομφακίτις, and is the best:
The other (which is greter) is plain, light, &  perced through
with holes. They are to vs well knowne: as well by the 
vse of perfect Galles, which we receiue from other regions. 
as also that we see them yearly growing plentifully in Kent:
(which are ther of the coommon sort called oke appuls). Though
they be never indurate. And whether ther be several kin­
des of okes, wherof (as maister Turner reasoneth,) some
beare Galles, and some not. I can not saye: For with us,
fewe okes for the most yeres are without. 
Howe be it, of maister D. Cunningham I am through
his most friendly conference informed that he hath by ob­
seruation founde on okes growing about Norwich, (wher
they are in certayne wooddes very plentifull,) three kindes
of fructes: the Acorne, the Oke appull, and the Galle: All






the whiche I haue also by obseruation founde in Kent. The
Acorne, and the Appull, growing on the sprigges or bran­
ches, but the Galle, on the leaues of the tree. The Galle
(saieth he) waxeth harde, and the outward couering wryn­
kled, and hath been by triall proued good (besyde the natiue
adstringent vertue,) to make inke, and blacke colours. Af­
firming also, that the appul is harde in Julie, but hath gro­
wing on it a softe substance, not unlike to masse, inwardly
more massy, &  very stiptike: within the which also are those
thinges found, that are in the Galle. Wherof also some old
experte husbandmen of Kent, haue no smal opinion to iudge
by them the sequell of the yere. For they breaking them a­
bout their time of withering, doe finde in them some liuing
thing. As sometime an Ante, wherof they iudge plenty of
grayne: sometime a whyte worme lyke a gentill, wherof
they prognostricate moreine in of beastes: And sometime a
spyder, wherof they presage the pestilence, or some other
lyke sicknes, to folowe among men. Whiche thing also the
learned haue not omitted to note, though not in the same 
order. For Matthiolus upon Dioscorides hath these wordes. 
Illus sibi peculiare maiores Galiæ uendicauere, ut quot annis aut an­
none fertilitatem, aut sterilitatem, aut pestilentem auram prænumcient:
Nam si rumpantur integra (& quæ perforatæ non sunt,) aut museam,
aut araneum, aut uermiculum exponeunt. Si muscauolat futuri belli, si
repit uermiculus, annonæ penuria: si curritaraneus, pestitentium mor­
borum præsagium est. Neque culquam mirum uideatur, quod ex omni­
bus Gallis ista oriantur animalculatetenim ego huius rei sæpius feci pe­
riculum, nullamque unquam suam consequutus prius non perforatam, quæ
ex tribus animalibus unum intra se non continerat. Nam foramine con­
specto facile iudicium sumi potest, iam animal exisse. Dicamus igitur li­
cet, quærcum & fructum, &  animal gignere. Cuius rei haud ignari ue­
teres illi patres, non sine causa quercum dixerunt loui summo esse dicatam. 
Which may in effecte thus be Englished. This thynge
haue the greatter Galles chaleged peculiar to the selues
that they can yerely forchewe, eyther plentye or scarcitie
of victualle, or a pestilentialle ayre; for if they be broken in
sondre, namely those that are not already through pearced. 






They conteine either a flie, a spyder, or a worme. If a flye
be founde, it is a prognostication of warre to folow: if a cre­
pyng worme, of the scarcitie of victuall: but if a runnynge
spyder, of pestilente sicknesses. Neyther let any man mer­
ueile that out of Galles those little liuyng thynges should
apeare: for this thyng haue I often proued, neither I
eyer fynde any, (being not before pearced withholes,) which
conteyned not within it selfe one of the fornamed ani­
malles: for the hole beinge sene, it is easy to iudge that they
are nowe gone forth. Wherfore we may saye, that the oke
bryngeth forth frute, and lyuing thynges. Of the whiche,
the olde fathers not being ignorant, haue sayde (not with­
out cause) that the oke was dedicated to the hyghe Ju­
piter. 

Galla (sayeth Galen) which is called Omphacitis, is a sower 
medicine and of substance for the most part earthy &  colde:
wherby it drieth and repercusseth fluxions, constreyneth &
fasteneth lose and feble partes. It coleth in the seconde de­
gree, and drieth in the thyrde. The other (which is great, 
yellow, and softe) drieth also, but that so muche the lesse as
it hath lesse sower or sharpe qualities. 
In primum. 
Dioscoridis. 
lib. Cap. Ve­
ro. 124. κηις
. i. Galla. 
De simplicium
facultatibus
lib. 7. 


Gangræna.  
GAngrænæ sayeth Galen, are suche mortifications not
yet absolute, as are made by the greatnes of inflamma­
tions: and are raysed when bloud boyling whotte, an­
nexed to inflammations, burneth the skynne. Looke more at
Aschachilos. 
De tumo. præ
ter nat. &  de
arte curatiua. 
lib. 2. 


Garyophilli 
GAryophylli, (others write Caryophylli,) in Greke Γαρυο­
φύλλοι, και χαρυοφύλλοι: so called, sayth Paulus Aegi­
neta, quasi folia nucis habentes, that is, hauinge the leaues
of nutte trees, odoriferous, and of very good taste. This






hath neither Dioscorides nor Galen: but Plinie maketh men­
tion therof, saiyng. There is a frute in India called Garyophil
lon, lyke a pepper grayne, but greater and britler, of colour
reddishe vpon blacke, headed like a nayle, with foure den­
ticles spredde lyke a starre: within the whiche lyeth bow­
lyng out a litle rounde button. The tree is of heyght three
cubites, hauing litle thick leaues, &  a broade woody roote. 
Cloues are whotte and drie in the thirde degree, very
aromatike, and haue almoste the vertue of pepper, but
dooe hurt the stomache lesse, &  are good against poyson. In 
lynimentes, they haue vertue to consume, dissolue, comfort
sinewes, and asswage payne, specially commyng of colde
matter. 
γαρυοφύλ­
λοη


Gentiana.  
GEntian is an herbe: called of the Grecians γεντιανὴ,
whose first inuention as sayeth Dioscorides, is assig­
ned to Gentius king of Illiria. The roote therof is whot
and drie, as the adstringencie and extreame bitternes ther
of witnesseth: And therfore doth moste effectually purge,
extenuate, and scoure away. Wherby it helpeth obstructi­
ons, and is drunke In Vino, cum ruta &  pipere againste the
daunger of venemous woundes: and is somtymes put into
fistules, and hollowe vlcers, to enlarge their orifice. 
Gentiane. 
lib. 3. 
GalenusDe
simp. med. li. 6


Gingiber.  
Gingiber is wrytten otherwyse Zingiber, looke there. 


Glandulæ.  
GAlenus in lib. 13. &  . 14. De methodo medendi, defineth Glan­
dules &  their natures double, saiying. Some Glandu­
les there are, placed in the myddes of the vesselles,
and of their branches, to defende their strengthe, whose vse






is not great. Other there are (whose vse is greater,) made 
to receiue, and make spitle, milke, seade, &c. (as thou maiest
farther see in myne anatomy, neither are they otherwyse
cured, when they are affected Cum scirrho, then other partes
of the body: But the other require the parte, with also the 
corruption to be taken vtterly away. They are partes most
apte to receiue fluxions, as well for their weaknes and lo­
senes of substance, as also because among all other partes,
thei haue (except the alteratiue) almost no natural facultie:
and therfor are most swiftly taken, of the tumores Bubones. 

Glandulæ in Lanfranke, are to be vnderstanded of the first
sorte of Glandules conteined in the vessels, being affected
of Phygethlon: but chiefly after his minde, of humores phleg­
matike. For if by melancholy they become scirrhous, he cal­
leth them Scophulas, but Galen nameth them Strumas, and
in Greeke χοιράδες. 
Scrophula. 
Struma. 
Chocras. 


Glycyrrhiza.  
Γλυυύρριζα, which is Radix dulcis, and we call it liquo­
rice, After the Apothecaries who call it Liqueritiam, is indue­
ed with a certeine warming propertie, and yet more colde
then man his nature: and muste needes also be moderatlye
moyste, as it is moderatly sweete. And therfore to staye
thyrste it is moste mete, and smotheth or softeneth the
roughnes or ruggednes, as well of the bladder, as of the 
sharpe artery. It is conuenient for the heate of the breste,
stomache, and liuer: And drunke Cum passo, healeth the pei­
nes of the renes. The pouder of the roote also dried, hea­
leth sayeth Dioscorides, the webbe of the eye. 
Galenus De 
simp. med. li. 6
Diosc. lib. 3. 


Grana paradisi.  
GRana paradisi are commonly taken for Cardamomo, and
are so vsually solde of the Apothecaries. Not with­
standynge others among the learned, thinke the com­






mon lyttle graynes, to be Grana paradisi. 
It is a spice of whotte &  drye nature, &  odoriferous of smel. 
Whiche I could neuer fynde so perfectly descrybed, of any
man, as of Rychard Eden, where he wryteth of the twoo
first viages of our Englyshemen to Guinea, saiynge that
our men might haue lade their shippes with those graines,
by the ryuer Sesto. These Graynes (sayeth he,) growe and
come forth, in a fruyte muche lyke a fygge: wiche (when
they are gathered,) are as redde as bloude. They growe
not paste a foote and a halfe, or twoo foote from the gro­
unde: And as the fygge hath in it many graynes, so hathe
this fruyte. Through the whiche the inhabitantes there
make holes, wherin they put strynges, and so hange them
to drye, that the sayde Graynes may be the more easely
taken out: as all seades and graynes, may most aptlye be
taken from theyr coddes vessicles or eares, when they be
very drye. These last haue been taken for Cardamomo minori,
and the former (sold commonly for Granis paradisi,) for Car­
damomo maiori. And this is the opinion of the later Phisiti­
ens: for Brasauolus noteth three sortes of seedes, which haue
been of olde among the Apothecaries under this name 
Cardamomum. The one is the trianguled grayne, whiche
they sell as is aboue sayde, both for Cardamomo, and Grano pa­
radisi. The seconde he calleth Meligettan. The thyrde (sayeth
he) is Cardamomum of the auncientes, is 
to vs vtterly vnknowne. 
Cardamomum. 
Meligetta. 
Nigella Ci­
trina. 


Gummi Arabicum
GVmmi Arabicum founde (and also so called) of the Arabi­
ans, because it is there moste plentifull, and also Babi­
lonicum &  Sarasenicum, vpon lyke reason, is the teares of the
thorny tree called Acacia &  Spina Aegyptia, (described befor in the 






letter A) and therfore may it be called Gummi Acaciæ, or Gum­
mi Spinæ Aegyptia, Though the Gumme that is vnder that
name commonly solde, be the gumme sumetime of the bit­
ter almonde tree, whiche is nexte of goodnes to the beste,
sometyme of the Cherry or prune trees, and sometyme of
the Elme: and this is the cause why it is founde of so diuers
colours. It is (as the tree wherof it commeth) of cooling and 
drying facultie, without sharpenes of byting: And therfore
a commodious lenitiue medicine, for the grefes and peines 
of the eyes. 




Hammoniacum.  
Is to be sought at Ammoniacum. 


Hæmatites.  
&#x0303B1`;ιματίκς, id est apis sanguinaria, in English the bloud stone. 
So called sayeth Galen, of the lykenes in coloure that it 
hath with bloude: beyng of so muche coldnesse, as it hathe
adstriction. Wherfore it is founde a medicine profitable to
the eyes: and may be vsed alone, to the roughnes of the 
eye browes, if it come of inflammation. And thus muche of
his faculties efficient, whiche are by reason knowne. For 
the faculties that it hath after the propertie of the whole 
substance, are neyther knowne by reason, nor methode,
but onely by experience. Wherby it stayeth the fluxe of
bloude, the wounde beyng onely touched therwith. It is
conuenient for all vlcers, and the poulder therof represseth 
excrescentes. 
Gal. De symp. 
lib. 9. 


Hedera.  
IVye (of the Grecians Κισσός,) is after Dioscorides of . iii. 
kindes, namely Candida (which Plinie calleth foemina,) Ni­
gra, (of Plinie mas,) and Helix. Wherof the white reioy­






ceth in watery places, the blacke to growe vpon walles or
trees, and Helix barenly crepeth on the grounde. 
It consisteth (by the sentence of Galen) of contrary qua­
lities: as of a certeyne adstryngente substance, whiche is
colde and earthy, hauing also some sharpnes: whiche to bee
whotte euen the taste proueth. And farther if it be grene,
it obteineth a warme and watery substance. 
The grene leaues therfore boyled in wyne, doe glewe
together and brynge to healynge greate and maligne vl­
cers, and vlcers made with fyre: though by experience, we
see them also attractiue, and apte to kepe long open, suche
sores as we would not haue healed. And being boyled with 
vynegar, they helpe the sycke of the splene. The tares or
gumme therof kylleth nittes, and maketh balde, and is so
whotte, that it priuily burneth. Whiche yet I haue found,
to be a meruaylous desiccatiue, and with oyle to asswage
peyne. 
Cissos,
lib. 2. 
De symp. 
lib. 7. 


Hermodactylus.  
THough that kynde of Εφκμμρομ, (so called because it
kylleth in one daye hym that eateth the roote ther­
of) that is also called Κολχιηὸη, (of the contrey Colchis,
where it did plentifully growe) haue emong many learned
men, borne the name of Hermodactylus, and may be one of 
the worste or nocyue kyndes of the same, accordyng to the
descriptions of Auicenna, Serapio, Mesues, &  other Arabians: yet
it is not the Hermodactylus that is solde of the Apothecaries. 
First because the roote of this is rounde on al partes, black
or reddyshe, and when it is drye rugged, or wrynkled:
whose stalke goeth forth at a rifte or creaste, in the vpper
or smallest ende. That of the Apothecaries is rounde on the 
one syde, and flatte on the other: whyte, and smothe, and
without rifte: but hath on the flatte syde, a certayne sha­
lowe dinte, as it weare a cloue cleauynge to the syde of a 
stalke. Wherin it very well agreeth, with Hermodactylo,






as Paulus Aegineta descrybeth it. The same also doth Cordus
inferre, because Colchicum strangleth, whiche Hermodactyli
doe not. Who affirmeth Hermodactylus to growe in mowne 
medowes, and sonny places. 

Mesues makyng twoo kyndes of Hermodactili, sayeth. It is 
the roote of an herbe that groweth on the hylles, wherof
the one is of a fynger length, the other rounde: and this is
eyther whyte, redde, or blacke. Amonge the whiche, that
whiche is white, bothe within and without, is the beste: as 
the redde and the blacke are euell. Whiche (sayeth Serapio),
doe strangle, and therfore may one of these be that kynde
of Colchicum, or wylde saffron, that groweth in certeyne
gardyns in Englande. 
But who so woulde note more exactly, Mesues order of
deuision of Hermodactilus, may beholde it thus gathered. 

Of Hermoda­
ctilus ther are
two kyndes. 
Long, as of a finger lengthe. 
Round wher­
of the sortes
are three, dif­
fferyng in co­
lours, as 
1 Whyte 
wherof the 
Best is
1 Very whyte both
within &  without. 
2 Compacte. 
3 Meane betweene
harde and softe. 
All others howe muche so­
euer they wante of the for­
named tokens, so much are 
they inferior in goodnes to 
the beste. 
2 Redde. 
3 Blacke. 
Bothe the whiche are euell. 






It is whotte and drie in the begynninge of the seconde
degree. whose moisture is excrementous, flatulente, ab­
horfull, and hurteth the stomache: chiefly when the excre­
mentes of other partes flowe into the same. It draweth
principally from the ioynctes grosse phlegme: And therfor
helpeth the gowte, and other paynes of the lymmes, either
taken in, or layde to in Cataplasmate, cum uitellis ouorum, farina
hordeacea, uel mica panis. It maketh fatte, and is proffitable for
vlcers: in that it consumeth the putrefied fleshe, and wy­
peth away the filthines in them. It is called Ερμοδάκτυλος,
Quasi mercurii digitus, that is, Mercuries finger, or els as o­
thers wyll Hermetis digitus. 
Ephemeron. 
Cholchicon. 
Sperma quo­
que auget. 
Hermodacty­
los. 

"Mercuries finger" antedates the earliest OED citation (1589). 



Herpes.  
Ερπης, is one of the tumores against nature, that are re­
ferred to Erysipelas, and an affecte of exulceration of the
skynne, springing, (by the testimony of Galen) of the same
cause: as of bilious excrementes, setlyng in some place. Sa­
uing that the humore therof, is thinner and subtiler then 
of Erysipelas, wherin also they differ. It is sayeth he, of two
kindes. For when the substance is grosse, it perceth through
the skynne with his vlcerations, euen to the fleshe, and is 
called Herpes exedens: whiche rightly in qualitie resembleth
the serpente, (wherof it hath his name) in crepyng, and de­
uouring the partes adiacent, and is of the kynde of Erysipe­
las vlcerate. But when it is ingendred of choler not so
whotte and sharpe, or (as to some it semeth not all without 
reason) myngled with some phlegme: it maketh no vlcer,
but litle pustules like the graines of Milium, and therfore is
called Herpes. 
De methodo
medendi. lib. 1. 
2. &. 4. 
De tumorib. 
præter naturam
Herpes exe­
dens. 
Herpes mi­
liaris. 







Hordeum.  
BArley is called in Greeke Κριθη, and therof are there
dyuerse kyndes. As Hordeum distichum, wiche is oure
sommer barley. Hordeum tetrastichon, bigge barley. Hor­
deum polystichum, of some wynter barley. Hordeum Hexastichum, 
whiche D. Turner calleth duche barley. Γυμνόκριθοη. i. Hor­
deum nudum, uel corticis expers, naked barlye, &c. Whiche far­
ther to dilate, here is neyther place nor nede. 
Barley coleth and drieth (after Galen) in the first degree,
wherin it differeth from wheate, and hath also a little ab­
stersion, and in meates excelleth beanes: because it is not
wyndy. Barley bread nourysheth lesse then wheate, but
prouoketh the belly more: and is vnto men of smal or no
exercyse, of large nuryshment. So is also Polenta, which is
of nature more drye: although Ptisana, doe naturally moyst. 
And in Libro de attenuante uictus ratione, he saieth: that emong
all other breades, barley is vnhurtefull to a sclender diete. 
Barley meale outwardly resolueth, mollifieth, and matu­
rateth, chiefly whotte affectes, and cholericke tumores. 
Crithe. 
Gymnocrithon. 
De alimentis. 
lib. 1. 
De sym. medi. 
fac. lib. 7. 

The terms "bigge barley," "wynter barley," "Dutch barley," and "naked barley" could not be found in the OED. 



Hyosciamus.  
HEenbane is called in Greeke Υοσκύαμος, in Latin
Hiosciamus, Apollinaris, Faba suilla, Altercum: of Apuleus
Symphoniaca: of others also Fabulum, and Eabulonia: and of
some Cassilago, or Caniculata: of the Apothecaries Iusquiamus. 
Of Henbane there are three kyndes: the blacke, the ye­
lowe, and the whyte. The blacke is our common kynde:
Whose seade causeth madnes, and is not allowed. The ye­
lowe groweth in my garden, the seade wherof was geuen
me, of maister Roger Lee Doctor of phisicke: whiche is bet­
ter then the blacke, but yet to be eschued as hurtfull. 
That whose flower and seade is whyte, I neuer sawe as
yet. It is only allowed holsome, beyng colde in the thyrde






degree, and is a narcotike, or stupefactiue medicine: asswa­
gyng peyne, and represseth the inflammations of the eyes:
helpeth the gowte, and asswageth the swellinges of the
breste and stones. 
Hyosciamos. 
Galenus De
simp. med. li. 8
Diosc. lib. 4

"Hyoscyamus" antedates the earliest OED citation (1706). 



Hyposarca.  
Ανασάρακ, called also Sarcites, Hyposarca, and Leucophleg­
matias, is that kynde of Hydrops, whiche (spreadyng it
selfe larglyer then the other two Ascites, and Tympa­
nites,) possesseth the whole habite of the body, with muche
moisture: though the other two dooe yet sende affectes, to
other partes then they possesse, whiche is the belye. As to
the great arteries, Ascytes, colyng, stretching and aggraua­
ting them, and Tympanites, filling them with wynde. Whose
coates Anasarca dothe lose &  mollifie. The Hydropsy cometh
diuerse wayes. As by the obstruction and refrigeration of
the lyuer, or by Pylorus and Mesente­
rium, or of some one of the smalle guttes: of the immoderate
fluxe of the Hæmorrhoides, or of Menses, and of the suppression
of the same: and sometime of the vntymly drynking of cold
water, coolyng the lyuer: Without some vnnaturall affec­
tion wherof, there can spryng no Hydropsie, sayeth Galen. 
De locis affectis. lib. 5. cap. 6.  
Anasarca. 
Gale. De dig­
noscendis pul­
sibus. lib. 4. De pulsuum
causis. lib. 4. 




Icteritia.  
Ικτερος (whiche taketh that name of the yelowe byrde 
Icterus, called also Galbula) is called in Latin Arquatus, Aurigo,
and Regius morbus: in Englysh the Iaundies, or Guilsouth. 
Whiche is when Choler natural, (through the abundance
of the same, or the whotte distemperance of the lyuer and
veynes, or through the obstruction or inbecilitie of the bla­
der of Choler, for then it is mixed with the bloud) is poured
out ouer al the body: in so much that it occupiying the eyes,






maketh euery obiecte vnto them seeme yelowe, or pale. 
And we calle it the yelowe Iaundies. 
Vnder this name Icterus, is also comprysed the lyke ouer­
flowyng of melancholie, through lyke occasions from the
splene, &  hath had to name Μελαγχύροη, Quasi Icterus niger,
and commonly Icteritia nigra: of vs the blacke Iaundies. 
Icteros. 
Arquatus. . 
Aurigo. . 
Morbus re­
gius. . 
Galen. de sy­
mptom. causis. 
lib. 1. . 
Melanchyron. 

A lexeme for "black iaundies" could not be found in the OED. 



Ignis persicus. Ignis sacer. 
Id est Erysipelas, looke there. 


Incarnatiua medicamina.  
Medicines incarnatyues, or fleshe breders, commyng of
Incarno, to ingender, or increase fleshe


Incisio.  
Incision or cuttyng, of Incido, to cutte, or to cutte awaye. 


Induratio.  
Hardnes, or hardenyng, of Induro, to harden. 


Inflammatio.  
Is a fyrie heate or inflammation, of Inflammo, to inflame
or set of fyre. But looke more at Phlegmone. 


Inflatio.  
A bredyng or gathering together of wynde in the body:
and commeth of Inflo, to blowe or puffe vp. 


Infusio.  
Commyng of Infundo, to powre in, or hylle on, signifieth






stepyng or laiyng in fuse: and sometyme the liquor, wherin
thynges are or haue ben infused. 

Intensio.  
Intensio is, a stretching, streigning, or bending. But here 
it is a meanynge, wyl, intent, or diligence: &  commeth of In­
tendo, signifiyng as well to indeuoure, to looke diligently, or 
to intende: as to stretche, streygne, bende, or inforce. 

Intubum. 
Or Intybum is sufficiently spoken of at Cichorium. 


Iposarca.  
Also at Hyposarca. 


Iris.  
OF the Grecians likewise Ιρις, which name the Apothe­
caries also reteyne, Is to vs commonly knowne, and
called in Englysh blew flowre deluce. whose flowre
(though blew do beare therin the greatest vewe) is of many
colours, lyke the raynbowe: wherof sayeth Dioscorides, it 
taketh his name. Whose roote is sharpe, and whotte and
drye after Mesus in the thyrde degree. 

It scoureth concocteth, resolueth, thinneth, openeth, and
taketh away the obstructions of the lyuer, splene, &  other
vicious partes: Healing or amendyng, the affectes caused
of them: as hydropsies, tumores, hardnes, payne, and suche
lyke. It aswageth paynes, and purgeth grosse phlegme &
choler mixed therwith, and also whayey waters, and that
gentilly. It helpeth muche with sweete wyne the olde
coughe, caused of grosse and toughe humores, and also
the difficultie of breathynge sprunge therof. Beynge
boyled and outwardly applyed, it mollyfyeth, and dige­
stethe scrofules, olde harnesses of the Ioyntes and 






sinewes, &c. It purgeth with hony, drye vlcers, and filleth 
them: so doth it also fistules, and hollowe vlcers. 
Lib. 2. de
symp. medica. 
purgant. ca. 8. 





Lacertus. 
Lacertus, or Lacerta, is a worme or litle beaste, hauynge
foure feete, and formed in body like our este or ewght
(which therfore some iudge a kynde of the same,) of
coloure in germany ashye or blacke, and of a spanne or of a
foote lengthe at the moste. In Italy longer, of coloure
grene, &  venemous, but yet moste frendly to man, (whose
face he delyghteth to beholde,) enemy to serpentes: and for
man his cause, (whose spittle he wyll lycke when he fyn­
deth hym sleaping, vsing it as a defence) he fighteth against
serpentes, and therfore obteyneth worthilye the name
Οφιόμαχος. Almanzoar, describinge the same medicine for
the eyes, that Lanfranke dothe, hath Stellio, because it hath spottes on the skynne
lyke to starres. 

The dunge of the Lizarde, is a medicine proffitable for
the eyes, as to sharpen the syght, &  to take awaye the itche
and the webbe in the same. The head of the Lizarde,
(as sayeth Dioscorides) brused and layde to, draweth out all
prickes or stynges fixed in the flesh, &  taketh away spottes,
and the wartes called Formicas, and Acrochordonas. The ly­
uer of the same put into holowe teethe, taketh away their
peynes. The Lizarde broken, and layde to the stroke of a
Scorpion, easeth the same. 
Ophiomachos
Lib. 1. 
Ακροχορ­
δωμ. i. Ve­
ruca pensilis. 


Lac muliebre.  
MYlke called in Greeke γάλα, (whose substance primi­
tiue is bloude:) is of temperament, meane betweene
bloud and phlegme, consisting of three substances dyuerse,






and in effectes contrary. Namely whayey, whiche is colde
and moiste, and loseth the bely: Curdie, whiche is tough,
and byndeth the same: and fatty, wherof butter is made,
and vsed (sayeth Galen, Lib. 3. De alimentis,) in colde contreis
for oyle. Of qualities as variable as the bodies ar dyuers,
wherin it is made: As cowe mylke is most grosse and fatte,
(whiche healeth the lang="it"Dysenteria.) Camels mylke leane and
moste liquyde. But of all the thynnest and most whayey is
asses mylke: And therfore to drye affectes is moste conue­
nient: The meane betwene these holdeth goates mylke: 
whiche taken without hony is perylous, because if it con­
geyle in the stomache it suffocateth. Galenus De Euchymia, &  
Cacochymia) Thicker then whiche is shepes mylke, &c. 

Mylke generally nurysheth, maketh good iuyce, &  pur­
geth the bely moderatly, is profitable for the breste, and
healeth the vlcers of the lunges: but to the head that is not
very fyrme it is vnprofitable, and the vse therof to the
teethe very hurtfull. But of all other womans mylke, (as
of the same nature) is to vs most famyliar, and to phthisick
persons an excellent medicine: conuenient also for sharpe
and bytyng fluxions of the eyes, and inflammations of the
same, and to the vlcers of the panicle Cornea. It mitigateth
the inflammations of the mouthe, throte, and Vuula, and ea­
seth the squincie: and is geuen as a helpe to them that haue
taken corrodyng venyms. 

The best mylke is very whyte, and without sensible
temperament: that is hauing no odor or little, and the same
pleasant: but hauing in taste some swetenes, lyke holsome
bloude. As that which is in any wyse thervnto contrari, is 
alwayes euell. 
Gala. 
Galenus De 
sanitate tuenda
lib. 1. &c. 5. 
De marasmo. 
De methodo
medendi. lib. 7 
De sym. med. 
lib. 4. &. 10. 
De compo. se­
cun loca. lib. 4
De Theriaca
ad pisonem. 



Lactuca.  
Θρίδαξ is of kynde firste double, as Lactuca satiuaeme="lettice(n)", or Hor­
tensis, that is gardin letuce: And grene
Endyue. Of the first there are dyuers kyndes, (as there is 






also of this:) as Crispa, so called of his wryncled or curled
leaues, Rotunda takyng his name, of the rounde leaues. and 
Capitata: that is cabbege letuce, of his headlike roundnes or
Cabbeginge. 

Letuce cooleth and moisteth by the testimony of Galen,
according to the temperament, of fountaine water, and
therfore is commodious to whotte inflammations, and Ery­
sipelata of the worste kyndes. It cooleth the stomache, and
stayeth thyrste: and therfore sayeth Galen, that he vsed it
in his youth to coole with, When choler infested his sto­
mache, And in age, as a helpe against wakfulnes: For the
seade prouoketh sleape, and stayeth 
Genituræ profluuium. The
iuice therof neyther resisteth concoction, nor byndeth the 
belly: But the large drynkyng therof is very dangerous. 
Thridax. 
Dios. lib. 2. 
Galen. de ali­
mentis. lib. 2. 
De attenuante
uictus ratione. 
De locis af­
fectuis lib. 3. &  
de symp. med. 
facul. li. 3. et. 6


Laudanum.  
LApdanum as we barbarously call it, is called of
Dioscorides in Greke λάδανοη, of Galen Κισθος, and
in Latin Ladanum: but more commonly of the Apo­
thecaries Laudanum. Galen affirmeth Ladanum to be whotte
beyonde the firste degree, of a subtyle substance: and hathe
vertue to mollifie, resolue moderatly, to digeste, and con­
cocte harde thynges, to amende the deformitie of scarres,
to disolue the duration of the matrixe, and to amende other
vices therof. It stayeth the faulyng of heare, but yet is not
able to heale Alopecias, or Opthalmia, which require stronger
medicines. Being drunke with wyne, it stoppeth the belly 
and prouoketh vryne. 

It is the Gumme of a certeyne shrubbe or bushe, called
Cistus, or λἧδοη, whiche maister Turner called therfore Ci­
stus ladanifera: and is gathered by drawynge ropes, or suche
like thyngs, through the bushes: or els as saith Galen from
the beardes of gotes, which they haue gathered by feding
among the same. 
Ladanon. 
Cisthos. 
De symp. me. 
lib. 7. 
Dioscor.  lib. 1. 
cap. 10. 
Ledon. 
De com. med. 
secun. loca. li. 1

"Laudanum" antedates the earliest OED citation (c1602). 








Laurus.  
THe Laurell or Bay tree, is called in Greeke Δάφνη,
and in Latin Laurus. The leaues wherof doe vehe­
mently heate &  drye, but the beries more vehemently: and
therfore doe helpe the diseases of the lunges, caused of colde
and reumatyke matter, paynes of the eares also, and deaf­
nes. The rynde of the roote, is neyther so sharpe nor so
whotte, but more bitter, and hath also some adstriction: and
therfore is with swete wyne profitable to the breste, and
breaketh the stone. The leaues doe sensibly bynde, offende
the stomache, and prouoke vomite. Brused and aplyed,
they help the stingyng of waspes or bees: And Cum polenta
& pane, asswage inflammations. 

Other kyndes of this there are, as Nerium, Daphnoides, whiche we call laurialle: but because
they are for the more parte rare vnto vs, and not seruyng
to any thyng wrytten in this boke: I here omitte to speake
any more of them. 
Daphne. 
Dioscor. lib. 1. 
Galenus de symp. lib. 6. 



Lenticula.  
Φακός ἢ Φακὴ, Latine, Lens, &  Lenticula, and in Englyshe
Lentilles, Is a kynde of pulse. whose grayne sayeth Fuch­
sius, is of all other the leaste: of temperamente meane be­
twene whotte and colde, but drie in the seconde degree. Of
substance grosse, earthly, austere, and myghtly adstringent. 
Wherfore both their substance and seconde decoction, sup­
presseth the fluxe of the belly, and comforteth the stomache:
though the iuice yet be losing, &  the first decoction doe purge
the same. It is of lytle iuice, and of nurishment grosse and
melancholyke, to melancholyke persones dangerous,
and bredeth on them Elephantiasim, &  Cancrum, and dulleth
the syghte. 
Phacos. 
Phace. 
Galen. de ali­
mentis. lib. 1. 
& 2. 
Galen. de ali­
mentis. lib. 1. 
& 2. 
Euchymia &
Cacochymia. 
De sym. lib. 8. 







Lepra.  
LEpra sayeth Auicen, is as it weare a Cancer commuitis toto
corpori, that is a Cancer common to al the body: wher­
in he sheweth him him selfe to meane, that lothly af­
fecte, whiche the Grecians call Ελέφαντα ᾔ Ελεφαντίασιη, 
and some Λεοντίασιη, of the greatnes of the disease, ma­
kyng the skinne lose, rugged, and of diuerse colours lyke
the skynne of the Elephante: and is of Galen thus descri­
bed. Elephas sayeth he, is a melancholicke affecte, hauing his
beginnyng of melancholicke bloud: but in processe of tyme,
blacke choler superaboundeth that bloud in quantitie, and 
then doth the body stynke, and semeth filthie, deformed,
and the fleshe blacke, and sometymes is exulcerate. Of the 
same kynde also is Lepra, and commeth of a lyke
cause, but is more common to the skynne, &  is not alwayes
so vniuersall: Whiche some (of the lykenes and communi­
tie of the one with the other) haue called Υώραη, id est scabiem,
but not without confusion. Guido de Cauliaco, and others of
that age, haue rekoned foure kyndes of Lepra, for the which 
resorte to Serpigo. 
Elephas. 
Elephantiasis. 
Leontiasis. 
λεόντιομ 

Morbus foe­
dus. 
Lib. de tumor
præter natu. &  de sympto. 
causis. lib. 3. 
λέπρα
Psora. 


Leucophlegmatia.  
Λευκοφλεγματιτίας, is that kynde of the Hydropsie that is
called also Anasarca, Sarcites, and commonly Hyposarca, looke
there. 



Lilium.  
ΚΡίνος, κρίνοη, ηαηλέιριοη, Latine Lilium, atque Rosa iunonis,
wherof Dioscorides, Lib. 3. mencioned two kyndes: as 
Albion, and Croceum. The leaues &  rootes of the white
lilyes (for that chiefly is vsed in medicine,) doe drye, digeste,
and moderatly scoure away: and therfore Cum olco rosato are






good for burnynges of fyre. The floures therof consiste of
a mixed temperament: as of a substance partly subtil, part­
ly earthy, partly watery, and that temperate. Wherof it
foloweth the oyle made of them, to bee of digestinge and
mollifying facultie, without byting: and therfore is moste
conuenient, for the hardnesses of mother, inflammations
of the coddes, and apostemes. 
Crinos Crinon 
Leirion. 



Linum.  
FLaxe, whiche is named in Greeke λίνη, (as well as the
seade therof called λινόσπερμον, id est semen lini,) is of tem­
perament whotte in the firste degree, and meane be­
tweene drye and moyste, obteininge the same faculties
that Fenigreke hath, and is in meate flatuous: yet doth it
scatter and deuide, and with boyled hony mollyfieth bothe
inwardly and outwardly harde inflammations: and be­
yng rawe, taketh away the frecles and litle swellynges of
the face. Their brothe leadeth out excrementes, and profi­
teth as well against the gnawyng of the guttes, as also a­
gainst inflammations and other diseases of the mother. 
Linon. 
Linospermon. 

"Linum" antedates the earliest OED citation (1867). 




Lithargyrus.  
DIoscorides in his fifte boke and . 62. Chapiter (treating
of Lithargyros), noteth three kyndes therof. One to be
made of a certeine Leady sande in the fornaces, an other or
siluer, and the thyrde of leade. We of a common opinion
also recken three sortes, as of leade, siluer, &  of golde: which 
two last are inded both one thing: (though we haue of a 
long tyme by reason of the name) thought Lithargyrum aureum. 
to come onely of golde. For λιθάργυρος, is by common con­
sent interpreted Spuma argenti, and commeth thus: as out of 
Brasauolus, and MatthiolusI haue gathered. 

When the finers of metalles (hauing taken a masse of
siluer out of his owne veyne,) woulde trie it from the me­






talles, myxed therwith, (whiche are lead and brasse:) They
put it into a certeyn fornace, being first wrapped in plates
of lead, or into muche lead already melted, in the fornace or 
meltyng pitte: whiche is prepared of ashes after their ma­
ner. On the whiche (beinge melted together) ryseth a cer­
teyne spume, whiche is gathered together with an Iron
instrument, and is called Spuma argenti. And the same (if
the greater store of brasse therin doe geue vnto it a goul­
den coloure,) is called χρυσιτις, and vulgarly in Latin, by
the imitation of the greke, Lithargyrum aureum, and that only
for the coloure: and yet is it not to be doubted, but that of
goulde there ryseth also a Spume in the triyng, whiche I
thynke may moste worthily be called Lithargyrum auri. An
other friuolous varietie of opinions there is, about the sole
or symple namyng of the same: for the common opinion is
that Lithargyrum so wrytten in receptes, without any other
addition of difference, ough to be taken for litarge of lead. 
Platearius woulde haue it taken for the litarge of goulde:
but the ancient and true interpretation, is aboue shewed. 

Lythargyros dryeth by the wytness of Galen, moste mo­
deratly, consistynge in a certeyne measure, bothe of qua­
lities and faculties: yet dothe it meanly bynde and scoure,
and is by ryght as a meane amonge other metalles. And
therfore vse we it, as the matter or substance of others:
none other wyse then wexe, among thynges lyquide. It 
healeth gaulynges or chafinges: and beynge broken with
wyne, auayleth againste vlcers, that are for their moi­
sture harde to heale: and that without gnawynge, if it bee
washed. 
Lithargyros. 
Chrysitis. 
De symp. li. 9. 
De com. med. 
secun. genera. 
lib. 1. 



Lumbrici.  
Looke at Vermes terrestres. 






Lupinus 
CAlled in Greeke δέρμος, is a kynde of pulse, descri­
bed of maister Turner at large, (who calleth it figge
bene) whose immesurable bitternes sheweth it to be
whotte and drye, and hath vertue digestiue, and scowryng
away. Beyng watered before, they lose their bytternesse,
and may be eaten: but they are of grosse nuryshement. 
They kyll wormes rather layde to, or eaten: they purge
also the lyuer and the splene, and drawe out Menses &  foe­
tum, cum myrrha &  melle. The meale of Lupines boyled in vi­
neger Cum posca aut oxymelite, digesteth blewe hurtes, wen­
nes, and scrofules: and mondyfieth scabbes, scalles of the
head, and all maligne vlcers, without mordication: and 
purgeth the skynne of frecles, spottes, and blewe markes. 
And thus muche of Syluestris,
whiche I haue growynge in my garden at Maydstone. 
whose vertues are lyke the former, but they doe all these
thynges more strongly. 
Thermos. 
Galen. de sym. 
lib. 6. 

"Figge bene" antedates the earliest OED citation (1657). 




Lycium.  
IS the Iuice of a thorny tree, growyng chiefly in Capado­
cia and Lycia, of three cubites heyght, (made by boylynge
the infusion of the rootes and braunches therof, to the
thycknes of hony,) called in Greeke  πυξάκανθα ᾔ λύκιοη,
and of Theophrastus Ονόπυξος, hoc est Buxus asininus, which we
may call an asse boxe tree: hauynge leaues lyke the boxe
tree, with a lyght, faste, and bitter frute, like pepper: a pale
coloured rynde, (not vnlyke to washed Lycium,) and many 
croked rootes. 

Lycium, (that liquid medicine,) sayeth Galen, digesteth,
and dryeth in the seconde degree, heateth moderatly, and
consisteth of dyuers substances: as one of thinne partes,
whotte and digestynge, an other earthlye and colde. 






Wherof it hath not a little adstriction, and is vsed to the 
blewe markes of bruses, to the inflammations of the mouthe
and fundament, to exulcerations, teters, rottennes, froward
and stubbern vlcers, to chafinges, to sanious runnynge
eares, and to nayle wheles: and putteth from the eyes, the
dulnes of syghte. It is conuenient both in drynke and Cli­
sters, for the fluxe of the belly and Dysenteria: and is geuen
for the coughe, and spitting of bloud. And thus farre of the 
true thing. For the Lycium that is now vsed and sold of the
Apothecaries, is of the learned iudged conterfeite, &  decei­
uable: for that it is not apte to burne, neyther yeldeth a
redde spume when it is quenched, as Lycium shoulde. And
where Lycium should be blacke without, and redde within
It is blacke both without and within. 

Another kinde of Lycium also doth Dioscorides mention,
called Lycium Indicum, made of a plant called 
Lonchitis: which
Dodonæus affirmeth to be solde of the Apothecaries, vnder 
the name of Sanguinis draconis, for the which looke vnder the
same title. 
Pyxacantha. 
Lycion. 
Onopyxos. 
Dioscor. lib. 1. 
De symp. me. 
facult. lib. 7. 
Lonchitis. 
Sanguis dra­
conis. 

"Lycium" antedates the earliest OED citation (1597). "Ass box tree" is not found in OED. 






Malua.  
ΜΑλάχη, so called of the Grecians (of Μαλάττειη, Id est
mollire,) because it mollifieth the belly, (and Varro con­
tendeth also it to be called Maluam, quasi moluam, for the cause
aboue sayde) is of Dioscorides and Galen deuided into two
kyndes: namely Hortensis, (for it is planted and groweth in 
gardines,) and Syluestris so called not because it groweth in
wooddes or roughe places, but wildly of it selfe in laye, and
vntitled groundes. And so of a great number moe. Hereof
there are two kyndes: whervnto some doe also reken Al­
thæa, or Malua uiscus, called of Actius Δενδρόμαλάχη and of
Galen ἅρισαλθδια: wherof vnder Althæa. 

Malua agrestis, (sayeth Galen) hath some digestinge, and
lyght mollifyng facultie. But Hortensis is apter to be eaten,
and frendly to the belly, but yet hurtfull to the stomache,






and howe muche the more it hath of watery moysture, so
muche the weaker are the vertues therof. So is the sede
also so muche the stronger, as it is dryer, but Althæa dothe
of all other digeste moste effectuously. Of temperamente
he sayeth it is whotte, whiche the Arabians seme to deny. 
Malowes sayth Dioscorides, both healeth the stynging of 
bees and waspes, and withstandeth the same, and is good
for the griefes of the mother, the guttes, and the bladder:
and beyng drunke in tyme, is a remedy against al venims. 
Malache. 
Fuchsius de hi
storia stirpium. 
Dendromala­
che. Aristal­
thæa
De alim. li. 2. 
De sym. li. 7. 



Malum punicum.  
THe pomgranate is the frute of a tree, called in greke Ροία, και ρόα, in Latin Malus punica, seu granata, and is of twoo
sortes: as Satiua and Syluestris, (whose flowres seuerally and
their faculties, are touched vnder Balaustium. ) A thyrd kynde
also there is, that kepeth a meane betwene the wylde and
the tame: of whose temperamentes Galenus lib. 8. De symp. med. 
fac. sayeth thus in effecte. Euery pomgranate hath some ad­
stringent facultie, but that surmounteth not in all: for a­
mong them that are sharpe, some are more swete then
sowre: and by the reason of those their chiefe qualities, ey­
ther the one or the other is vsed for beste. Their graynes
are of a driyng and byndyng iuice, so are also their flowers
and ryndes: of them altogether may medicines be made,
very proffitable for the stomache. Which in li. 2. De com. med. 
secundum loca. he affirmeth hym selfe to haue vsed, to the
griefes of the nose called Ozæna &  Polypus. And in his boke 
De attenuante uictus ratione, he disprayseth the pomgranates
of Pontus, as also he doth al other harde, and pontike frutes. 
But others sayeth he, ye may moderatly vse, for they are
profitable to them that are greued with Cardialgia. lib. 2. De
alimentorum facultatibus. 
Rhoea. 
Rhoa. 
Οζαινα. i. est 
uulcus quodda
profundum uel 
foetidum. 
πολύπους. i. 
tuberculum
subrubrum mul­
tis radicibus 
siue pedibus
præditum. 
Καρδιαλ­
γία, i. Oris uen
triculi mordi­
catio. 



Malum.  
Appuls are called Μᾕλα, and Mala, (as the apple tree is






called μηλέα, and Malus) and are generally of two kyndes:
(wherof somwhat at Agresta) otherwise
infinite, and of dyuers natures (as are also their leaues and
ryndes. ) The appuls that are adstringente, haue a colde
and earthy iuice, and doe coole inflammations of heate and
moysture. The sharpe ones are bothe colde and subtyl, and
incysiue: of meane temperamente are the swete ones,
whiche doe inclyne to heate, as those that are watery and
without taste doe bende to coldenes. Of these vsed accor­
ding to their qualities, may the distemperatures of the sto­
mache be cured: as with the meanly sharpe and with very
tarte appuls, you may roborate the lose &  feynte stomache,
glewe together woundes, and repercusse the fluxe of great
inflammations: but suche as are more watery, doe put a­
waye lesse inflamations, that doe but nowe begynne. 
They are generally of harde digestion and ill iuice, but
may bee geuen after meate to suche as lacke apetyte, and
concocte slowly, to suche also as are vexed with womyting,
Diarrhoea, and Dysenteria. Whervnto very tarte appulles
are moste commodious. 
Melon. Malum. 
Melea. 
Malus. 
Galen. de ali­
mentis. lib. 2. 
De sym. lib. 7. 
Διάρροια. hoc
est alui fluor. 
δυσεντερια i. Viscerum
exulceratio.



Manna.  
Manna so called of the Arabians, is sayeth Mesues the
dewe of a vapor, lyfted by and concocted in a tem­
perate and fertille ayre, fallyng (in the twye lyghte
tymes sayeth Matthiolus) through plesant aspectes vpon cer­
teyne plantes and stones, wherof there are twoo differen­
ces. That whiche falleth vpon stones, is coagulated round
lyke droppes or sedes, whiche oughte to bee newe, swete,
whytyshe, or at least a citrinyshe colour. That whiche fal­
leth on plantes, bothe taketh of them some qualitie, and 
hath myred therwith some of their leaues and floures,
though not muche: wherof that whiche is newe, and why­
tyshe is beste. Of this doubtlesse dyd Galen wryte, In Lib. 3. 
De alimentis: where he sayeth, that in the mounte Libanus,






men vse yearly to spread skynnes on the grounde, and af­
ter they beate the trees, gathering vp that whiche falleth, 
and fille pottes with the hony: whiche they call δροσομέ
λι, ᾔ αερόμελι, Hoc est mel roscidum, &  mel aerium. Though Aue­
rois Cordubensis affirme (not without the opinion of dyuers
great clerkes of late dayes) Manna to haue ben vnknowne
to Galen, and it to haue comde in vse synce hys tyme, be­
cause in dede in all Galens workes, there is no mention
therof vnder that name: Who mente by Manna (and also
Dioscorides with other olde Grecians) a farre other thing,
as hereafter will apeare. But Mesues procedynge sayeth,
that it somwhat excedeth the meane in heate, scoureth and
smotheth the throte, the breste, and the stomache: purgeth
choler gentilly, and quencheth thyrste: and mixed wyth
strong medicines, it bettereth their actions. And thus much
of Marina Arabum (who call it also Thereniabin) uel Recentium, na­
med also Manna Orientalis: for Manna Græcorum, called also Man­
na Thuris, are certeyne fragmentes taken out of pure fran­
kincense, whiche Galen calleth the drosse of the same, affir­
ming it to be of the same nature, how be it somewhat more
adstringent, by reason of the frankincense ryndes that are
somwhat myngled therwith, wherof also at Thus. somwhat
more. 
Drosomelid. 
Mel Roscidum
uel rerulenium
Aeromeli. i. 
mel atherium
siue mellago. 
Theremiabin. 
Manna Thuris
De methodo
medendi. li. 13. 
De com. med. 
secun. loca. li. 5



Mandragora 
ΜΑνδραγόρας, is also called Κιρκαία (saith Fuchsius a Circe,
because it is thought to worke amorous affectes, &  of
Pythagoras Anthropomorphos, of the humane forme, that the
roote semeth somwhat to represent. About the whiche the
dotyng folly of some, and the guylfull knauery of others:
haue Fuchsius and maister doctor Turner (our contrey­
man,) right well detected. Herof after Dioscorides, there
are twoo kyndes: as the male, called Mandragoras mas, uel 
Candida, and also Mandragoras morion, whyche is with vs not
verye rare, And the female called Mandragoras foemina, 






uel nigra, and (of the lykenes that it hath with the leaues of
Letuce) Θριδακία, vnknowne to vs as yet. 

It cooleth, by the testimonie of Galen, in the thyrde ex­
cesse, though saith he in the appuls ther is not a little heate
and moisture: whiche therfore prouoke depe sleapes. The
rynde of the roote doth bothe coole and drye. The leaues
of mandrage are profitable, as sayeth Dioscorides, for the
inflammations and other affectes of the eyes, caused of vl­
cers in them, or in other partes howe so euer: and mete to
deuide euery harde tumore. It is of suche mollifiynge ver­
tues, that Iuory (as some thynke) beyng boyled with the 
roote therof, may be made softe, and apte to be wrought. 
Mandragoras. 
Circæa. 
Ανθρω πόμορ
Φος. i. speciem
humanam re­
ferens. 
Mandragoras
Candida. 
Thridacia. 
De sym. med. 
facult. li. 7. 



Massacunia. 
Massacunia. , (for so fynde I it wrytten in the prynted la­
tin copy, and interpreted the fylinge or scarpynge of
earthen pottes glased,) is written of Almanzoar (who for Al­
bula in oculo, maketh the same recept) Masacuna, and Pandacta­
rius wryteth it Massacuna: Who sayeth it is a coloure wher­
with earthen vessels are nealed, and called also of them Pe­
tanum. Shewyng moreouer the opinion of diuers, as that 
some saye it is the water of glasen vesselles, and others
that it is glasse not perfectly boiled, and is the mater wher
of glasse is made, and vulgarly called Massa cocta, &c. Whose
vertues, because the mater is vncerteyne, and the autori­
ties scant probable, (for in Galen, Dioscorides, and other 
auncientes I fynde it not) I leave to silence. 


Mastiche.  
ΜΑστίχκ commonly called Mastix, and of Dioscorides Resi­
na Lentiscus, (called also in Greeke σχινος) is of tempe­
rament whotte and drye in the seconde degree: Wherof
Galen maketh two kyndes, namely 
Candida, & Nigra. The






whyte mastike sayeth he, (callynge it also Mastiche Chia, be­
cause the beste and fayrest groweth plentifully in Chio)) doth
bynde and mollifie: and therfore is proffitable, for the in­
flammations of the stomache, the belly, the lyuer, and the
bowelles: To the olde coughe also, and as sayeth Dioscori­
des to the reiections of bloude. It is frendly to the stomache,
but moueth belchyng, and is vsed to scoure the teethe and
the face. 

The blacke masticke (called Mastiche Aegiptia) dryeth more
but byndeth lesse, &  therfore is the meter for suche thinges
as require stronger digestion, by euaporation. 
Dioscor. lib. 1. 
Galen. de sym. 
faculta. lib. 7. 
Chius is an 
Isle of the 
sea Aegeum. 



Maturatiua.  
MAturatiua medicamenta, siue pus mouentia, are rypyng me­
dicines, or quitture breders. Which heate and moist
sayeth Galen, reducyng substances of dyuers kindes
ad pus uel saniem, that is to mater or quitture: and commeth
of Maturo, to maturate or make rype. 
De methodo
medend. li. 4. 
De sympt. 
causis. lib. 5



Mel.  
IS called of the Greekes μέλι, whiche some thynke to be
the humore of the ayre purging it selfe, for it is someti­
mes founde to cleaue vpon mens heare and apparell,
that are abrode very rathe. wherfore Plinie iudgeth it the 
swette of heauen, or els a certeine slymines or spittle of the 
starres. And therof are thre kindes: as Mel anthinii, uel Ver­
num, which is gathered in the spring: Mel horæum, aut astiuum,
gathered in the sommer: and Ericeum, whiche is smally este­
med, for that it is gathered in Autumne, when Erica onely
bloweth in the wooddes. The best hony is gathered in som­
mer, of Thyme and suche other odiferus plantes, whiche
heateth and dryeth in the seconde degree, and mundifieth. 
Others eyther allowe or disprayse it, in respecte of the place 
where it is gathered: praysinge Mel atticum for the beste,






next to that Mel Siculum, and chiefly that whiche is called
Hybleum of Hybla, a citie of Sicilia, and that because of the
plentie of Thyme growynge there. But Mel Sardoum & 
Ponticum, are (as euell and hurtfull) abiected. 

Galenus. lib. 3. De alimentorum facultatibus, sayeth that it is
founde on the leaues of plantes, but neyther can it sayeth
he be sayde, eyther any iuice, frute, or parte of the same. 

And here must you take Galen to speake of the primi­
tiue matter, or first substance therof. For if there shoulde
not be graunted to hony suche a varietie of qualities, accor­
dyng to the plantes wheron it is, As Mesues noteth in 
Manna: Why should it haue ben estemed the worthyer, or 
the vyler, for the plantes wheron it is founde. 

Hony not well boyled, bredeth certeyn wyndes in the
stomache and bowells: but beyng well clarified, it is vn­
wyndie and moueth vryne. It taken without the admyx­
tion of water, nourysheth weakely, but emptieth the belly
aptly, and eaten largely it moueth vomite: beyng boyled
without water, it neither causeth vomite, nor loseth the
belly. To olde and colde persons, it is moste commodious:
In yonge and whotter persons it turneth into choler. 
Meli. 
Mel Vernum. 
Mel astiuum. 
Mel Ericeum. 
Erica. 
Galenus de
symp. medi. 
fac. li. 4. &. 7



Melanchiron.  
OF Melanchiron I nede not here saye muche, for Lan­
franke interpretynge it Icteritia nigra, sheweth hym
selfe to meane therby that vniuersall effusion of me­
lancholy, which we calle the blacke iaundies. 

The iaundies which the Greekes cal Icteron and the La­
tines Regiam &  arquatam passionem, is an vniuersall effusion
of choler, sometyme yelowe from the gaule, and some­
tymes blacke from the splene, caused dyuersly, as by those 
members inflamed, obstructed, weakened, &c. as before at
Icteritia. 
Icteros. 
Regia passio. 
Arquata pas­
sio. 

"Blacke iaundies" is not found in OED. For "yelowe" jaundice, see 
under "yellow," adj, and n., C1. 









Melilotus.  
THe herbe that we in Englande vse for Melilote, lac­
keth not in my iudgement the vertue that should bee
in Mililote: though it be not in dede the true Μελίλο
τος, but rather a kynde of 
Lotus syluestris, by the mynde of
maister Turner, (who taketh it to be Mel frugum, of Theo­
phrastus) and also of Dodonæus, who by reason of his vertues,
calleth it Meliotum Germanicam, and Fuchsius Saxifragam luteum. 
But the ryght Melilote groweth in Italy, &  is therfor cal­
led Meliotus Italica, and of some Sertula Campana, & Coronare­
gia. It is whotte and drye in the fyrste degree. Galen saieth
it hath more heate then colde, and is somwhat adstringent,
but yet doth it digeste and concocte: And the emplaster
called Meliotum, is potente in mollifiyng hardnesses, by
the testimonie of Galenus and Mesues. 
Melilotos
De symp. me. 
lib. 7. 



Mica panis.  
CRommes of bread are generally resolutiue: but that
doth it more or lesse, accordynge to the composition &
handlynge therof. For bread sayeth Galen made of
lyght corne, well leuened, and moderatly baked, is moste
easye to concocte, so is it of power outwardly to digeste and
deuyde: and of consequence if it varie from these poyntes, it
is the vnfitter for the one and the other. 
De symp. me. 
lib. 7. 



Miliaris.  
THe opinion of Lanfrancus, and of many moe about his 
tyme, concerning the likenes of Miliaris with Formica,
semeth to come from Auicen: whoe also teacheth 
for them bothe almost lyke curations. 
But howe farre is it from the mynde of Galen






Who numbereth Miliarem among erysipelatous tumores,
and Formicam among Scirrhous excrescentes. 

Miliaris named also in Greeke of that forme κέγχρος , is a
tumore vttering certeine litle pustules lyke milet, com­
ming of a choleryck fluxion somwhat sharpe. Wherof
looke more in Herpete. 
Cenchros. 
Herpes. 



Mirobalani.  
Goe to the title Myrobalani. 



Mumia.  
OF Mumia (so called of the Arabians. ) There is an vn­
certeine varietie of opinions, for diuers great lear­
ned men thinke it to be Πισσάσφαλτοη Dioscoridis, be­
cause that as Dioscorides sayeth, Pissasphaltos is driuen by
lande floudes from certeyn hylles of Apolonia, called Ceraunii
montes, and being after cast vp on the ryuer bankes: is by
heate baked into Cloddes, whiche doe smell lyke pytche,
myred with Bitumine, wherof it hathe that name. Euen so
and with the same wordes, hath Serapio descrybed his Mu­
miam. But differing from this is that which the most of the 
Arabians doe mention: who affirme it to resulte of the
imbaumyng or spicery of dead bodyes at their burialles, as
Ex Croco, Aloe, myrrha, &  Balsamo, beyng coagulated &  growne
together (with the fatte and moysture of the corps) into a
But as this composition is very costly, and therfore vsed
for the bodies of the nobles: so are men of some lesse repu­
tation imbaulmed with Aloe, myrhe, and saffron: neyther
of the whiche bodies are easely spoyled of their tombes and
spicerie, namely by strangers. Howe be it the poorer sorte,
(whiche are the greatest number, the openinge also and re­
mouyng of whose bodies is the more tollerable) are inclo­
sed with Pissaphalto only, because it is of lesse price: for they






vse customably to imbaulme all bodies. 

But that whiche is nowe among our Apothecaries ex­
tant, varieth from all these substances, and is the very flesh
of mans body, as it weare burned to a cole: for both whole
armes and whole legges, haue been here not rarly seene,
being dryed as blacke as cole. Wherfore it must nedes 
be thought, that eyther the merchantes bryng from thence
whole buried bodies, or very partes of the same: or els that
it becommeth so, by that meanes that dyuers merchantes
make reporte of , (if it be worthy credite. ) Who saye, that in
the farther partes of Aegypte, great driftes of lyghte and 
moste subtyle sande, are at certeyn tymes remoued (by the
change of wyndes) from place vnto place, and therby row­
led vp into huge heapes lyke great mountaynes: and that
often tymes bothe men and beastes, happening in the way,
are violently swalowed vp and buried therein: so remay­
ning vntyll by a lyke tempeste from the obiect coastes, it be
agayne turned ouer, and all such buried thinges are again
vncouered: beynge by the whotte and drye nature of the
sande so dryed, and preserued from putrifaction. All the
whiche howe true it is or may be, for the lacke of experience
I am not able vndoubtfully to saye, neyther can I (through
lykelyhodes) yelde for the same a better defence, then that
baked or dryed sande, hath been proued to preserue frutes
longtyme vnputrefied: wyshinge that some man of more
experience therin, would make the matter more manifest. 
But certeinly it is mans fleshe, eyther thus or otherwyse 
dryed into a cole. 

It is vsed as well in outwarde plasters, as inwarde
drinkes, to confounde broken bones and veynes, and to di­
solue congeiled bloud, and stayeth the fluxe of the same. It
helpeth Hemicraniam &  Paralisin, and the peynes of the heade
that come of cold without humores. For it is of heating and
driyng facultie in the seconde degre, as sayeth Matthiolus: to
whom I remitte the explication of all other his eximiouse
vertues. 
Bitumen. 
That whiche
is don to dead
bodies as with
spices &c. is
called imbal­
ming though 
there be no
Balsame ther
in. 








Mundificatiua med.  
MEdicinæ mundificatiuæ siue abstergentes, are medicines that
haue powre to mundify, purify, scoure, or clense woundes
&c. Whiche if they doe meanly, they are mete incarnatiues
for vlcers. It commeth of Mundifico, to mundifie or make
cleane: Whiche also riseth a munditie of, cleanes. 

 

Myrobalanus.  
THe etymology of this worde  Μυροβάλανος, requireth
it to be called Glans odorata, siue unguentaria: though this
name Glans unguentaria be much more fitly applyed to
βάλανοη μυρεψικηη: for from it differeth Myrobalanos, in figu­
re, colour, and faculties, and ought rather sayeth Syluius, to
be accompted of the kynde of appuls or prunes. 

Of Myrobalanes there are fiue kyndes. wherof these
these thre Citreæ Negræ & Cepulæ, are thought of some saith
Mesues to be the frutes of one tree, whose propertie is to 
beare twyse yearly: whose first frutes are Citreæ, beyng ga­
thered vnrype, and Negræ or Indæ, gathered when they are
rype. The seconde and laste frutes are Cepulæ. (These all
are colde in the first degree, and drye in the seconde. ) But
Andreas Marinus vpon Mesue, sayeth plainly that they are . v. 
destincted fructes, of so many seueral trees, and hath lyuely
paynted out three of them: whiche also many other haue
thought before, because thei vary in faculties. Loe so boun­
tifull hath God ben vnto this our age, as to open merciful­
ly vnto vs (with the landes so longe vnknowne) manye
thynges, that to the worthy fathers weare eyther vnkno­
wne, or muche in doubte: For so doth Marinus confesse hym
selfe to obteyne this certeintie. They are benigne or gen­
till medicines, and doe strengthen the harte, the stomache,
the lyuer, and the rest of the body. 

1 Myrobalam Citreæ (which are of colour inclining to grene,
great, weightie, massie, and within when they are broken,






gummy,) do purge choler aboue the rests: and therfore are 
holsome for whotte and bilious natures, & cum omphacio, uel
aqua rosarum, uel succo foenicula they scoure the eyes, and take
away their inflammations: their poulder also stayeth the
fluxe of them, & cum mastiche dryeth vlcers. 

2 Myrobalani Cepulæ are blackishe, inclining to rednes, and
are phlegme purgers, namely from the stomache, they streng­
then also the same & the spirites rational, & sharpen the sight. 

3 Myrobalani Nigræ, are of colour blacke, greate, flesshye, and
grosse, whose vertues are to purge melancholy, and choler
adust: and therfore are profitable for trembling, pensiuenes,
leprosies, quartanes, and other melancholick affectes. But
they are all apte to brede obstructions. 

4 Myrobalani Emblicæ do cole somwhat, & drie in the first degree. 

5 Myrobalani Bellericæ are gentill, and doe strengthen, of tem­
perament lyke the first three: They both doe purge putre­
fied phlegme from the stomache, and strengthen the same,
The brayne also, the harte, the lyuer, the synewes, and re­
laxed partes. &c. 
Myrobalanos. 
Balanos my­
repsice. 
Balanus my­
repsica. 
Empelica. . 


Myrrha.  
MYrrha, whiche the Grekes call σμίρναη, heateth and
dryeth in the seconde degree: and therfore glueth
freshe woundes, especially of the head: Hauing also
much bitternes, wherby it killeth wormes. It hath moreo­
uer a moderate abstertion: by reason wherof, it is mixed with
medicines made for the eyes, for the olde cough, & for pein­
full breathing. It hath also power to comfort and to defend
from putrefaction, and to expell superfluities. It mundifieth
rotten vlcers, and prouoketh sleape. Howe be it the vse of
Myrrhe is not altogether hurtles, bothe for that the onely
smell therof causeth head ache: and also because in the best
myrrhe is founde Opocarpasum, a thyng sayeth Galen, verye
hurtfull and deadly, and hath kylled many vnwittynglye
takyng it with myrrhe. 






Myrrha is the teares or droppyng of a tree growynge in
Arabia, not vnlike to Spinæ ægiotiæ, wherof ther are dyuers
kyndes. Pediasmos beyng fatty, from the whiche beyng pres­
sed, commeth Stacte Gabirea, whiche is most fatte, and swea­
teth out Stacten habundantly. Then Troglodytica(n), whiche is
of a grenyshe colour, shyning and byting: whiche is the best
and is also of twoo sortes. The fourth is Caucalis, whiche is
very olde, blacke, and parched: And this is thought of some
to be it, that is commonly solde vnto vs. The fifthe and
worst is Ergasima: And the sixt Aminea, not wel approued. An
other kynde also there is, called Myrrha Boeotica, because it
commeth from the roote of a tree, growyng in Boeotia. 
Smirna. 
Galenus  de
symp. medi. 
lib. 8. 
So was 
myrrhe in Ga
len his time
adulterate. 
De antidotis. 
lib. 1. 


Myrtus.  
MYrtles are of an earthly cold propertie, as Galen af­
firmeth, hauyng yet some subtiltie and heate, wher­
through they drye myghtily: and therfore are verye
profitable to helpe the restoring of broken bones, and stre­
igned ioyntes, and also to drye vp bruses, kepynge therby
the places from putrefaction, and apostemations. The
Mirte tree, is called in Greeke μυρσίνη, and in Latin Mirtus. 
The frutes or beries wherof, doe the Apothecaries calle
Myrcillos. 
De symplici. 
lib. 8. 
Myrsine uel μυρϊνη. My­
rhine. 




Nodi.  
Nodus signifieth a knotte, and is here to be vnder­
standed of certeine kyndes of tumores, whiche in
roundnes, (and somtyme hardnes,) resemble a
knotte: comming principally of phlegme, and are
chiefly referred to the three speciall tumores, called of Ga­
len ἄθερωμα, στεάτωμα, and Μελικκρὶς, so called of the sub­
stances like a whyte potagie confection (called romane
Puls) fatte, or
hony, conteined in them. And somtime the nerues become
knotty, but that differeth from Nodo sayeth Avicen, in that
it is not euery waye mobyle or seperable. 
De tumoribus 
præter natur. 
Atheroma. 
Steatoma. 
Meliceris. 
De methodo
meden. li. 14. 










Obtalmia.  
Is shewed at Ophthalmia. 



Oedema.  
ΟΙδημα, is one of the foure chiefe and principall
symple tumores agaynst nature, softe, lose, and
without payne, spryngyng of thynne phlegme or vaporous spirites, &  is the same that in the tyme 
of Lanfranke as well as before and since, was called Vndi­
mia. which (when it hath adioyned partly therwith, any of
the other three) is called eyther ὄιδημα φλεγμονώδες . i. Oe­
dema phlegmonosum, uel Oedema inflammationis particeps, of bloud:
Οιδηπμαερυσ ιέλατώτες. i. Oedema erysipelatosum, aut sacri ignis
particeps, if choler be his partener, or Οιδημα σκιγγρωδες, hoc
est oedema induratum, siue duritiei particeps, when melancholie is
adioyned. More at Vndimia. 
Galenus de tu­
moribus præ­
ter naturam. 
De methodo
medendi. li. 1
De arte cura­
tiua. lib. 2. 


Oleum.  
OYle which the Grecians cal Ελαἵιοη, is the iuce of O­
lyues named Oliuæ, whiche are the frutes of the tree,
Olea in greke Ελαια, consisting of . iii. substances (as doth
mylke,) as of grosse dregges, called Amurca, of an aery essen­
ce, &  of a whayey substance. Oyle is of temperament meane
as it weare, betwene whotte and colde drye and moyste:
yet doth it rather inclyne to heate and moisture. But from 
this meane may it three wayes varie, as firste Omphacinum
(made of vnripe Oliues) is somwhat colde and adstringent:
as the oyle of through rype olyues (which they cal Drupas)
doth moderatly heate and moyste. Secondly newe oyle is 
by comparation colde: so swete oyle kept vntyl it be olde,
is whotte and euaporatyue. Thirdly is doth moste aptly or 
redely receyue the qualities, of whatso euer by arte is ther






with composed: be they whotte or colde, &c. And therfore
sayeth Galen, is it worthily accompted, the matter of all 
other medicines. 

It moueth the belly and the reddyshe wheye, beyng ta­
ken a way (as by washynge or els howsoeuer) the reste is
made whyter, and without byting. The vnctions therwith
are rather to be vsed to whole bodies then vnto plethorikes,
or to men possessed with rawe humores. 
Elaon. 
Elæa. 

Drupas.  
De symp. me. 
fac. li. 2
Cf. OED, "olive oil," n. and int. (1566-). 




Olibanum(n).  
OLibamon sayeth Platearius, is whotte and drie in the 
seconde degree, and is none other thyng but Thus. 
Which Galen sayeth, dryeth but in the first. It is 
thought of dyuers men, (not without great reason, to bee
that rounde whyte droplyke gumme, and within fatty,
whiche Dioscorides preferreth for the beste, &  calleth Thus
masculinum, and in Greke Stagonias. Not farre from this is
Lanfranke his mynde, who by Cortice olibani meaneth
Corticem Thuris optimi. 
De sym. lib. 7. 
Dioscor.  lib. 1. 
σταγονίας
λίβανος. qua­
si Thus stilli­
cidare. 
Cortex olibani


Ophthalmia 
ΟΦθαλμία, in Latin Lippitudo. Is the inflammation of that panicle that couereth all the other panicles &
partes of the eye, called Tunica adnata (of Galen Agna­
ta) and Coberens, and is of twoo sortes. Vera, comminge of a 
cause antecedent or interiore, as of fulnes in all the body,
of the influxion of sharpe humores, or of grosse and flatu­
lente spirites: & nonuera, whiche commeth of a cause proca­
tarctyke or exterior, as of a stroke, duste, smoke, &c. Suche
a difference of Obtalmia (for so he calleth it) maketh Lanfran­
cus as thou seest, calling it Parua, magna, or maxima. 


Opium 
Οπιον, Id est lacrima papaueris, whiche is the iuice of Papaue­






ris nigri, brought by arte into a masse, muste nedes be lyke
in temperament to the popye, wherof it is made: and is
sayeth Galen the myghtiest among narcotike medicines,
and causeth dead sleape, but ought rarly, in great extremi­
ties (and then warly) to be vsed. For it strangleth, and ve­
hement paynes are often eased therby (beyng vsed alone)
for some small tyme: after the whiche it returneth more
violently then before. But in euery doubte of this and his
vse: let maister Turner be to you a sufficient satisfier. 
Opion
De com. med. 
secun. loca. li. 5
De methodo
medendi. li. 12. 


Opopanax.  
Οποπάναξ, Succus panace, that is the iuice of the herbe Πά
νακες ἥράκλειον, or Panax there are o­
ther two kyndes, Asclepium & Cheironium. It is an herbe
(sayeth Dioscorides) growyng in Boeotia and Arcadia, with
rough herby coloured leaues, liyng on the grounde, inden­
ted with fyue diuisions muche lyke to fygge leaues, a high
stalke, as hath Ferula, whiche is white throughe a certeine
mosines, and also beset with little leaues: hauynge moreo­
uer a toppe lyke dylle, a yellowe flowre, and a sede feruent 
and odoriferous: with many rootes also, springing from one
beginnyng, beyng whyte, of heauy sauoure, thyck rynded,
and bytter tasted. Opopanax sayeth Galen, doth both digeste
and mollyfie: and therin excelleth Chalbanum. It heateth in
the thyrde degree, and drieth in the seconde, (as dothe also
the rynde of the roote, though lesse then the iuice) and that 
without adstringencie: and therfore is vsed to stuberne vl­
cers, and as an incarnatiue to broken bones. 
Panaces he­
racleion. 
Countreis in
Grece. 
De sym. med. 
facultat. lib. 8. 
De com. med. 
secundum ge­
nera. lib. 7. 


Orificium.  
ORificium, is the orifice, mouthe, or entrance of anye
thinge that is holowe. Wherfore Orificium sinus, uel
fistuleæ, is the orifice or entrance, of a fistule or holow
vlcer. &c. 






Orobus.  
SO called of the Apothecaries, folowynge the Greeke,
(which is Οροβος, and the Latine Eruum) is englyshed
of D. Turner, a bitter fitche: who treateth therof at
large. It is a certein pulse, and a foode (for his vnpleasant­
nes) meter for bullockes then for men, but are vsed in me­
dicines that purge grosse humores, from the lunges and
the breste. The whyte bitter fitches, are less medicinable
 then the yelowe or the pale. Eruum dryeth in the thyrde de­
gree fully, and heateth in the first: and farther, howe bitter
so euer it be, in the same measure doth it cutte insonder,
scowre, and open obstructions: beynge twyse sodden, it lo­
seth his vnsauorines, and also his scowring and incisiue po­
wer, and so dryeth without great bytternesse. It is diure­
tike and (copiously taken) causeth pyssyng of bloud. Diosco­
rides sayeth, that of them by parchyng and gryndinge is
made a meale, whiche with hony mundifieth vlcers, ke­
pyng dyuers angrye sortes of them, from crepyng and cor­
rodyng: being made into paste with wyne, it healeth vene­
mous bytinges, and scowreth the skynne of freckles and 
spottes. 
Eruum. 
Galenus De a­
limentis. lib. 1. 
De attenuante
uictus ratione
De symp. me. 
facult. lib. 8. 

Ossa combusta.  
OF burned bones thus sayeth Galen. They drye and 
digeste, and chiefly as some saye, the bones of a man. 
I haue knowne certeyne of our contreymen, that by
geuyng mans bones burned in drinke, haue cured in many
Epilepsiam and Arthritin, all this Galen. A great desiccatiue
they must nedes be, for that burnynge addeth to the bone
more drynes, whiche was before of his owne nature colde
and drye. 
De sym. med. 
facult. li. 11. 
Επιληψία
Morbus comi­
tialis. 
αρθριτις. i. ar­
ticularis mor­
bus. 


Oua.  
EGges sayth Galen in his boke last cited, are not partes
of animals, but answer in proportion, to thynges su­






perfluous or more then nedeful. They are made for propa­
gation and perpetuitie, and are profitable, as for foode. 
Whervnto the egges of Phesantes and hennes, are the
beste: As of the Goose and the Ostriche, are the worste. 
Egges that are meanly sodden, (called therfore Tremula) are
for nourishment best of all other. Sorbilia oua (which be sodde
in water tyll it be whyte) doe nuryshe the lesse, but are easyer
to put downe, and smothe the roughnes of the sharpe ar­
terie. Sodden egges are of harde concoction, of grosse nou­
rishment, and are hardly put ouer: but grosser and more
fumous iuice doe rosted egges make, and tary longer in the
stomache. But fried egges are euery way of worste nurish­
ment, and doe corrupte other meates eaten with them. 
Lastly, egges prepared with oyle, wyne, and the sauce Garo,
and after meanly baked or rosted, and called Oua suffocata,
are better then sodde egges or rosted, and are colder then
the equall temperament. 

The whyte of the egge is accompted of the number of
medicines not byting, and is vsed not onely to the eyes, but
also to all other thynges that require gentyll medicines:
as ad Vlcera contumacia &  pudendorum ac fedis: so is also the yolke,
(whiche aswageth payne. The whole egge is vsed Cum oleo
Rosæto, for inflammations: but in all these thynges oughte
newe egges to be taken, and the olde refused. 
Ouum. 
Galen. de ali­
mentis. lib. 3. 
Oua tremula. 
Ouum sorbi­
lium. 
De euchymia
et cacochymia
Oua suffocata. 
Albumen ovi
Oui uel ellus. 

"Ovum" antedates earliest OED citation (1672). 




Oua formicarum.  
SO vnspeakable is the careful loue of our merciful God
towardes his creatures, that he maketh the litle Ante &
hir egges, medicines for their health. Thei ar foode for
Beares, and their egges (sayeth Plinie) are to them a hol­
some medicine, when they are greued. 


Oxalis.  
Οξαλίς, so called as well of the Apothecaries as of the






Grecians, of the sharpe taste that it hath, is one of the . iiii. 
kyndes of Rumecis, or Lapathi in Dioscorides, called also of
some αναξυρις, and commonly Acetosa, and is of two kyndes,
Maior and Minor, the first knowne to all, the other not so. 

It cooleth with a pleasant sharpnes, and is therfore with
vs in great vse. The iuyce therof cooleth &  represseth chole­
ricke inflammations of the stomache and the liuer, and pre­
serueth from pestilent infections if the leaues be chawed,
and the iuice swallowed downe: as haue dyuers learned
men of late practise writen, by whose iudgement it is of tem­
perament colde and drye in the seconde degree. 
Rumex. 
Lapathum. 
Anaxyris. 

"Oxalis" antedates earliest OED citation (1601). 






Papauer.  
OF Popy with the Grecians called μήκων, there are 
many kyndes, as ήμερος .i. satiuum ἄγριος i. syluestre, 
ροίας i. fluidum uel erraticum, Κερατῖτις cornutum uel cor­
niculatum, αφρόδες Spumcum &  Herculeum: of euerye of the 
whiche there are also diuers kyndes, whiche here it were
to longe to discusse. They do all coole. 

The whyte seade of Papaueris Satiui, prouoketh sleape
moderatly, and therfore it is eaten in bread and with hony. 
But of the wylde ones, the seade of Papaueris fluidi, called al­
so Rhoeas (because his floures doe sodaynly falle,) doth coole
more myghtyly, and therfore can not be vsed alone with­
out hurte. That of the kynde of Papaueris syluestri, or wylde
Popye, whiche hath a fittynge bowle, hathe in the same a
blacke medycinable seade, whiche cooleth myghtylye: but
the seade that is founde in the longe wylde popye bowles,
is of all other the metest for medicine, somniferous, and
stoppeth suche spyttinges, as the cough bryngeth from the 
lunges and the brest, and is conuenient for Catarrhes 
and thynne destillations from the head. It cooleth so muche,
that it may induce bothe dead sleapes, and death also, vn­
warly vsed: for it cooleth in the fourth and last degree. 
Mecon emeros
Mecon agrios
Mecon rhoeas
Mecon ceratitis 
Papauer cornu­
tum. Mecon­
aphrodes. i. 
Papauer spu­
meum. 
Galen. de sym. 
Lib. 7. 
Galen. de ali­
mentis. lib. 7. 







Parietaria.  
VUlgarly Muralium, because it deliteth to growe on 
stone walles: Of some Vrceolaris, because it serueth
well to scowre glasen vessels. It is called in Greeke 
Ελξίνη sayeth Fuchsius, of the rough seade therof, which wyl
hange on mens clothes, and περδικίοη 
καί περδικίας, be­
cause the byrde Perdix (whiche is englyshed the Partriche,)
deliteth to fede theron. It constreigneth or bindeth strong­
ly, and scoureth awaye with colde moisture: and therfore
healeth whotte inflammations, from the begynnyng to the
state, and is also layde in Cataplasmatibus ad Phygethlon in the
begynning. The iuice therof dropped into the eares, hel­
peth their phlegmonous paynes. 
Muralium
Vrceolaris. 
Helxine. 
Perdicion. 
Perdicias. 
Galen.  de sym. 
Lib. 6. 



Passula.  
CAlled also Vua passa, and in Greeke ασταφις, ή σταφις
ήμερος, with vs reysons, ar grapes prepared by arte
as are fygges: and therfore (sayeth Galen) haue Vuæ
passæ, the same affinitie with grapes, that Caricæ haue with
figges. Whiche beynge made of tame or tylled grapes,
haue concoctiue, adstringente, and meane digestiue facul­
tie: but the wylde are vehement sharpe, and therfore doe
purge and scoure the head myghtyly. Grapes doe not 
exquisitly maturate in colde regions, muche lesse reysons:
and as they beyng swete, are the whotter, so are the sharpe
ones colder, whiche doe roborate the stomache, and con­
stipate the belly, and that, the tarter the more: among the
whyche, the reysons that are of a meane swetnes, keepe a
meane constitution. In these as there is a moderatiue ver­
tue, so haue they also a meane clensinge facultie: wherby
they put awaye the small gnawynges of the mouthe of
the stomache. If they be not adstryngent, they helpe not
the lyuer or the splene, but the affectes of the brest &  lunges. 






Of reysons they are beste that are fatte, and haue a tender
skynne: whiche if they be colde are made the better, by ta­
kyng from them their graynes, when they haue been ste­
ped in water. Though in Cilicia there doe growe reysons,
bothe full and small, without graynes. 
Astaphis & 
Staphis eme­
ros. 
Dried or pre­
pared fygges. 
Galenus Dea­
limentis. lib. 2. 
De attenuente
uictus ratione
De symp. li. 6. 



Pes milui.  
It is mencioned vnder the title Flamula. 


Phlegmone.  
Φλεγμονὴ, Id est inflammatio, uel collectio αποτουφλεγμου, hoc
est a sanguine dicta, written moste commonly hithervnto (with
muche rudenes) Flegmon, is properly a symple tumore (as 
Galen sayeth) and an affecte of the fleshie partes, comming
of a greater fluxe of bloude then they nede, or can natural­
ly susteyne. Whiche sweateth through the coates of the
veynes lyke a dewe: wherin they gather together to them
selues a tumore, with heate, rednes, stretching, resisting,
and pulsatiue or beating payne: whiche is propre to great
inflammations. And thus much of the simple tumore. For
when so euer it chaunceth to haue some portion of anye of
the other three humerall tumores adioyned therwith:
there resulteth a compounde name, suche as the mixture 
requireth, as choler therwith concurrent, maketh the name 
φλεγμονὴ ερυσιπελατώδὴς, quasi inflammatio ignis sacra seuig­
nitæ rubedinis particeps. Phlegme coupled therwith, nameth
it Φλεγμονὴ όιδηματὼδής, id est inflammatio laxa, uel Oedma­
tis particeps: But melancholy therwith, is called Φλεγμονὴ
σκιρρώδης, in Latin inflammatio dura, siue duritiei consors, as of
the reste. 
Φλεγμος, 
enim sanguis
est. 
De tumoribus
præter naturam
De methodo
med. li. 13. 14. 


Pilileporis.  
Seyng that heares (whose cause efficient as Galen wit­






nesseth, is of grosse and slymy superfluities) is colder & drier
then any other parte of the bodie, yea then the bones: By
the mindes of Aristotle, Constantinus, Galenus, and Albertus Mag­
nus: nedes must the heares, of the Hare be moste colde and
drie, and therfore restraining and bynding) whiche is of all
other a beaste moste melancholike and timorous. For the
whiche cause (sayeth Galen) is he and the Harte, indued
with swifte bodies. 
De methodo
medendi. li. 1&
De temp. lib. 1
De usu par­
rium. lib. 1. 

Pinguedo. 
PInguedo, is with vs the grease or oylye fatte of bodies,
of men or beastes, for the whiche looke more at Adeps. 



Pini Cortex.  
THe rynde of the Pine tree, (called in Greke πίτυς, and
in Latin Pinus,) brused and layde to, is profitable by the 
testimonie of Dioscorides, for chafinges and vlcers that are
ouer all the body: and also for burnynges cum Manna & Spu­
ma argenti. Beyng vsed cum Serat myrtino, it healeth suche vl­
cers of delicate persons as refuse sharpnes. Brused cum 
atrimento sutorio, it restrayneth crepyng vlcers: and in suffitu, 
& partus & secundas eiicit. The leaues of the same brused and
applied, doe mitigate and represse inflammations. They ease
with vineger the totheake: and a dragme weighte of the
same druncke in Mulsa, is profitable for men diseased in the li­
uer. The ryndes of the appuls or nuttes of the Pine tree, 
dooe in drinke as doe the leaues. Wherfore Lanfrancus, by
Cortice pini, must be vnderstanded to meane the rynde of the
tree, whose properties doe beste agree with his intente. 
Pitys. 
Lib. 1. 


Piper.  
OF the Grecians called πέπερι, is of thre kyndes, be­
side Piper siluestre, as Longum, Album, &  Nigrum. Which






all (sayth Galen) doe heate and drye, and are vsed (as in Dic­
trion peperon,) to digeste rawe humores: and drunke Cum 
Vino, doe helpe the stomache cooled by colde alimentes. 
Black pepper is to be chosen, that is neyther sclender, rug­
ged, nor hauing a grosse rynde: whiche twoo notes doe also
commende the whyte. The long pepper ought to be found,
without holes, and that neither by brusing nor steping wyl
be resolued, but will kepe still the nature of pepper. 

And where as the olde wryters (ledde thervnto, as it
should seme, rather by heresaye then experience,) Esteme
them al the frutes of one tree, gathered at seuerall seasons:
The opinion of the later wryters, for dyuerse considerati­
ons thervnto repugning: I referre you to Matthiolus and 
to maister D. Turner, his worthy worke, wherin he hath
not only made hereof out of eche sorte large demonstra­
tions, but also moste learnedly hath he explicated manye
doubtes: whiche vnknowne, myghte through ignorance
haue wrought many euels (as no doubte) long tyme here
tofore they haue done. 
Peperi. 
De symplici. 
lib. 8. 
De sanitate
tuenda. lib. 4. 


Pira.  
Of Pira I haue wrytten benethe at Pyrum


Pistacia. 
ωιστάκια , so named bothe in Greeke and Latine, and
vulgarly Fistici, are the frutes of a tree, growyng as sayeth
Dioscorides,) in Syria, lyke to Pine nuttes: whiche Doctor
Turner describeth also at large. They are after Galen,
frendly to the stomache, subtill, bitteryshe, aromatike, and
somwhat adstryngente: And therfore of small nurysh­
ment, mete for a sclender diete, good to comforte the liuer, 
and to open the obstructions of the same. 
De sym. med. 
facultat. lib. 8. 







Pisum.  
πίσοΝ
 (sayeth Galen) doth in his whole substance resem­
ble the beane, (if I may so englyshe Faba,) and are in lyke
maner taken. They are not so wyndy, and doe in al things
excelle beanes, saue that they haue not so muche scowring
power, and therfore doe tary longer in the belly. 

But to know how Pisum, (wherof neyther Dioscori­
des nor Galen haue made description. ) may be our peason
or no: haue recourse as before to maister D. Turner. For
to repete that here, whiche an other hathe already so com­
modiously sayde: would but make my booke vnnedefully
to swelle, and with knowne thynges fatigate the reader. 
Pison. 
De alimentis. 
lib. 1. 
De euch ymia
et cacoch ymia



Pix.  
NAmed in Greke πίσσα, is after Dioscorides of three
sortes Liquida, Viscosa, and Arida. Pix liquida (sayeth he,)
is gathered out of the fattest portions of the trees Picea and
Pinus, whiche of some was called Δάς, in Latine Teda, affir­
ming it to be a vice or Canker of the trees afore saide: con­
foundyng the vanitie of some that haue counted Teda a tree
speciall. 

Hereof the beste is sincere lyghte, and shining, whiche
by boylynge waxeth thycke, and is called παλίμπσσα, Id est
spissa pix uel Pix bis cocta: wherof one parte waxeth clammy,
and is called βοσκάς, quasi pix Viscosa, the other is drye, and 
named Κολοφωνία, (of the citie Colophon of Libia or Græcia,
from whence it was wonte to be brought,) In Latine Pix
Arida, and commonly Pix Græca, whiche oughte to bee pure,
fatte, odoriferous, resinous, of reddyshe coloure, and hea­
teth and drieth, by the sentence of Galen in the seconde de­
gree: but doth more drie then heate. The liquid contrarily
doth more heate then drie, hauynge also subtill partes, 






and therfore helpeth asthmatike persons. They haue ab­
stersiue concoctiue, and digestiue powre, as in taste a lyght
sharpnes and bitternes: so beyng mixed with wexe, they
take away leprosy nayles, and scoure Lichenas. They also
beyng put in Cataplasmatis, doe concocte harde tumores: and
to all these is Pix liquida the better, and filleth vp the holow­
nes of vlcers: but the drye is more apte to glewe together
woundes. 

But Peter Martyr, in his Decades of the Spanyardes
their voyages and gestes in the west Indies, sheweth of a 
harder and stronger kynde of pyche: (and therefore better
for shippes,) flowyng out of a roche in Hispaniola. Whiche (or
the lyke thynge) myght be the cause of the name in that
whiche we commonly call stone pyche. In the whiche Isle
sayeth he, there is also pyche made of twoo seuerall trees:
the one is the Pyne tree, (commonly knowne,) the other is
called in that countrey language Copeid. The leaues wher­
of is a spanne broade, almoste rounde, thicker then double
parchment, merueylous tough, and is apte to be wrytten
on with wyers of metall or woode, and that on both sydes. 
And whyle the leafe is fresh and newe, it shelueth the let­
ters whyte vpon grene: but when it is olde and drye, it be­
commeth harde and whyte, like writing tables of woodde,
and the letters yelowe: for it wyll neuer lose them, by wa­
shyng or any other wayes, saue only by fyre. 
Lib 3. 
Pissa. 
Picea. Pinus
Das. 
Palim pissa
Boscas. 
Colophonia. Pix arida. 
De sym. lib. 8. 
Copeia. 



Plaga.  
PLaga, is taken as wel for euery vlcer or sore generally,
but chiefly for suche as hadde their begynninge, Proca­
tarctice that is from without, as for euery new wounde
or cutte, strype or hurte. And so doth Lanfranke vse it, cal­
lyng Vulnus Plagam nouam aut recentem: and Vlcus he calleth 
Plagam putridam, uell antiquam. 
Vulnus. 
Plaga noua. 
Vlcus. 
Plaga antiqua







Plantago.  
IS of the Grecians called Αρνόγλωσσοη, quasi agnina lingua,
and is (though Dioscorides mencion but two,) of dyuers
kyndes, as Maior, media, & minor, Aquatica also and Marina:
Wherof Plantago maior, whiche Lanfranke meaneth, bothe
cooleth and dryeth in the seconde excesse, and hathe some
sowernes by reason of hir earthly partes. The medicines
that are both colde and adstryngente, are mete for rebelli­
ous vlcers, rottenes, and fluxions, and therfore for Dysente­
riis: for they staye the flowynges of bloude, and coole things
burned. They heale woundes, both new and old, and glew
together their holownes. But of all other suche medicines
planteyne is chiefe, or at the least seconde to none, by rea­
son of his meane and conuenient temperamente, for it is 
drye without bitynge, and colde without stupefaction. The
seade and the rootes are of lyke faculties, sauyng that they
are dryer, but not so colde. The seade is subtyll &  the roote
grosse. The leaues also dryed are subtill, and of lesse coo­
lyng. The rootes are vsed for paynes of the teethe. The
leaues also (but muche more the seades) are geuen for the
obstructions of the lyuer and splene. 
Arnoglossos 
uel arnoglosson
Galenus
De symp. me. 
facult. lib. 6. 


Plumbum vstum.  
LEade is called in Greke Μόλυβδος, and is of coolyng
facultie, hauing moreouer, not only much moiste sub­
stance congeyled by heate: but also some aery and ear­
thy essence. It being burned and after washed, helpeth to
fylle vp and heale vlcers, as well suche as are cancrous,
as those that are called Chironii, but vnwashed it is a helpe 
for frowarde vulcers. 
Molybdos. 
Galenusde
symp. medi. 
lib. 9. 


Porus sarcodes.  
THis Greeke worde Πόρος, permitteth dyuers inter­
pretations, and is taken for a waye, a passage, a tracte,






a iorney, a caue, a bosome, a couered hole, a vessell, (and πό­
ροι plurally are small sweatyng holes,) for lucre also, som­
tyme for money, and lastly, (which is nyghest our purpose)
it is a stony hardnes. And Poros,
(for Tophus is also and that more proprely a stone: whiche
Vergill in his Georgikes termeth Tophus Scaber. ) Wherof
Galen thus sayeth. When came phlegmatike humores, by
liyng long hydde in the lymmes or ioyntes, doe becomme
grosser and more viscous: ther are of them ingendred Tophi,
and Calli. Wherfore this substance repletiue, the worke of 
nature, of the grosse nurishment of the bone (commyng as
a lygature betwene the endes of the broken bones, of sub­
stance harde, but not britle) may well be called πόρος σαρ­
κώδης, quasi duritres Carnosus, as it is of Galen called Callus. 
Whiche also somtyme sygnifieth the circulare or quilly
hardnes of fistules, and is commonly taken for the hardnes
both of the palmes of the handes, and soles of the fete, in­
gendred by labore or exercise. 
Poros. 
Tophus,
A stone which
is apte to be
resolued into sande. 
De com. med. 
secun. loc. li. 10
De arte medi­
cinale. 
Poros Sarcodes. 
Callus. 
De methodo
medendi. li. 6/


Portulaca.  
POrtulaca, called in Greeke ανδραχνἄ, is of two kindes. 
Hortensis (which Lanfranke calleth Domestica), and Syl­
uestris: and is after Galen, of a colde &  watery tempe­
ramente, and coolyng in the thyrde degree, and moystynge
in the seconde: hauynge also some tartnes, and therfore
stayeth whotte and bilious fluxions, and by a certeyn clam­
mynes that it hath without bytynge, it easeth the teethe
when they are on edge. It helpeth greatly the burnyng
heates of the belly, layde to the waste or the mouthe of the 
stomache, and that in hectike feuers. And (because it is re­
stryngente) is profitably geuen to Dysentericis, muliebri pro­
fluuio, and to reiections of bloude: but to these the iuice is 
muche more efficatious then the herbe. 

An other herbe there is also, called Portulaca marina, only 
of the likenes that the leaues therof haue with porcelane,






whiche yet (in other pointes vnlyke) is not to be numbred
with these. Neyther ought I here to ouerpasse, that the 
thyrde lytle kynde of Sedum, called Illecebra is of some Gre­
cians named ἄνδράχνη άγριἄ
Andrachne. 
De symp. li. 6. 
Illecebra. 
Andrachne. . 
Agria. 


Pruna.  
AVicenna. lib. 4. Fen. 3. tract. 1. describeth Prunam, and Ignem
persicum, bothe in one chapiter, not without some
confusion of the one with the other, and bothe with 
Formica. First estemyng both the names, to serue for euery
blysteryng, corrosiue, and eschare makynge pustule. And a
little after he sayeth, that Pruna is that, whiche maketh the
place blacke as a cole, without moisture, hauynge a small
emmence lyke a lupine, somtyme with a pustule and som­
tyme not: hauyng itche ouer all. And somtyme dothe Ignis
persicus or Pruna, more larglye blyster, and purge suche a
quitture, as a place burned or cautrized doth. The place be­
ing ashe coloured, blacke, or leady, and compassed aboute
with a vehement inflammation without perfecte rednes. 
And agayne, Ignis persicus is the more sharpe, and of the
swyfter apparition, and motion: Pruna the slower, and lying
deper. The beginnyng of both is of burned choler myxed
with melancholie, (and therof commeth the blacke exchare
in both. ) Ignis persicus consisting of the vehementer choler,
and Pruna of the myghtier melancholye. If they chaunce in
the fleshe, they are the soner resolued: but if in the sinewes,
they sticke the faster, and resolue the slowlyer. Thus farre
Auicen. and yet confessyng after, that the name of eyther,
may be geuen to both: and affirmeth them often to come of
a pestilentiall feuer. 

Nowe Pruna and Carbunculus, in the qualitie of names as
you see differ not: and howe muche their efficient causes,
signes, and propreties doe varie: After these descriptions
therof, by comparing them together, it is easy to see. 
Ignis persicus. 







Prunum.  
THe plumme tree or Damsen tree, called in Greeke,
κοκκύμηλος, and Prunus is of many kyndes, both tame
and wilde: wherof maister Turner hath egregiously
wrytten. The prune (called κοκκύμηλον,) is a fructe sayeth 
Galen, of small nuryshment, but doth meanly moyste and
coole the belly, and by his moisture and slimines, subdueth
the same, and that the better if it bee boyled cum Melicrato:
But this doe the newe moyst ones, more then the olde and
drye. The damascen prunes also, (which are acounted best)
lesse then the Spanysh prunes, whiche are praysed nexte. 
The best prunes are great & lose, hauing some adstriction. 

The wylde prunes or plummes, are euidently adstrin­
gent, and therfore doe staye the belly, and are conuenient,
for the inflammations of Columella, and other partes of the
throte. 
Coccymelos. 
Coccymelon. 
Galen. de ali­
mentis. lib. 2. 
De sym. lib. 7. 


Pyrum.  
PEares are called in Greeke άπια, (as the tree is called
άπιος,) and consiste of three partes, as an earthy, a wa­
trie, (whiche are both colde,) and a temperate. Wher­
fore to be eaten, they are frendly to the stomache, staye
thirste, and nuryshe somwhat. Peares thynne slyced, so 
dried, and after boyled, are vsed in wynter for meate. 
Outwardly applyed, they drye and coole moderatlye, and
therfore doe they glewe together woundes. Which to doe
the wylde peares, (called Pyr
-a syluestria, in Greke αχράδες)
because they are moste adstringente, are moste mete. 
Apion. i. pyrum
Apios pyrus. 
Galen. de ali­
mentis. lib. 2
De symp. me. 
fac. li. 6. 
Achrades
αχραςi. py­
rum syluestre. 




Quartana febris.  
THe quartane feuer, is either interpolate, and named
Quartana intermittens, uel exquisita, or continuall, &  therof
called Quartana continens, or continua. The first is ingen­






dred of a melancholike humore putrefied, or a splenatyke
affecte, whose rigor is in the begynning not vehement, but
lyke the colde that men commonly fele in moste vehement
frostes. Whiche yet in processe of tyme augmenteth euen
to the state, with colde so vehement, as if the bones would
breake, but not pungitiue as in the tertian. The pulse is
slowe and rare: The augmentation, vigor, and mouyng of
of heate, are contrary to the tertian. The humore kyndleth
slowly lyke to a stone, or other lyke colde and drye thynge,
whiche is the cause of so muche longer intermission therin,
then in the Quotidiane. 

Quartana continua (whiche is rarly sene) is ingendred of me­
lancholy, putrefied in the vesselles, euen as is Quotidiana con­
tinens, or continua, caused of phlegme in like maner putrefied
wherin they both differ from the lyke named intermittent
feuers, and in that they are neuer without a feuerous ha­
bite, vntyl they cease for all: though yet they haue some re­
mission betwene euery fitte, and therin differ they from
the feuers Synochis, wherin there is no remission but conti­
nuall burnyng. 
Galen. de dif­
ferentiis febri­
um. lib. 2. 
De arte cura­
tiua. lib. 1. 
De morborum
temporibus. 


Quotidiana febris.  
Quotidiana uera, siue exquisita, is described in the title Amphe­
merina febre, and Quartana. 




Rapa.  
RApa or Rapum, is (of the round forme that the roote
hath,) called of the Grekes Γογγύλις ἤ γογγύλη,
quasi bolus rotundus, in Englishe a Rape, or Turnep:
and is of temperament, whotte in the seconde de­
gree and moyste in the firste: and therfore may Lanfranke
well place it with his maturatiues. The roote of the same
sodde dothe nuryshe, but is harde to concocte, and ingendreth 






wynde and sede, troubleth the stomache, & somtyme byteth
the same: and the more if it be rawe. The decoction therof is
somtime applyed to the goute. The roote rosted vnder ashes
cum cerato rosacco, is good for vlcerated kybes. The tender
stalkes eaten, doe moue vrine. The seade is put amonge
anodyne medicines, and is drunke as a helthfull medicine
against venim. Condite in brine, they nurishe the lesse, but
increase apetite the more. 
Gongylis. 
Gongyle. 
Galen. De sym. 
lib. 6. 
Dioscor. lib. 2. 
Galenus de a­
limentis. lib. 2. 


Realgar.  
A Most vehement corrosiue medicine, and is made (as
is sayde In opere pandactarum) ex sulphure, Calce uiua, &  au­
ripigmento: whiche mortifieth fistules, &  corrodeth de­
plie. And is also called Soricoria, because it killeth rattes, as it
doth also the wormes of horses. 

But Brassauolus in examine suo symplicium, sayeth, that they
are deceiued that thinke the true Risagallum (for so is it more
fitly named) a thing artificiall, for it is founde sayeth he, in 
the same myne with Auripigmento, and is of the same kynde:
beyng in dede a medicine hurtfull and venemous. 


Regeneratiuæ medicinæ 
REgeneratiue medicines, are of nature lyke to incar­
natiues, as in restoring or renewing of flesh, bone. &c. 
and commeth of Regigno, to regender or brede againe. 


Repercussiua medicamina.  
CAlled also Repellentia, are after Galen thinges sharp,
tarte, and adstringent: hauyng by the same power to 
put away or driue backe the fluxions of humores, and
ryseth of Repercutio or Repello, to constreygne or dryue
backe. 
De com. med. 
secund. loca. 
lib. 3. 







Resina.  
REsina, whiche the Grecians call ρητίνη, signifieth the
oyly teares of trees, whiche wyll burne with fyre,
and easily be commixed with oyle, and moste hardly
with water. As Gummi signifieth the watery teares of the
same: for in the fyre it wyll crackell, and wyll in water be
easily disolued, but not so in oyle. 

Resines doe al heate and drye. Wherof Resina terebinthina,
is of Dioscorides called the beste: whiche also Galen appro­
ueth, begynnyng with Resina lentiscina, and geueth to it the
firste place, saiyng. Besyde the litle adstriction that is ther­
in, (wherby it is so commodious to the weaknes and in­
flammations of the stomache, the liuer, and the belly,) it al­
so dryeth without bytinge: for it is verye subtyle without
sharpnes. Of Terebinthinæ resinæ he sayeth, that it is prefer­
red to the reste: hauyng a manifest adstriction, but not lyke 
to mastyke. Howe be it, it hath adioyned a certeyne bitter­
nes, and therfore digesteth more then mastike, &c. of dy­
uers other. But this worde Resina, so written alone, is al­
wayes taken for our common Rosin. 
Rhetine. 
Dioscor. lib. 1. 
De sym. med. 
facultat. lib. 8. 


Resolutiua medicamina.  
MEdicynes resolutyues, are called also Discutientia, &
Discutiendo, aut resoluendo: That is of discussynge, dy­
soluynge, vnlosynge, dischargynge, or wastynge a­
waye. 


Restaruatio.  
REstauration, vnition, or reparation, is the first and
principall intention, of the CHirurgien in euery dy­
uorse of vnitie. 







Rigor.  
Ρίγος is that swifte and frequent motion, (contrary to
Palpitationi,) whose motion is litle, softe, &  rare, whiche Ga­
len calleth compounde, as of a cause against nature and of 
a facultie animall (as of the vertue expulsiue) procurynge a 
sensible coldnes, and an vnequall and inuoluntary mouing
of the whole body, wherin it differeth from Horore (whiche 
is an vniuersal affecte of the skynne only,) and from Tremore
whiche possesseth somme one member, and may by the wil
be resisted. 

But that rigor that is wonte to come on sicke persons, 
and called Rigor Morbosus, is by the opinion of Hippocrates, a
certeyne peynfull coldnes, with an vnequall mouinge or
shakyng of all the body. This may dyuersly chaunce, euen
to whole bodyes as of heate, or of colde, or of a viscouse hu­
more, (to the first coolyng is a remedy, to the second heate,
to the thirde concoction or euacuation, or both. ) Somtyme
of the heryng or seyng of horryble and fearfull syghtes, or 
noyses, phlegme also bredde without a feuer by idlenes, ill
order of diete, and entryng the bathe after dynner: to the
olde auncientes vnknowne. And though it be euident, it to 
come of a natiue heate, yet commeth it also dyuersly, as 
well of colde viscous phlegme as of whotte and sharpe hu­
mores, and sometyme of a iuyce myxed of heate and colde,
as in quartanes, but in mixed compounde feuers, the rigor
is neuer vehement. It to chaunce to a weake body, in a con­
tinuall feuer is an euyl signe: and also when it wyl not at
all, or hardly be put away. 
Rhigos. 
Palpitatio. 
De sympto. 
causis. lib. 2. 
De palpita­
tione trem. com. 
& rigore. 
Horor. 
Tremor. 
De Crisibus. 
De differentiis
febrium. lib. 2. 
De morborum
temporibus. 


Rosa.  
IS named in greke of the pleasant sauour therof Ροδον
quasi bene olens, & is deuyded into kyndes diuers, wherof
the auncientes haue lefte no memory. The powre of roses






consisteth sayeth Galen of a whotte & a watery substance
together: And also of two other qualities, as bitternes and
byndyng. The flower wherof is more adstringent then it
selfe is, and therfore desiccatyue. Mesues appoynteth them
the faculties of coolyng in the first degree, and driyng in
the seconde. The iuyce of Roses sayth he, whiche is seue­
red from the earthy substance therof, heateth nyghe to the
firste degree. It openeth, mundifieth, resolueth: and pur­
geth gently by experience (sayeth Syluius,) both choler and
water, though the olde wryters saye not so muche. Lyke 
properties to these hath Syrupus and Vnguentum rosarum. 
They strengthen the harte, the stomache, the lyuer, and
the retentyue facultie. They are good in bilious feuers, to
coole inflammations, to mitigate the paynes made by them,
and prouoke sleape. They moue sternutations, and are hurt­
full for catarrhous persons: but they bynde and strengthen
the Vuula and the throte, and take awaye surfetyng. The
whyte roses doe purge little or nothyng, but doe bynde and
strengthen more then the redde. 
Rhodon. 
De sym. lib. 8. 


Rumex acutus.  
CAlled in Greeke ὄξυλάπαθον, is one of the kyndes of λαπαθου: so called απο του λαπάζω, quod uacuat uentrem,
because the leaues of eche kynde therof doe lose and
emptie the belly. The kyndes of Rumex are foure, Rumex
acutus, wherof here. Rumex satiuus, called for his greatnes
ιηπολάπαθον, &  of other fondly Rhabarbarum. Rumex syluestris, 
called also αναξυρὶς, & ἰξαλις, wherof afore. The fourth hath 
leaues lyke planten. About the which kyndes, because ther
is some controuersie rysen, in that Aetius describeth his Oxi­
lapathon, otherwyse then Dioscorides doth, appoynting his
sharpnes to consiste rather in taste then in the harde and
sharpe substance of the leafes pointe: and that to speake of
it here so largly as D. Turner hath done, would vnnecessa­
rily augmente this briefe worke: I sendeth thyther. 






Of Rumex acutus, Galen saith, that it doth (of a mixed tem­
perament) both digeste & repercusse: The seade wherof is of
so manifest adstriction, that it staieth the Dysenteria, &  the fluxe
of the wombe. The rusticall women, (lystyng when they
are with chylde) and gredy boyes, doe vse nowe and then
to eate it rawe: whiche nurysheth but litle more then La­
patho. But that the roote of Lapathi acuti doth maturate, I
fynde not in any other autentike author: and therfore is 
Lanfrankes experience only to be trusted vnto. Or els per­
haps he myght meane some other herbe: but what, it is 
doubtfull. They prayse it in the healyng and dryuing away
of dyuers apostmes: Whiche to doe it semeth of them ra­
ther to be gathered by deuydinge, then by maturation. 
Oxylapathon. 
Lapathon. 
Hippolapathon
Anaxyris. 
Oxalis. 
De symp. me. 
fac. li. 7. 
De alimentis. 
lib. 2. 



Ruta.  
RVe is called in Greeke Πεγανον, because by the
great heate and drynes therof, it coagulateth sede,
for πἡγνυδαε (id est coagulare, uel ut glaciem contrahere) sig­
nifieth to congeyle or coagulate, Teste Plutarcho. It is of two
kyndes, Hortensis & syluestris: wherof the one is as rare, as
the other is common. It is in taste both sharpe and bitter,
kylleth wormes, and is of temperamente whotte in the
thyrde degree. The wylde Rue in the fourthe, and dryeth
myghtely: and therfore is of power to deuide and cut inson­
der grosse and tough humores, and to moue vryne. And
is good for paynes of the ioyntes, and the dropsie. 

The iuyce therof heated in a pomegranate rynde, is put in
to the eares to ease their peynes: It also sharpeneth the
eye sighte. Eaten rawe or condite with salt, & layde to cum 
melle &  succo foeniculi, it putteth away their dimnes: and mit­
tigateth their peynes, beyng layde to cum Polenta. It is mor­
ouer of subtil partes, and destroyeth wyndes: and therfore
pursueth strongly the inflammations of Colon, and other
interior partes, &  restreyneth venereous appetites: beside
the incomparable vertue that it hath against poyson, and
all venemous woundes. 
Peganon. 
Dioscor.  lib. 3. 
Galen.  de sym. 
lib. 8. 









Sabina.  
SAuyn is that continuall shrubbe, that is cal­
led in Greeke βράθυ seu βράθυς. And therof are
there two kindes after Dioscorides. The one with
leaues lyke to Cupresso, to vs well knowne: The
other resembleth in forme, the leaues of the Tamariske
tree, and is here rare. 

It heateth (by the sentence of Galen) and dryeth in the
seconde degree, Consisting of moste subtill partes, of taste
lyke the Cipers tree, but that it hath more sharpnes, and
lesse adstriction: And therfore is whotter, and dothe more
myghtily digeste. It stayeth spreadyng or eatynge sores, a­
swageth inflammations, and breaketh Carbuncles: But
for his great heate and drynes, is vnmete to heale woundes. 
Being drunke with wyne: Menses, Vrinasque prouocat by his
subtill substance, and dryueth out euen bloud by the vrine. 
Foctum etiam uiuentem interficit, & mortuum educit. 
Brathy. uel 
Brathys. 
De symplici. 
lib. 6. 


Saccharum.  
SAccharum, is called of the moste auncient Archigenes, and
other olde wryters Sal Indicus, and Mel arundineum. 

Dioscorides, lib. 2. cap. 74. Hauing spoken of dyuers
kyndes of hony: sayeth. There is also an other kynde of con­
creted or hardened hony, which they call σάκχαρον, founde
in India &  Arabia felici, in the redes, coacted or fastened like
salte, and breaketh betwene the teethe as salte doth. It is
mete for the belly, and profitable to the stomache, and hel­
peth the griefes of the reynes & bladder: being layde to, it
putteth away the causes of darknes or dimnes of the eye sight. 

Galen in his . vii. boke of the faculties of simple medicins,
in the chapter of Mel, sayth. But Saccharon whiche is brought
from India and Arabia Felice, groweth together or becom­
meth harde on redes, and is a kynde of hony: not so swete
as ours, but of like vertues, in scouryng & digesting. And 
in that it is no enemy to the stomache as is ours, nor cau­
seth thirste: so muche differeth it from our hony in substance. 






Plinie sayeth, it is hony gathered together as bygge as
hasell nuttes, whyte lyke gummes, of great vse in medi­
cine. 

Alexander Aphrodisaus sayeth, that whiche the Indians cal
Saccharum, is the curdes or heauy partes of hony, the sonne
thyckenyng or hardenyng the dewes, and conuertyng them 
into the swetnes of hony. By these and lyke authorities,
doth Fuchsius seme very learnedly to proue our sugar not to 
be Saccharum Candum, or Salem Indum of the auncientes: affir­
ming our sugar to be none other, but the iuyce of a plante
of a proper kynde, well brused and pressed out, (and is then
of colour, rather blacke or reddyshe, then whyte,) and by
heate of the fyre, in boyling and purifiyng or scumming, it
hardeneth and becommeth sugar: and the more it is boy­
led and purified, the whyter it is. Ioannes Manardus sayeth he,
a man of most sharpe iudgement. Lib. 2. Epistolarum suarum
medicinalium wryteth, that by the Portugales and Sicilians
he knewe the plante, from the which sugar is pressed: and
sayeth that it is sowed of seade in moyste places, and is out­
wardly lyke a great rede, but inwardly moste vnlyke: as
full of pulpe, heauy, softe, and ful of iuyce. A rede contrary­
wyse is harde, lyght and empty. 

Nowe seyng that the sugar of the auncientes, came of a 
naturall dewe sayeth he, and the mater of hony, fyrst made
glewye by the colde of the nyghte, and after harde by the
heate of the sunne: whyte by nature, and breakynge be­
twene the tethe lyke salte, (Ours being softe, and may as
hony be swalowed, tyll by fyre it be hardened. ) That han­
gynge vpon redes, and after Galen, shoulde not moue 
thyrste so muche as hony, whiche ours doth: It can not be 
oure sugar. 

But contrary to this are the myndes of Brasauolus and
Matthiolus, who denye Saccharum, of the auncientes to be any
kynde of hony, or to come of the ayre: because what part of 
the ayre so euer (saye they) doth coagulate by colde, the same
wyll by the heate of the sunne not harden, but euaporate






or vanyshe awaye, as wyll Manna recentium: whiche neuer
waxeth so harde, that it wyl breake betwene the teethe like
salte, but wyll rather be chawed as it were wexe. 

Who also iudge that plante (about whiche Fuchsius 
thus argueth) to haue been of his exterior forme called Ha­
rundo, though it be not holowe or emptie as a rede, &  doe cal
it Harundinem Sacchariferam: confessyng yet with Fuchsius, that
our sugar is Factitium quoddam, non naturale, and of the same
iuyce made perfecte by boylyng, as before. But Sal Indus (saye 
they) is of the same substance, and for very fulnes issueth or
sweateth out, at certeine ryftes of the same, and chiefly a­
bout the ioyntes or knobbes: where (saye they) it is by the
heate of the sunne hardened and whytened. 

Claymyng also herin Plinies former authoritie to leane
with them, in that he lykeneth it to gummes: Noting also 
that the auncientes did neuer saye, that their Saccharon dyd
fasten or growe together on the leaues, as dewes are most
apte to doe. 

Brasauolus also semeth to proue, that the makynge of su­
gar of the iuyce of Canes, and of the rootes of the same,
was in vse before the tymes Galen and Dioscorides, by the
testimonies Marcus Varro, Statius Papinus, and Strabo: who ly­
ued al before Galen. But Matthiolus alloweth not the swete
pressed out liquores, whiche they mention, to be of necessi­
tie Saccharon: because the INdians pressed out suche iuyces
from the rootes of dyuers plantes and trees, as well as of
Canes. Neyther yet (though it be called Saccharum Tabarzeth 
or Saccharum Candum) is it our sugar Candy: whiche is not
brought from India. But the Venetians immitating na­
ture as muche as may bee, doe make it, by boylynge oure
whyte sugar foure or fyue tymes, puttinge redes therin,
wheron it may hange lyke lumpes: And wrappe it in cot­
ten, as though it came from the easterly regions. Neyther
knowe I any thyng at this daye extant with vs, that may
so well by lykened to Saccharum Arundineum, as may the why­
test sugar Candy, that we haue amongest vs: for the other






is also not naturall, but artificiall: nor white but yelowysh. 
And that iudge I Lanfranke to meane by Saccharum rubrum. 

Loe, thus doe we se, how this our infortunate and mise­
rable age, is not only bereft of this &  many other Iewels
and commodities: but also (whiche worse is) so drowned in
obliuion of the same, that what they are or weare, we are
either vtterly ignorant or very vncerteine. 

Sal Indicus
Mel arundineum. 
Saccharon. 
Saccharum
Tabarzeth. 
Candum. uel
Candidum. 
Harundo Sac­
charifera. 

"Saccharum" has a different sense in OED, a form of honey. 




Sal.  
SAlt, generally called Sal, (wherof there are dyuers 
kindes,) is also in Greke in lyke maner called ἅλες, and 
is made partly by arte, of sea water in the bayes, dryed
through the heate of the sunne, and called Marinus: and of
certeyne salt lakes by boylyng (whiche is called Lacustris siue
Stagneus: and partly natural, digged out of the earth, and
is therfore called Fossilis, whiche doe both alyke drye migh­
tyly, but differ in this. That Sal Fossilis is of substance more
compacte, grosse, and more adstringent: and beynge put in
water, wyll not disolue as the other two sortes wyll. They
haue also an obscure adstriction, wherby they thycken and
bynde suche fleshe as is salted therwith: for it wasteth a­
way moyste substances, and byndeth the solid partes. For
the whiche Sal Fossilis is best: next good to it is Sal Marinus. 
The thyrd rome holdeth the salt that is made in the welles,
& salte pooles. Of all the whiche, we haue only the vse of Sa­
lis Marini & Lacustris. Howbeit, in some partes of Calabria &
Germania, and in all Pannonia, Sal Fossilius is their vsuall salte. 
For the whiche (sayeth Brasauolus) they digge & vndermyne
certeyne hilles, of two myles in lengthe, estemyng that for 
beste whiche is whyte, salt, and shyning: but that whiche
is moste bright and glistering like to Crystall, doe the A­
pothecaries (folowing the Arabians) therfore (or els for the 
rarenes of the same) call Salem Geminæ. Whiche for a truthe 
Manardus doth auouche: affirming him selfe to haue sene in 
Pannonia dyuers lumpes or cloddes of digged salte, shynynge
so bryght, that suche as sawe it, thought it to haue ben very
Christall. This sayeth Matthiolus, beyng cast into the fyre,
neither cracketh nor leapeth out, as the other sortes wyll:






but gloweth as Iron therin. 

Salte sayeth Dioscorides, dothe bynde, scowre awaye,
purge gentlye, scatter abroade, represse, and extenuate. 
But in that, one more then an other as before. It defendeth
from putrefaction, and is put in medicynes that mundyfie
scabbes. It represseth the excrescentes of the eies, &  consumeth
the webbes in the same, and taketh awaye other fleshye
eminences. It put in Clysters, loseth toughe and glasye
phlegme from the belly. Outwardly applyed, it putteth
away werynes, helpeth hydropicall tumores, and in fo­
mentations dothe mitigate paynes: Cum oleo &  aceto, it sta­
yeth itche, &  easeth the quincie, cum melle, aceto, &  oleo. It is 
drunke cum Oximeli, after Opium and musheromes, to resiste
strangling: and is profitable to all poysoned woundes, and
venemous hurtes. 

Howbeit, Sal by Mesue, is deuided into foure principall
or notable kindes, as 1. Sal panis, wherin are conteined al the
former sores, as Marinus, Stagneus, (eche of the which is cal­
led Factitius) and Fossitius (called also of Syluius, Hammoniacus &
Communis) which ought to be white, bright, not stony, thick,
and equal. 2. Sal Gemmæ whiche will easely cut or rente, &  is 
lyke to the Cristal. 3. Sal Naphthicus, of colour blackysh, and
smelleth like Bitumen: and 4. Sal Indus. Which is reddysh, or
rather blackish, and is the strongest: next to it is Naphthi­
cus: Thirdly Gemmeus, and the weakest is Fossitius. Salte is
whotte and drie (sayeth he) in the second degree, and howe
bitter soeuer it be, so muche the whotter and drier it is. 

Of Sal Naphthicus, Dioscorides maketh no mencion, but
Galenus lib. 4. &. 9. De symp. sayeth that a certeine salt called Sodo­
minus, is made in the sea of palestin of Syria, called Mare mortuum,
wherin muche Bitumen is ingendred: and Naphtha is a kynde
of Bituminis, wherof the said salt is called Sal Naphthicus: wher­
of also in Plinie is almost a like sence. What the Arabians
ment by Salem Indum, it is hard to know. But what the Gre­
cians ment therby, is shewed aboue vnder Saccharum. 

Salte consisteth of an earthye substance, bitter by ad­
ustion, and of an vnsauory watery substance. 






Whiche two if they be equall, make a salte sauoure. If the
earthy substance be the stronger, it wyll be bytter: but if
the watery, it wyll haue an easy saltnes. 
Hales ex li­
bris Galeni
De symp. fa­
cult. li. 4. 9. 11. 
Sal Mariunus. 
Sal Fossitius. 
Sal Gemmeus
is as you see
a kynde of Salis Fossitii
or els must 
it varie from 
Sale Gemmeo
Dioscoridis. 


Sal Ammoniacus.  
ΑΜμωνιακος ἅλος quasi Sal arenarius, so called because
(as some wryte) it is by dygging founde in long pie­
ces vnder sande, or els of his natiue place (as aboue
of the Gumme Hammoniacum) is more commonly and moste
corruptly called Sal armoniacus, and is of two sortes. Namely,
the naturall called Natiuus, whiche is thought to be con­
teyned vnder the sortes of Salis panis, and shoulde in colour
be lyke Alumen Siston, and shyning: beyng so salte, that it is of
vnpleasant taste, but profitable in medicine. 

Sal Ammoniacus is (sayeth Dioscorides) peculiarly praised,
if it may bee easyly cutte or clefte into streighte flakes or
sclyces, with vs bothe out of vse and knowledge, though
in tyme longe synce better knowne. The other whiche 
we haue is artificall, and therfore called Factitius, and is
chiefly occupied of Goldsmythes: and oughte not to bee v­
sed in steade of the true thynge, otherwyse then in muche
lesse quantitie. But Galen biddeth vs substitute in his place
Salem Capadocum. And dyuers other learned men, Salem Gem­
meum. . His vertues are like the vertues of salte. 
Hammoniacos
Halos. 
Sal Ammonia­
cus natiuus. 
Dioscor. lib. 5. 
Sal Hammonia
cus factitius. 
Sal Capadocus


Sal Nitrum.  
ALbeit (as moste true it is) that our Salte petre is not 
Νίτρον και λίτρον, of Dioscorides, Galen, Plinie, and
other auncient wryters, whiche is naturall, com­
myng of certeyne waters in lakes: and should be lyght, rose
coloured or whyte, cleauyng or openyng it selfe into many
pores, lyke a spungy substance. But our Salt peter (which
is artificiall) is glisteryng whyte, (if it be good) or els blac­
kyshe, (if it be not made perfecte by boylyng) solide and 
weyghty. 






Nitrum also is taken cum Lacerpitio, of suche as fele not their
meate (whervnto salt peter is not the metest:) yet surely is
it euident, that Lanfranke and others right learned,
both of his tyme and long since, ment according to the vul­
gar opinion, (though not without great errore,) that which
hath ben commonly called Sal petræ, When they wrote Sal
Nitrum. 

But Mesues sayeth, that of Nitrum, there is one mineral
or naturall, and an other artificial called Spuma Nitri, white,
lyght, salte, and bityng, and weaker then the naturall Ni­
trum. An other artificiall Nitrum also there is sayeth he, stron­
ger then Nitrum, and called Flos parietis uel salis. Hetherto Me­
sues. And this doe I with Syluius take to be Sal petræ, (if it
may in any wyse be founde among the auncientes) better
knowne as it semeth now, to the Apothecaries and to Gun­
ners, then in olde tyme to the auncient wryters. 

Nitrum sayeth Mesues, is drye in the thyrde degree, and
 whotte in the begynnyng of the same: But after Aui­
cen only in the seconde. It is (sayth Galen) of power meane
betwene Aphronitrum &  Salem, and by burning is more sub­
tyle: and therfore draweth the nygher Aphronitrum. 

It dryeth and dygesteth, and is put (sayeth Dioscorides)
into emplasters, that drawe out, discusse, &  extenuate: &  scow­
reth awaye leprosies. Whiche (if it be taken inwardly) cut­
teth, and thinneth, grosse and toughe humores, muche
stronglier then salte: and is taken both rawe and burned,
against the suffocations of Musheromes. 
Nitron. 
Litron. 
The old trans
lators vse this 
Araby worde
Baurach. But
let that be no pre
iudice to anye
truthe. 
De sym. lib. 9. 
Dioscor.  lib. 5.  


Sambucus.  
SAmbucus, which is called in Greeke Ακτὴ, semeth sayeth
Fuchsius to be so called of Sambix, the first fynder therof,
or of the musicall instrument Sabucus: and therfore (after
Quintus Serenius) ought it rather to be called a Sabucus. There
are of the Elder two kyndes, the one a tree called symply,
by that general name Sambucus. The other a shrubby herbe






called Ebulus, and in Greeke χαμαιακτη 	Ή
, Quasi sambucus hu­
milis, in Englyshe Walle worte, or Daneworte. Whiche to
haue both heatyng and driyng facultie, the bitternes and meane bynding therof, doth sufficiently declare, according
to the mynde of Galen: though some wryte that it cooleth. 
It dygesteth also &  glueth together. Dioscorides saieth that
they drye, drawe out water, and hurte the stomache. 

Their leaues sodde and eaten, doe purge choler and
phlegme: and with wyne, doe helpe the byte of the viper. 
It mollyfieth the mother, correctynge the affectes of the 
same. The freshe and tender leaues, applied cum polenta, mi­
tigateth inflammations, helpeth burnynges, and the by­
tinges of dogges, and glueth together depe and fistulous
vlcers. Two kindes more hereof are of the late wryters men­
cioned as Syluestris, beyng a more shrubby tree with beries
alwayes redde: and Palustris growyng alwayes in the fennes. 
Chamæacte. 
Sambucus
montana siue
syluestris. 


Sanguis draconis.  
BLoude sayeth Galen, called in Greeke ἅιμα, varieth
as the natures of the beastes, from whence it floweth. 
The bloude of one being thinne &  liquide, of another 
dryer, an others bloude is whotter, but no bloud is colde. 

Sanguis draconis, soundeth dragons bloud: about the which
there are not a fewe opinions. Some iudge it the iuyce of 
an herbe, others the gumme or liquor of a tree, and Plinie
calleth it Cinnabarin. who sayeth that the Elephant, beyng in
the conflicte betwene hym and the dragon, (whose mutual
hatred neuer ceaseth,) strangled: falleth with great weight
on the dragon and dasheth him in sonder. The bloud of both
the whiche running forth together, is after gathered made
in a lumpe, dried and kept for medicine: and this Leonicenus
as well as diuers others, disapproueth not. But that Cinna­
baris, is Legitimus sanguis draconis, is farre from truthe, as here
after shall appere. First Dioscorides treateth of Cinabaris, in 
his fifth booke (as Galen also doth,) among mineralles, (not
speaking a worde therof in his second boke, where he trea­






teth of dyuers bloudes) saiyng: that some men estemed it to 
be Sanguinem draconis, because that suche as then was, would 
scantly serue the painters to varie a colour with. Second­
ly, Theophrastus maketh it a metall, growynge in Hiberia and
Colchis. None otherwyse sayeth Auerois also, of Cinnabaris. 
But that whiche we haue commonly to be solde of the Apo­
thecaries, semeth (not without the authoritie of diuers lear­
ned men) to be the teares or gumme of a tre growyng in A­
phrica, whose rynde may be sene in the lumpes of the same:
whiche as Matthiolus iudged, might be Cinnabaris Dioscoridis. 

Serapio also mencioneth a kinde of Sanguinis draconis, to bee
the iuice of an herbe, whiche he describeth both in forme &
faculties, as Dioscorides doth the fourth kinde of Sideritis, cal­
led Achillea Sideritis: whiche Brasauolus wysheth to be in vse a­
mong the Apothecaries, rather then the gumme that they
haue. Thus doe you se here three sortes of Sanguinis draconis,
variyng eche from other as notably as may be. 

Sanguis draconis sayeth Platearius, hath byndyng and conso­
lydatiue powre, and is profitable for the spyttyng of bloud,
bledyng at the nose or els where. Vnde, menses cum Corrigiola
sistit. 
Hæma. 
Cinnabaris. 
Who repro­
ueth Plinie in
many thinges
Hibania. 
But the rea­
son of the na­
me is hard to
be knowne. 


Sanies.  
Sanies, is generally taken for that superfluous liquide
substance that floweth from euery vlcer, regularly or
otherwyse, or what kynde or qualitie soeuer it be, and
as it differeth in coloure, substance, or qualities, so is it kno­
wne and called by seuerall names, (as well as the vlcers
from whence it floweth,) As by destinction a pure, Sanies
purulens: a sordite, Sanies sordida, or filthy matter: a Viro uirulens, 
or venemous. But thou shalt perceiue Lanfranke alwaies
(for the most part,) to meane by Saniem, the same quitture,
whyte and thicke to beholde, light to touche, and equall, or
eche waye lyke to it selfe, and not stinkyng: whiche Galen 
calleth Pus laudabile, and we good or well digested matter. 
But in apostemes otherwyse as before. 
Lib. 1. de diffe­
rentiis febrium
cap. 6. 







Santalum siue Sandalum.  
OF the wooddes called Sanders (wrytten commonly
Sandali,) there is among the olde Grecians no mencion
founde, vnlesse their opinion should be of force, that
woulde haue Santalum rubrum, to bee Aspalathum Dioscoridis: 
whiche Serapio doth manifestly confute. For in wrytyng of 
Santali, he yeldeth no testimony of Dioscorides (as elswhere
he is wonte,) but the authorities of his owne contrey men:
wryting also of Aspalathi vnder the Arabik name Darsisahan. 
And farther Santalum is the woodde of a taule steight tree,
but Aspalathus is a lowe shrubbe, odoriferous, and bitter in
taste: neither of the whiche is founde in Santalo rubro. Of the
Arabians therfore, was it first founde and described. 

Santalum (sayeth Matthiolus) groweth in certeyn great and 
thicke wooddes of both the Indies, and is of three kyndes:
wherof Santalum Pallidum or Citrinum is beste estemed. The
next place hath Santalum Album. The thyrde and worste,
is Rubrum, whiche is without odore: but the other doe smell
well. They are colde (by the testymonies of the Arabians)
in the thyrde degree, and drye in the seconde, hauynge byn­
dyng, coolyng, and alteratiue vertue: And therfore are vsed
to mitigate thirste, and the whotte distemperance of the
lyuer, and for choleryke vomites. Santalum rubrum doth pry­
uatly resiste defluxions, and is profitably applyed Ex succo so­
lani, uel Sedi, uel portulacæ, to vehement inflammations, &  the 
gowte of the feete. Santalum Candidum atque pallidum layde to
the forehead, cum aqua Rosarum, doe ease the peynes of the
heade: and beyng drunke, doe merueylously helpe whotte
stomaches. They doe (sayth Auicen) most effectually make
gladde, and strengthen the hearte. 
Aspalathus. 


Sapo.  
SOpe, whiche the Arabians cal Sabon, is of diuers kindes
in opere pandactarum. As Sapo Gallicus, Sapo muscatus, and Sapo
Spatharenticus, so called of his excedyng sharpnes and cut­






tyng, and is also called Mollis, niger, &  Iudaicus, wherwith
they washe sylke. The softe or graye sope, is made of the
stronge lye called Capitellum, and oyle together. Hard sope
hath in composition in the steade of oyle, shepes talowe. 
They are of a hotte and composed exulceratiue operation,
and doe scoure, putrefie, and maturate, harde apostemes. 
Quoniam sicut
spatha incidit
Gutta uel a­
qua prima Sa­
ponariorum. 


Sarcocolla.  
IS the Gumme or liquore of a tree growyng in Persia, as 
wytnesseth Dioscorides, Like the poulder of Frankyn­
sence, redde or pale, or as Mesues sayeth whyte, and
bytter: and is called in Greeke σαρκοκόλλα, id est glutinum
carnis, because it glueth excellently fleshe together. Galen
sayeth that it dryeth without bytyng, and therfore is of po­
wre to adglutinate woundes, and to staye the fluxe or run­
nyng of the eyes. It heateth after Mesue, in the seconde
degree, but drieth lesse. It concocteth or maturateth, scou­
reth, openeth, and digesteth. Inwardly, it purgeth rawe
phlegme and other grosse humores, from the brayne chiefly,
from the sinewes, the ioyntes, and the lunges: And therfore
is profitable for olde phlegmatike, asthmatike, and coug­
hing persons, and helpeth Ophthalmia, and other diseases of
the eyes. 
De sym. med. 
facultat. lib. 8. 

"Sarcocolla" antedates the first OED citation (1584). 




Scabiosa pilosa.  
SCabiosa, whiche Aetius calleth ψώραν, quasi scabiem Sanantem,
(because it healeth scabbes) is an herbe wherof the grecians
neyther olde nor late writers, haue left any light. Though
Mathæus Syluaticus, (as reporteth Iacobus Manlius) affirmeth it
to be στοιβκὴ of the Greciaans: whose sentence hath few lear­
ned fautores,) Whervnto there are referred fyue kyndes:
wherof the first two differ not but in greatnes, for the one
is muche lesse then the other. The thyrde is called Scabiosa
Ouina. The fourth Iacea negra, and vulgarly Materfilon. The






fifthe whiche Fuchsius (imitating a certeine olde writen her­
ball,) calleth Succisam. The common sorte (ledde by a moste
vayne superstition, that the diuell of enuye to mankynde &
his felicitie, should haue bytte away, this precious roote:)
haue named Morsum diaboli, quasi a diabolo præmorsa, &  in english
diuels bytte, of some Matfelon, but moste aptly heary sca­
biose. This doth most iustly agree, both in forme &  vertues
with Scabiosa pilosa, that Lanfranke describeth. For it is vsed
sayeth Fuchsius, as a present remedy to maturate and heale
Carbuncles, eyther brused grene and applyed to the same,
or the wyne drunke wherin it was boyled: and is nowe
founde to haue discussiue, and incisiue facultie, and vsed to
dissolue coagulated bloud. This Succisa, hath ben thought
of some to bee Geum Plinii: Whiche with greater reason,
is more aptly aplyed to Caryophyllata. They are all vnmea­
surable bitter, and therfore must nedes be hotte and drye,
and are in qualities lyke Succisa. 

Of Scabiosa, in opere pandactarum I fynde as foloweth. Men
saye that S. Urban at the peticions of a certeine asthma­
tike sister of his, (that vsed scabiose continually,) sente to hir
these verses, of the vertues therof. 


Vrbanus pro senescit pretium Scabiosaæ. 
Nam purgat pectus quod comprimit ægra senectus. 
Lenit pulmonem purgat laterum regionem. 
Apostema frangit, si locum bibita tangit. 
Tribus uncta foris anthracem liberat horis. 


Whiche may with a fewe moe wordes thus in
verse be englyshed. 


To Urbane him selfe, it is vncerteine. 
Howe many vertues, in scabiose reygne:
But excellently it clenseth the breste,
Of sicke aged folke, that there are opreste. 
The pypes of the lunges, if rough they apere,
It maketh them smothe, yea gentle and clere. 








The roumes of the breste, that we the sydes call,
It purgeth well, from incombrances all. 
If it be drunke, so that it touche the place,
Apostemes it breakes, by peculiar grace. 
Without to Carbuncles, if it layde be,
It doth lose and breake them, within houres three. 


Psora. 
Stoebe. 
Succisa. 
Morsus Dia­
boli. 

"Heary scabiose" not found in OED.




Scammonium.  
σκαμμώνιον, so called Per Antonomasian, is the iuyce of the
herbe ςκαμμωνία prepared, &  called then Diacridium. The
Romains also doe (after the place) name it Colphonium. 

Scammonia, saith Dioscorides, putteth forth grosse, fatte, &
many branches, from one roote, of the length of thre cubites,
with the leaues of Helxinæ (whiche we call byndwede,) or of
Iuie: but softer, rough, and triangled, a floure white, rounde 
and holowe, lyke a maunde basket, or bell formed cuppe, &
of heauy smell. The roote is very longe, of a cubite thyck­
nes, and whyte, with a heauy sauoure, and a heauy iuyce. 
Whiche is thus gathered. 

The roote (the head therof beyng first cutte of) is made 
holowe with a knife, that the iuice may runne out into the
holownes: whiche is taken in vessells, and dryde. The scam­
monie is praised that is light, cleare, thinne, of coloure most
lyke to glewe of lether, called Glutinum taurinum: Like a mu­
sherum, with fine pores or fistules, suche as is brought from
Mysia, a region of Asia. And trust not it that will only waxe
white, being touched with the tongue: for so will that doe,
that is adulterate with the iuyce of Tithymali, wherof the
greatest token is, that it burneth not the tongue vehement­
ly, as the right Scammonie doth. One drachme of the iuyce
drunke ex aqua pura uel mulsa, purgeth downwards choler &
phlegme. Mesues writing of fiue kindes of Volubilis or Con­
uoluulus, describeth the fifth kynde therof (whiche groweth
in Antiocha, Armenia, Arabia &  Turchia) to haue a roote like to 
Bryonia or bigger, like a great gourde, a stalke . ii. cubites long 
with little narowe leaues, formed like a fethered arowe,
and falling of at euery light occasion: hauyng more plentie






of mylky iuyce then the reste, whereof scammonie is made:
and therfore is called the mistres of mylke geuing herbes. 
It is hotte and drye in the seconde degree (or rather with 
Galen in the begynning of the thyrde. ) &c. In the chapiter
of Scammonium he sayeth, that Scammonie is of purgynge me­
dicines the strongest. And after he hath shewed diuers ma­
ners of gathering, drying, workyng it in paste, and sealyng
it: he sayeth that it should be cleare lyke gummes, or whi­
tyshe, or of dyuers colours, chiefly that which floweth first. 
The same touched or rubbed, with spittell or water, ge­
ueth mylke. It ought also to be tender, brittle and easye to
be pouldered, lyght, and referring the propre odoure of the
herbe: but that good, not stynkyng. From the which notes
howe muche the more it differeth, so much the worse it is. 
It may be kept twenty yeares, but the older it is the wea­
ker. It is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree, bytter and
sharpe: but not so sharpe as the herbe. It cutteth, scoureth,
and purgeth yelowe choler, by attraction from out the bloud,
euen from the extreme partes: so muche is his furious ve­
hemencie. It hurteth the harte, the stomache, the liuer, and
the guttes, and troubleth the other bowelles, subuerteth
the stomache, taketh away appetyte, moueth abhorfulnes,
stirreth thyrste, and ought not to be geuen to cholerick per­
sons, and such as are apte to take feuers. When it is taken,
heate, colde, colde frutes, colde water, long sleape, exercise,
wrath, and other vehement affections of the mynde, ought 
to be aduoyded: and so goeth he forth to the corrections of
the same. 

But nowe whether Scammonia Dioscoridis, and Volubilis
quinta Mesuæ, be one herbe vnder two names, or not: whose
descriptions, though (beyng precysely examined,) they doe
not exactly agree: yet are they (as you see) of no small affini­
tie. And may haue the more, for that Mesues dispraiseth for
nought, both the herbe and the iuyce of his country: Wher­
of belyke he made his description, or els perhaps of suche a
one, as he knewe not otherwyse then by reporte of others. 
For so are ryghte well approued authores, some tymes 






founde to doe. I leaue it to the wise and learned to discusse:
rather then rashly to affirme any thyng, wherof I haue
neyther sensible knowledge, nor iust assurance: and that
the rather because ryght worthy wryters doe leaue it in
doubte. But that Scammonium Dioscoridis is as vtterly out of
vse as vnknowne, there is no doubte. For we haue none
that maye in any wyse bee compared therto: for our best
may rather be adiudged Scammonium Iudaicum, uel Syriacum, 
whiche Dioscorides estemeth moste vile. And farther .x. v. 
graynes of the common Scammonium, hath ben sene to purge
the belly often, or with dyuers stooles: whiche by the testi­
monie of Dioscorides a whole drachme should scarsly doe. 
Wherfore Andreas Marinus, wysheth vs diligently to serche
out, and prudently to vse our owne natiue medicines. For
we haue in our regions (sayeth he) medicines that (if they
were ryghtly knowne and prepared,) would purge muche
more luckily then Scammonium, or vnknowne Turbith. For
if the best beare with it so many nociue qualities, as aboue
is shewed: what then dothe the worste, wherof we haue the
vse: Whiche truly moued Brasauolus to wyshe, that it had
neuer come to the handes of men: as a thyng more hurtful
then profitable. 
Scammonion
enim patroxsi­
micum nomena
Scammonia. 
ortem est. . 
Dioscor. lib. 4. 
Volubilis
Conuoluulus. 


Scarificatio.  
SCarificatio uel cutis Sculptura, englishly Scarfication, is cal­
led in Greeke χαράκμα από του χαράττω, Hoc est Sculpo,
Rado, uel Scarifico,  to rase, garse, or scarifie the skynne. 
Charachma. 


Schœnanthum.  
Σχοίνουανθος, quasi Schoeni, uel Schini flos, It is the floure
of the swete rushe called σκόινος αροματικος, hoc est iuncus odo
ratus. This rushe sayeth Dioscorides, must be chosen redde
and newe, bearyng fyne flowres with redde fragmentes,
whiche beyng rubbed in the hande smelleth lyke the rose:






and byndeth the tongue with a fyery byting. The flowres, 
the stalkes, and the rootes wherof, are in vse. The flowre
sayeth Galen (which we handle,) doth heate and bynde mo­
deratly, neyther lacketh it a subtill nature: and therfore
Vrinam & menses mouet, geuen in drinke, or in fomentations:
and profiteth also the inflammations of the lyuer, the sto­
mache, and the belly. But the roote is more adstringente,
(though the flowre also doe bynde with all his partes:) and
therfore is myxed with medicines that are geuen for spyt­
ting of bloud. Hitherto Galen. 

And for as muche as these flowres are not now brought
vnto vs, yea and in Venice rarely sene: (wherat our mer­
ueile may be the lesse, synce Galen noteth them in his time to
be very rare:) The learned phisitiens haue therfore councel­
led to vse, The tenderest or vppermost partes of the herbe
or rushe. But our Apothecaries, (saye they) goynge to Ve­
nise, are deceyued in Iunco odorato: &  buye eyther in the steade
therof, or mixed therwith, certeyne tender strigges of Iuncia
palustris, that is the marshe rushe, or rushe of the fennes. 

It is commonly called Pastum uel palca Camellorum, or Ca­
melles strawe. 
Schoenuanthos
Schoenos aro­
maticos. 
Lib. 1. 
Galen.  de sym. 
lib. 8. 


Scilla.  
Σκίλλα, called also of some Scylla, Cepe muris, &  Cepa marinsh
of the Apothecaries Squilla, in englyshe squille or sea onyon,
hath sharpe feruent, and cutting power, and heateth in the
second degree. It mollifieth the belly, moueth vrine, is good
for the hydropsie, for the iaundis, for the paynes of the belly
and the olde cough. Whervnto it helpeth much (by the minde
of Galen) to be rosted or sodde, rather then rawe: for so is 
his vehemencie diminished. Hereof see more in D. Tur­
ners herball. 
Galen. de sym. 
lib. 8. 


Scirrhus.  
Σκίρρος, καί σκληρότης, Id est durities, writen of old Sclirosis,






is (as I gather of Galen in diuers places) a tumore against 
nature, and an affecte of harde and thicke partes. (Whiche
yet to take, the lyuer &  the splene are moste readye) harde,
without peyne, and sometyme without sense. Whose fyrste
cause sayeth he, in his booke of tumores against nature, is
double: as of grosse &  toughe phlegme, and of the dregges
of bloud. Whiche also is double, wherof the one doth Hip­
pocrates call blacke: The other also is blacke, but proper­
ly called blacke choler. And in his fifthe booke of symple me­
dicines, he affirmeth it to sprynge of colde and grosse hu­
mores: as of melancholy, or of grosse and viscous phlegme,
(ouermuche dryed, and impacte in the pores of the skynne)
or of bothe: and chanceth often by ignorance, (throughe the
vse of vehement byndyng and coolyng thynges,) to inflam­
mations, and Ignibus sacris. If it come of phlegme, it hathe
some obscure sense, &  is curable with mollificatiues, though
hardly: but that whiche commeth of melancholyke iuyce,
is cancrous (the partes affected vtterly without sense,) and
vncurable: and is by mollyficatiues exasperate. 

And as the pure Scirrhus, made of melancholy, maye in
mixtures receyue any of the other three humores: so may
it in name variably change, and be called of phlegme σκίρρος 
οιδηματὥδες, Id est Scirrhus oedematosus. Of bloude φλεγμο­
νὥδες, Hoc est inflammationis consors, or of choler, and is named
Ερυσιπελατὥδες, quasi ignitæ rubedinis, uel sacri ignis particeps. 
Scirrhos. 
Sclerotes. 
De methodo
medendi. li. 13. 
De arte cura­
tiua. lib. 2. 
De com. med. 
secun. loc. li. 6
Scirrhos oede­
matodes. 
Scirrhos phle­
gmonodes. 
Scirrhos Ery­
sipelatodes. 


Scrophula.  
Scrophula, (so called of Auicenna, Guidone de Cauliaco, Bruno,
Theodorico, Lanfranco, and others, a Scropha, a pregnante
soowe: because it or the lyke, is a disease common to hogs)
is a harde Scirrhous tumore, in the glandules of the share
or arme holes, but chiefly in the necke, and called in Latin
Struma, in Greeke χοιράς: as the inflammation in them, hath
to name Phygethlon. Looke more at Bubo and Glandulæ
Struma. 
Choras. 







Seges syluestris.  
SEges, signifieth moste commonly standyng Corne. And
where Lanfranke hath Folia segetis syluestris, I know not
howe to vnderstand hym therin, vnlesse he meane ther­
by some kynde of the wylde cornes, that vsually growe in
Italy: as Milium, Milium Indicum, which they call Sorgos,) Pani­
cum, Bromus, &c.  Wherof the poore nedy wretches there,
make their breade, especially of Sorgos. But whiche of these
(if any) he meaneth, it is harde to gesse. But Galen in glu­
ing together woundes, and healing vlcers, (which is Lan­
franke his purpose) prayseth Milium for the best. 
De symp. li. 7


Semperuiuum.  
SEmperuiuum, whiche we may moste aptly call Aygrene, 
is called in Greeke αείζωον, id est semperuiuens, because it
lyueth styll and kepeth grene, both wynter & sommer:
neyther dieth it by any iniurious wether. Truly a singuler
miracle of nature, that an herbe so colde and moyste, grow­
ing on the house toppe, (a place moste drie, and subiecte not
only to the parchyng bemes of the Sunne in sommer, but
also to the moste colde frostes, and vehemente stormes of
wynter,) should yet lyue and be grene. Wherof indede,
manye suche as are ready to conuerte those merueylous
workes of God, (that their brutyshe eyes can not otherwise
beholde) into moste horrible supersticiouns: haue conceiued a
moste vayne opinion, that lightninge coulde not hurte the
house on whose toppe it grewe: and haue therfore called it
Barbam Iouis, and is of three kyndes: as Sedum maius, wherof
hitherto. 

The second is Sedum minus, called in Greke Τριθαλὲς,
for that it bloweth thryce in the yere, and therof is there
Mas & foemina. The male hauing a yelowe floure, the floure
of the female is pale or whyte, and is called Vermicularis, and






Crassula minor. There semeth also (sayeth Dioscorides) to be a
thirde kynde, called of some ἀνδράκνη ἄγρια, id est portula­
ca syluestris, of other τελεφιον, and of the Romaines Illecebra,
of nature very hotte, contrary to the reste. 

Sedum, sayeth Galen, (both Maius and minus) dryeth lightly,
and byndeth moderatly: yet cooleth it in the thyrde degree. 
Wherin also a watery essence, beareth the maisterie: and
therfore auayleth ad erysipelata, Herpetes, &  Phlegmonas, com­
myng of a fluxion: and is an excellent repercussiue. 
Aeizoon. 
Barba Iouis. 
Sedum
Trithales. 
Andrachne a­
gria. Telephion. 
De symp. me. 
fac. li. 6. 

"Sempervivum" antedates the earliest OED citation (1591). 




Serapinum.  
COruptly so called of Apothecaries, but more trulye 
Sagapenum, is the iuyce (sayth Dioscorides) of an herbe
lyke to Ferulæ, growyng in Media: wherof the beste is
shyning through, and of a bryght or shining yelow coloure
without, & whyte within: with an odore meane as it were
betwene Laser and Galbanum: sharpe in taste, and will (sayth 
Galen) sone resolue in water. 

It profiteth in the peynes of the breste and the sydes, to
olde coughes, conuulsions and ruptures, and expurgeth the
grosse phlegme of the lunges. 

Sagapenum (sayeth Galen) is whotte and of subtyll partes
as are other liquores: But obteyneth a certeine abstersion,
wherby it purgeth and extenuateth the scarres of the eye:
To the dulnesse also, and the dimnes of the sight, commyng
of the grosnes of humores, It is a good medicine. But the
plante lyke to Ferula (wherof it commeth) is weake and vn­
profitable. 
Dioscor. lib. 3. 
De antidotis. 
De sym. med. 
facultat. lib. 8. . 

"sagapenum" antedates the earliest OED citation (1597).




Serpigo.  
I Cann not better expresse Lanfranke his minde of Serpigo,
then hym selfe hath done, in the thirde treatice and first
doctrine of his greater worke, saiyng. I saie therfore that 
Serpigo is an exasperation of the skynne, whiche crepeth hi­






ther and thither, called in French Derbes, in Lumbardy
Dembeda, or Volatica, of others Ignis uolaticus, and commeth of
burned humores, assaultyng the skynne with exasperation
or roughnes. wherby I iudge him (and others without num­
ber) to meane none other thynge, then Galen doth by Her­
pete symplici. But looke more at Herpes. 

Howe be it, of Thiria, (whiche he ioyneth as a partener,
with Serpigine, and to come of the same causes:) Looke more
at his place in the letter T. For in his workes I fynd ther­
of no farther explication. 

Howe be it, Guido, Rolandus, and Rogers, wyth dyuers o­
thers liuing about that time, make foure kyndes of lepro­
sies, (a diuision in Galen and the auncientes not founde,)
whiche may come of the foure humores burned, as Alopecia,
whiche commeth of burned bloud, (though Rolandus saye of
phlegme.) Leonina, that springeth of burnte choler, infecting
the bloud. Elephantia commyng of melancholie, (Rolande
sayeth of bloud. ) And Thiriasis, caused of salt phlegme putre­
fied, after Rolande of melancholie: so called say they a Thiro,
that is of an adder or viper: because it is scaly & loseth the
skynne, as doth the adder. Wherin there is putrefaction,
both of the skynne and fleshe, and also pustules. Which na­
me (if it may be of the Greke deriued) I iudge to come, από
τουδηριου, Hoc est a serpente, uel fera aut noxa belua. That is of a 
serpent or some cruell or hurtfull beaste, Vt uipera uel lupus. 
δηρία haue the old grecians generally taken pro bestiis uenenatis,
that is for venemous beastes, & such as leaue venim behind
them, with their stroke or bite: wherof commeth δκριώμαδα,
Id est tetra, uel uenenata ulcera. That is cruell or venemous vl­
cers. And so of Theriacalia, that is thynges or rather medi­
cines that resiste venim. But at Thiria you may reade som­
what more. 
Alopecia. 
Lepra leonina
Lepra Elephan
tia. 
Thiriasis lepra
Therion. 
Theriomata. 
θηριώμα e-
nim terrum ul
cus est. 



Sinapis.  






SInapis, is called in Greeke Νάπυ ἤ σινηπυ. Of Sinapis,
Plinie maketh thre kyndes, but it is of Dioscorides vn­
deuyded. Who mencioneth but one, callyng it Sinapi hortense,
whiche we call garden mustarde or sendew sede: and ther­
fore may a wylde also be there vnderstanded: For the third
Rapistrum of the late wryters, is vsually put. 

Musterde heateth and dryeth, by the mynde of Galen,)
in the fourth degree. It is profitable for the diseases of the
throte, causeth nesyng, and draweth downe rewmes from
the head. &c. 
 Napy. 
Sinepy. 
Dioscor. lib. 2. 
De symplici. 
faculta. lib. 8. 

"Garden mustarde" antedates the earliest OED citation (1731; in a quotation). If "sendew" is OED "sundew," Hall antedates its earliest citation (1578). 




Solatrum.  
OF Solanum, whiche the Greekes name στρύχνον, both
Dioscorides and Galen, doe make foure kindes. The
first is στρύχνος κηπαιος, Solanum hortense, with vs night
shade, or petimorell. The seconde στρύχνος ἁλικάκαβος και
Φυσαλίς, Id est uesicaria, which we call wynter cherie, and fol­
lowyng the Apothecaries Alkakenge. The thirde is called
of Galen στρύχνος ύπνωτικος, a consiliando somno, somniferum, of
prouokyng sleape. The fourth (quod ad insaniam adigat,) they call
μανικον, Id est furiosum. A fifth also haue the late wryters
founde and added, calling it Vesicariam peregrinam. Solanum hor­
tense, whiche doubtlesse Lanfranke meaneth by Solatrum,
doth Galen also call Esculentum, because in time past it was 
planted in gardyns, and vsually eaten, but we vse it rarely,
sayeth he as an aliment, (because it nourisheth litle,) but as
a medicine often. It cooleth and byndeth in the seconde de­
gree: outwardly applied, they heale maligne vlcers. 
Strychnos. 
Strychnos Ce­
paios. 
Strychnos Ha
licacabos. 
Physalis. 
Strychnos hyp
noticos. 
Strychnos 
Manicos. 
Vesicaria pe­
regrina. 
De alimentis. 
lib. 2. 
De symp. li. 8. 


Spica.  
Spicanardi, for so sayth Nicolaus in his recepte of Diazingiber,
or as some haue it Spica indica, or Nardus indica, is so called
sayth Galen, in his first booke, De antidotis: because it in
forme resembleth an eare of corne, for it is in deede a roote,
and is called also of lyke reason in Greeke Νάρδο υ στάχυς. 






It is hotte in the thyrde degree, and drye in the ende of
the second, consisting of a sharpe adstringent, and light bit­
ter substance: Therfore is the roote bothe drunke and out­
wardly applyed, conuenient for the lyuer and the stomache. 
It moueth vryne, healeth the gnawinge of the stomache, &
drieth the fluxions of the head, breste, and belly. Whervn­
to Nardus Indica, whiche is the blacker, is stronger then
Syriaca. 

Other two kyndes there are, Νάρδος κελτοκὰ, Hoc est
Gallica, & Νάρδος ορειὰ. id est Montana. 
Nardu Sta­
chys. 
De sym. me. 
facult. li. 8. 
Nardos Celti­
ca. Nardos
orceia. 


Spodium.  
POmpholix sayeth Dioscorides, differeth from Spodio, on­
ly in Specie, not in kynde. And as the twoo kyndes of 
καδμία, are the earthy or stony partes of the oure of
brasse, dryuen vp from the fornace, when the brasse is in
melting or purifying, as ashes or soote: and cleaueth to the
sydes, vaultes, and walles, of the fornace or melting house. 
Some for the lyghtnes therof rysing, and cleauynge in the
hygher partes, and called Βοτρυίτις: The other weyghtier
partes, that cleaue therfore in the lower places of the wal­
les, they call πλακίτιν: So not only of brasse, but also of Cad­
mia broken, and by the industrie of the founder or worke­
man, sprinkled in the fornace, and at the last burned, com­
meth both Spodium and Pompholyx. Whiche by the cunnyng
blowyng of the belowes, doe rise from the fornace. Wher­
of some ryseth, and hangeth to the walles and couerynges
of the house, and is πομφόλυξ: white, fatty, and so light, that
it may flie away in the ayer: and parte, whiche is σπόδιον, 
so called απότουσποδου, id est a cinere sordido, That is of ashes
myxt with dead coales, and rubbyshe: falleth on the flower:
and is of colour black, weyghtie, and ful of heares, &  chaffe,
as the swepyng of the brasyers flowre. Whervnto sayeth 
Gallen, that seameth to be lyke in facultie, whiche is cal­






led Antispodium, whiche is not to be vsed where Spodium may
be had: neyther yet Spodium, if you may get Pompholyx. Which
if it be washed, is well nere the beste of all other medicines
that drye without bytyng. And therfore is a mete medicine
for cancrous and maligne vlcers: and is also put into col­
lyries that heale the webbes of the eyes, and staye the 
fluxions of the same. And farther is a very good remedy, ad
pudendorum, ac sedis ulcera. 
Cadmia. 
Cadmia botry­
itis quasi asi­
nosa. 
Cadmia placi­
tis uel πλα­
κώδης. 
quasi crustosa
Pompholyx. 
Spodion. 
De sym. lib. 8. 


Spuma maris.  
ΑΛκυόνιον is called of the Apothecaries Spuma maris,
that is the spume or fome of the sea, wheron the bir­
des called Alcyones, are sayde to make their neste, &
is therfore called Alcyonium: though Plinie (whose sentence
therin is lesse allowed) affirme it to come of the Alcions nests. 
It is after Dioscorides and Galen, of fyue kyndes, (wherof 
Plinie doth mencion but foure. ) The first is grosse, weight­
tie, sharpe in taste, without lyke a spunge, of heauy smell
lyke rotten fyshe: and is founde chiefly on the shores. An o­
ther is lyke the pin in the eye, or a spunge: lyght, full of ho­
les, of forme somwhat longe, and smelleth lyke the sea we­
des, called Alga and φύηος. The thyrde is in forme lyke a
worme, softe and of purple colour: whiche they call Milesum. 
The fourth is light and ful of pores like the second, and re­
sembleth the moyste woulle, called Lana succida. The fifth
is fashioned lyke a mosherome, without smoothe, within
rough, lyke the pumyse stone, of no sauoure, but of taste
sharpe. They doe all scoure awaye and dygeste, hauyng all
a whotte and sharpe qualitie. The firste twoo doe helpe
scabbes, skuruynes, leprosies, and take awaye spottes and
morphewes, and scoure and bewtifie the skynne: whiche
the fifte can not doe. The thyrde is of all the reste the sub­
tillest, and is good for the affectes of the reynes, and blad­
der, and for difficille pissynge: And beynge burned, dothe
cure with wyne Alopecias. The fourth hath also the same






vertues, but is muche weaker. The fifte is of all the reste
the whoteste: in so muche that it burneth the heare, and ex­
coriateth and exulcerateth the skynne. 

Galen. de sym. 
Lib. 11. 
Phycos, id est
Alga. 
Sea girdle. 
Milesum. 


Styrax.  
Στύραξ or Styrax calamita a moste pleasant gumme, is the
teares of a tree, sayth Dioscorides, lyke to the quynce tree:
wherof the beste is fatty, pale or yelowe, and gummy, with
whyte lumpes, yeldyng when it is melted a liquor lyke ho­
ny: and kepeth long his good sauour. That whiche is drie, is 
of Galen dispraysed: who sayth that it doth heate, mollifie,
and concoct. And therfore helpeth the cough, catarrhes, di­
stillations, and murres. Menses prolicit, eyther drunke or layd
to. That whiche is commonly called Storax liquida, is the fat­
ty substance, called στακὴ, pressed out of Myrrhe: and chiefly
of that kynde that is called Myrrha gabirea. Wherfore looke
more at Myrrha. 
Dioscor. lib. 1. 
De sym. med. 
facultat. lib. 8. 
De com. med. 
secundum ge­
nera. lig. 7. 
Stacte. 


Sulphur.  
OR Sulfur is named in Greeke θεἳον, & is of two kindes,
(vnder the which Plinie reconeth. 4) The one (which is
the beste) is called ἄπυρου, Hoc est uiuum, uel ignis non ex­
expers, & is taken out of the veyne without any boylyng. 
The other πεπυρωμένων, id est igne incoctum, that is boiled sul­
fur. The best Sulfur uiuum, ought by Dioscorides to be fattye,
greene, not stony: but bright, and shyninge lyke the glowe
worme. Euery Sulfur (sayeth Galen) hath drawyng power,
is whotte of temperament of nature discussiue, also swiftly
concoctiue, and of so subtile essens, that it layde to, resisteth
the peryls of many venemous woundes: and is a medicine
approued, to heale scabbes, leprosies, scuruines, &  itche. 
Theion. 
Apyron. 
Theion pepy­
romenon. 
Dioscor. lib. 5. 
De symplici. 
faculta. lib. 9. 


Syncope.  
Συγλοπὴ, Id est animi deliquium, uel præseps uirium lapsus, that






is the defecte of the mynde, or a sodeine slyding away of the
strengthe of the body, and commonly called swoundynge,
and is caused dyuersly. Somtyme of euel & sharpe iuyce, or
of raw humores, about the mouth of the stomache: of vnme­
surable bledyng, swetyng, & fluxe of the belly, great peyne,
vehement mouing, immoderate watche, or emptines: of ter­
ror also, and feare, and of suche lyke perturbations of the
mynde, and conuersation in stynkyng ayre. Whose sygnes
are rare and obscure pulse, coldnes of the extreme partes,
sweat of the face, the skynne of the same losynge his bewy­
tie, and almoste a resolution of the whole body: which must
be cured as variably as the causes efficient are dyuerse. 

Howe be it, the paroxisme presente, is after the mynde of
the learned, (led by reason and knowledge) Thus to be suc­
curred. First throw into his face violently rose water, with
vineger, or cold fountayne water: wherby the astonied spi­
rites maye be reuyued: And that in Sommer, a burnynge
feuer or the cause whotte. The extreame partes ought also 
in eruptions to be bounde. And rubbe the legges, if the e­
ruption issue aboue: the armes if beneathe. But principal­
ly and with spede, are the nosethrilles, and the mouthe to
be stopped (and as some wyll also the eares:) That the ayer
alreddy drawne in, and passinge into the inwarde partes,
and by and by is ready to issue out, So made whotte by of­
ten mouyng to & fro, may goe agayne vnto the harte: that
by heatyng the same, the spirites, may be quickned and re­
uiued. And then forthwith is it expedient, to reuocate the
mynde with thynges odoriferous. For nothyng by the te­
stimony of Hypocrates, lib. de alimento, doth sooner call againe 
the spirites. &c. By the whiche, and by bowying moderatly
the body: I haue often brought again, euen such as all men
presente haue thought dead. And thus much, because Lan­
franke appointeth them to be reuiued, by the noyses of Trum­
pettes & tympanies: Which (if they were necessary) yet are
they instrumentes, at so sodeine exigentes to vnredy, & to call
the person loude by his owne name. Whiche truly I iudge






as vayne and rydiculous, (or worse) as the strokes and buf­
fettes, that the rude multitude vse. For if it be (as by the
authoritie of Galen aboue, and as we see it is) the defecte of 
the mynde, a losse of strengthe, and a generall depriuation
of sense: what can the eares doe more by hearyng, then the
eyes by seyng. Or rather, howe can the eares heare more
then the eyes see: or the handes and other partes of the bo­
dy feele. But this notwithstanding, I denie it not, but that
the sodeyne noyse of trumpettes or drummes, may in the 
tymes of great incisions, and suche like daungerous enter­
pryses, both reteyne and quicken so the spirites (not yet
loste,) that swoundyng may therby be euited, wherof also I
haue had the experience. 
Galenus de me
thodo me. li. 12


Synochus.  
THose feuers (sayeth Galen) that haue one only acces­
sion or fitte, continuyng from the beginnynge to the
ende, and that many daies, are called σύνοχοι, id est con­
tinentes, seu continuæ, whose cause efficient is yelowe choler,
and is of nature double. The one hauyng a manifest putre­
faction, and is therfore called Synochus putrida: and the other
vtterly without the same, called Synochus non putrida, whych is
a kynde of diarie feuer: (and are of Lanfranke, and dyuers
other for distinction sake, called Synochæ. ) And because the
remission of the fitte is wonte to chance, by the transpira­
tion or breathyng out of feruent humores, (for they neuer
breathe out at all, in vehement stipations,) A fytte of many
dayes must nedes be made. When in suche feuers there is 
no occasion, that may rayse the begynnynge of an other ac­
cession: It persisteth a feuer, both of many daies, and of one
accession, without the inuasion of an other: neyther refer­
ryng quotidian, tertian, nor quartan. For as much therfor,
as of these twoo, a feuer may be maynteyned: both that all
the vapor may not passe out, and that the same may heate
whatsoeuer it toucheth: There must nedes be three diffe­






rences of Synochus. For some continue from the begynnyng
to the ende, of one greatnes: and are called in Greke πυρετοι 
ομοτόνοι και ἀκμαστικοί, hoc est eodem uigore permanentes. Others
doe augmente and still adde to somwhat, called ἀναβατικοὶ
ήεπακμαστικοι, quasi incrememtum sucipientes. And some demi­
nishe by a litle and litle, whiche they call παρακμαστικους, Id
est decrescentes. 
De methodo
medendi . li. 9. 
Synochos. 
Synochus pu­
trida. 
Synochus non
putrida. 
De differentiis
febrium. lib. 2. 
cap. 2. &  ulti. 
Pyreti. 
Homotom, uel
Acmastici. 
Anabatici siue
epacmastici. . 
Paracmastici. . 
-




Tamar indus.  
ΟΞυφονιξ, is called in Latin Syluestris palma, that is
the wylde or sower Date tree, whose fruite is
called of the Arabians Tamarindus, and maye bee
called in Greeke Οξυφοινίξ, and of some Οξυφοινι­
ηοοβάλανος, quasi fructus uel dactilus palmæ acetosæ, uel syluestris. 
Whiche last hath not withstanding some learned aduersa­
ries. But their opinion semeth moste false, that thynke Ta­
mar indum and Myrobalanon to be all one: for Tamar Indus hath a 
curnell or stone, whiche Myrabolani haue not. 

They are sayth Mesues, sharpe or sower dates (like saith
Siluius, vnto the sede of Cassia) and the fruytes of the wild
Indian date tree: A medicine excellent and hurtlesse. Of 
the olde auncient writers eyther vnknowne, or vnder these
names vnmensioned, colde and drie in the seconde degree:
After Auerois in the thirde. By the whiche reason, it repres­
seth the sharpnes of humores, purgeth choler, and mitiga­
teth the feruoure therof, and also of the bloude: & healeth
the iaundies, and sharpe continuall feuers. It stayeth vo­
miting, quencheth thyrste, and euery burnyng of the lyuer
and stomache. But to colde stomaches, it must not be geuen
alone. The beste Tamar indi should be freshe, fatty, syncere,
and tender, in taste sharpe swete, of colour blackyshe, and
shynynge, myxed with heares, as it ware with certeyne
rootes. 
Oxyphoenix
Oxyphoenico­
balanos. 







Terebinthina.  
ΤΕρμινθίνη ρήτίνη, Resina terebinthina, is the liquide gumme
of the tree Terebinthus, among the Greekes called τέρ­
μινθος, and sometyme τερέβινθος: The leaues and
flowres wherof are drye, and bynde and heate in the seconde 
degree. Terebinthin sayth Galen, is preferred among other
gummes, hauyng a certeyne adstriction: but not so mani­
fest as hath Mastiche. But it hath a certein bytternes, wher­
by it digesteth and scoureth, more then Mastiche. It purgeth
strayte passages, and draweth from depthe more then the
reste: and because it is of qualities moste moderate, it is
moste safely admyxed with medicines that heale vlcers,
whiche should be without byting. But neyther is this our
Terebynthine, whiche is the gumme of the tree Laryx, and
called Larigna, (not without his specyall vertues,) nor yet as
some suspect the finest that we haue, callyng it Terebinthinam
Venetam: For it is (as many learned affirme) A resine ta­
ken out of the rynde of the younge whyte fyrre tree, called
Abies, and was of the auncientes called Resina oleosa. The de­
termination wherof I referre vnto them againe. 
Terminthine
Rhetine. 
Terminthos. 
Terebinthos. 
De sym. me. 
facult. li. 9. 
De com. med. 
secund. genera
lib. 2. 
De com. med. 
secun. loc. li. 8. 
LarignaTerebinthina
ueneta. 
Abies. 
Resina oleosa. 

"Terebinthina" antedates the earliest OED citation (1693) but here is likely Latin. 




Terra sigillata.  
Earth called of the Latins Terra, in Greke Γἣκι χθών, is
vsually that, whiche beinge put in water dissolueth: and is 
diuers kyndes. For so muche as the body of the earthe is of 
nature drie, & vtterly voyde of fyrie substance, euery earth
drieth without bityng: Wherof many, (namely such as are 
mete for medicine) are in Dioscorides treated of at large. 
Among the which Γνλημνία, Id est terra lemnia, (sayth he) gro­
weth in holes, lyke cunny borowes, and is broughte from
a fenny place out of the Isle Lemno. which the inhabitantes
gather, and myxing it with goates bloude, they make it in
lytle cakes or loues, and signe it with the image of a gote: &
therfore call it σφραγίδα ἀιγὸς, Hoc est sigillum capræ, or rather






as Galen wil, (who of purpose to se it, visited the place abo­
ue sayde) because it is impressed with the sacred signet of Di
ana: but nowe is it marked with the Turkyshe sygnet. 
He maketh therof three differences. The firste he also cal­
leth Lemniam phragidon, whiche it was not lawfull for any
to touche, but their women priestes, and differeth from Lem­
nia rubrica, called in Greeke λημνία μίλτ ος, It est terra sigillata
rubea,) in that it defileth not the fingers when it is touched,
as Lemnia rubrica doth: and is of colour yelowe, lyke the hyll
in Lemno. wheron there is neither stones, trees, or plantes,
growyng: So muche sayeth he is this earth visited. To the
thyrd, he geueth neither name nor description, but sayeth
that it hath scouring faculties. The other two ar of driyng
facultie, and are vsed for the Dysenteria, against the venime
of beastes, or hurtfull medicines, and also for all olde and
malignant vlcers. 
Ge. Chthon. 
Dioscor.  lib. 5. 
Ge Lemnia, id 
est terra lemnia. 
Sphragis aegos
De symp. me. 
fac. li. 9. 
Lemnia sphra
gis. 
Lemnia miltos


Tertiana febris.  
THe tertian feuer, is eyther continuall, and called Ter­
tiana continua: or els hath intermission, and is named
Tertiana intermittens. (Lanfranke calleth it Interpolata,)
whiche is double. That is Tertiana pura, uel exquisita: & tertiana
notha, siue spuria. Exquisita tertiana intermittens, is caused of yelow
coler, dilated by the sensible partes of the bodye, and ke­
peth her owne pure and sincere nature, and chaunceth to 
younge choleryke persons, in Sommer, or in whotte and
drie regions: inuadynge with a vehemente rigor, (wherin
it differeth frome Febre ardente,) lyke the pryckynge of ne­
dles (and therin differeth from a quartane) whiche indu­
reth not longe: but soone foloweth vehement heate, and
muche sweate. This feuer endureth not aboue seuen Pa­
roxysmes, neither doe any of them excede the space of twelue
houres. Tertiana notha intermittens, is made for the most part,
when choler is mixed with phlegme, either grosse or thin, &  som
times though rarely, with melancholie, which passeth often,
both in numbre &  space of time, the paroxysmes aboue sayd. 






But not so vehement, neyther doe the signes of digestion
so sone appeare. For Tertiana continua resorte to Causon. 
Galenus de dif
feren. febrium
lib. 2. 
De tumoribus
præter naturam
De arte cura­
tiua. lib. 1. 


Thapsia.  
δαψία, so called (sayeth Dioscorides) because it was firste
founde in the Isle Thapso, is an herbe lyke to Ferula, in his
whole nature, hauyng a sclenderer stalke, with leues lyke
fenel. And on euery branche a spokye toppe lyke to Dylle,
with yellowe flowers, and a sede lyke Ferula, but broder
somwhat, and lesse: hauyng also a long roote, blacke with­
out, and whyte within: sharp also, and couered with a thick
rynde. The rynde and the milky iuyce therof, dooe purge
choler, but is perylous to take without great prouydence. 
It is by the testimonie of Galen, of a sharpe, and a myghty
heatyng facultie ioyned with moisture: And therfore dra­
weth violently from the depth, and that which it draweth
it digesteth. The iuyce hereof, (whiche is by arte gathered
from the roote) is so vehement sharpe, that the very breathe
of the same, maketh the face and other naked partes of them
that gather it, to swell excedyngly, and to ryse in pustules. 
Dioscor. lib. 4
Ideo aliquibus
ferula sylue­
stris nominatur
De sympto. 
causis. lib. 6. 


Thymum.  
THymum or Thymus, is also called in greke δύμον, which
name also it hath almoste in euery language, though
not the same thyng euery where: for Theophrastus
and Plinie, mencioneth two kyndes, callyng them Album & 
nigrum, as also Dioscorides doth, though not wher he descri­
beth Tymum creticum, that is Thyme of Candy, whiche is 
called θύμος κεφαλωτός, Hoc est Thymum capitatum: but in his
chapiter of Epithymum, whiche he affirmeth to come, a Thy­
mo duriore satiureia simili, that is of a harder Thyme, lyke to
Sauerie: which I take to be our Thyme, and is of the odor
that it hath lyke to Serpyllum, called Serpyllum hortense. Thymum
sayeth Galen, cutteth and heateth vehemently, and ther­






fore Vrinam & menses prouocat, foetumque potum euellit. It pur­
geth the bowelles, and ioyneth with other medicines at­
ractiues, prepared for the brest and the lunges. 
Thymum album
Thymum Cre
ticum. 
Thymos Ce­
phalotos. 
Serpyllum
hortense. 
De symp. li. 6. 


Thus.  
INcence (called in Greeke λίβανωτός) as well as the tree,
wherof it commeth (called λίβανος,) is called in Latyne
Thus: and groweth in Arabia. Herof Dioscorides maketh
foure sortes. The best sayeth he, is Thus masculinum, of his
owne nature rounde like a drope, and therfore called λίβα
νος σταγωνίας, whyte, vndeuisyble, fatte within when it is
broken, and burneth spedely: hereof at Olibanum. That of In­
dia is of swarte and reddishe colour, and is made rounde by
industrie: as first by cutting it in square peces, & then tour­
nyng it in vesselles till it waxe rounde, but in tyme it wax­
eth yelowe: and this they call λίβανον ἄτομον, or Syagrum. 
The second place hath Thus arabicum, growing in Smilo: which
some call Copiscum, of colour darke yellowe. An other kinde
there is, called αμομιτη, of some Candidum, whiche cleaueth
to the fyngers, as doth masticke. 

Cortex thuris, whiche is the rynde of the Incense tree, is
here also to be remembred: which ought to be new, thicke, 
fatty, swete smellyng, not rough, &  without skinnes. Here­
of also commeth Manna thuris or Manna græcorum, hauing also
sayeth Galen, some of the rynde therwith, wherof in his
place. Thus heateth (sayeth Galen) in the second degree, dri­
eth in the first, and hath some adstriction. The rynde drieth
in the seconde degree, and byndeth euidently. It is of gros­
ser partes then Thure, hauing litle sharpnes: and therfore is
vsed for the griefes of the stomache, spitting of bloud, fluxe
of the belly, and Dysenteria. Thus mollifieth, swageth peyne, 
concocteth, and bredeth quitture. But that in temperate na­
tures: for in moyste bodies it ingendreth fleshe. It putteth 
away the dymnesse of syghte, purgeth, filleth, and healeth,
the vlcers of the eyes, and all other hollowe vlcers: glueth






bloudy woundes, and stayeth all eruptions of bloud. 
Libanotos. 
Libanos. 
Dioscor. lib. 1. 
Libanos stago­
nias, quasi stil­
licidiare. 
Syagrum. 
Libanos ato­
mos, quasi sec­
tiones nullas
ostendens. 
Thus Copiscum. 
Thus amomite. 
Cortext Thuris. 
De symp. li. 7. 


Thiria.  
Οφίασις is a disease of the head, and hath sayeth Fuchsius
(in his first boke De medendis morbis) no latin name, but is cal­
led of the Arabians and barbarous phisiciens Tyria. By the
whiche worde they vnderstande all serpentes, but chiefly
the Viper: whiche therfore I thynke to come of this greke
worde θερία, and so of that kynde of leprosie, whiche is a­
mong that sorte called Theriasis as aboue at Serpigo. 

Euen as plantes sayeth Galen are of twoo causes vitiate,
namely some by the vtter lacke of nuryshyng iuyce, dried &
withered: other by the same contrarie to their own natures,
are infected: so are the beares through the vtter defecte of
their slymie nutritiue iuyce, and also by the same vitiate
corrupted. For through the vtter lacke therof commeth
Caluities, but of the same corrupted, riseth αλωπεκἵα, and
Οφίασις. And as in Alopecia the falling of the heare is circu­
lare, changing into a golden colour or like the foxe, (wherof
it hath that name, άλώπηξ, quidem uulpes est: so in Ophiasi, the af­
fected parte of the head is pilde, after the maner of Ser­
pentes, receyuing therof also his name: Orphis enim serpens est. 
Ophiasis uel de medendi 
methodo. 
 De methodo
medendi. li. 14
De com. med. 
secun. loc. li. 1. 
De definitio­
nibus. 
Alopex. 


Tragacantha.  
Τραγακάνθα, is a bright shyning gumme, leane, lyght,
sincere, and swetishe: whiche runneth out of the roote of a
pricky shrubbe, called also Tragacantha. whose roote is broad,
wooddy, &  stiffe in the toppe of the turfe: From the which
doe strong lowe branches spreade very broade: wheron do
growe many smale thinne leaues, hydinge vnder them
selues whyte, stiffe, and streight thornes. The gumme,
whiche we call commonly Dragagantum, stoppeth the poores
of the skinne, as gumme doth: whose most vse hath been in
medicines for the eies, for the cough, for horsenes, &  rough­






nes of the pypes and yawes, and other distillations against
peyne of the reines, and corrosions of the bladder. 
Dioscor.  lib. 3. 


Triticum.  
WHeate called in Greeke  Γυρός, is after Galen, of fyrme
nurishment, and bredeth a iuyce grosse and tough, and 
therfore is Alica (whiche also nurisheth strongly) forbidden 
in them that are apte to breede the stone, or to haue obstru­
ctions in the liuer: exterially vsed, it heateth in the first de­
gree, but neither can it drie nor moiste manifestly. What­
soeuer is made of Amylum, is then it, both colder and drier. 
The Cataplasma that is made with bread, digesteth more then 
with wheate, by reason of the salte and leuen: whiche hath
power to drawe vp and digeste, thinges that lye depe. 
Pyros. 
De attenuante
uictus ratione
De symp. li. 8. 


Turbith.  
TVrbith is estemed a barbarous name, geuen to a roote,
whiche is called Trupetum, wherof among all menne,
there is no small ambiguitie, nor a fewe opinions. 

For Syluius and Manardus, doe make therof a destinction,
in . iiii. sortes, whiche I thoughte good thus to gather. 

Turbith siue
Turpetum. 
The one, whiche some 
call Turbith Dioscoridis. 
Radix pityusæ, whiche hath the leaues
of Pinus. 
Serapionis. i. Radix Tripolii Dioscoridis. 
Vulgare Radix Tithymali foeminæ siue myrtites, so called be­
cause it hath leaues like to Myrtus. Or Radix Alipi, 
after Matthiolus under the autorities of Actuarius,
who calleth it Turpetum album. 
Mesuæ Is the roote of an herbe, whose leaues are like Fe­
rula: wherof thei dare not geue sentence. Howbeit
Brasauolus iudgeth it the roote of Tithymali myrsmites
but that would Matthiolus refute: who semeth by
reasons to proue that Turbith Mesuæ &  actuarii is
none other thynge then the roote of Alipiæ. And
so of our common Turpetum. 






Wherfore knowyng that there are at this daie, not a fewe
diligent men in this kinde of studie: namely in the serching
out of suche vnknowne symples, & the certeintie of thinges
so vncerteyne and doubtful: (least they should wante a iust
occasion, to examine suche conditions of plantes or rootes,
as shall in anywyse be lyke to any of these. ) I haue set here 
(for the sakes chiefly of the meanly learned) the seuerall de­
scriptions of the kindes of Turbith here mencioned: Namly
suche as haue not before in the Englyshe tongue been pu­
blyshed. For Pytiusa and Tithymalus myrtites, are of D. Tur­
ner right well described. Whiche therfore I touche not. 

Turbith Serapionis siue Tripolium, Græce τριπόλιον, groweth by
the sea sides, in places that are by the tydes washed, and by
the ebbes left againe: so that it groweth neither in the sea,
nor on the drie grounde: with a lefe like to Glastum, but thic­
ker, and a stalke lyke the Date tree, deuided in the toppe. 
whose floures (as men saye,) doe thrice in one daye change
their colours: beynge whyte in the morninge, purple at
noone, and crimson at nyght: whose rote is whyte, odorife­
rous, and whotte in taste. 

Of the whiche, two dragmes drunke in wyne, draweth
out water and vrine by the belly, and is put into medicines
that resiste venym. 

ἄλυπον, in Latin Alypum or Alypia, is a bushie and reddish
herbe with sclender stalkes and thinne leaues: hauinge a
softe thinne flowre, and of them plentie, & a sclender roote
lyke the roote of Beta, full of sharpe iuyce, with seede lyke
the sedes of Epithymi: whiche purgeth blacke choler, if it be
taken with an equall portion of Epithymum, with salte and
vineger: but it doth a litle exulcerate the intraelles. 

It groweth in places nighe the sea, chiefly and most plen­
tifully in Libya: though much of it doe also grow els where. 
Turbith sayeth Mesues, is a mylky herbe, hauynge leaues
lyke Ferula but lesse: wherof there is Hortense and Syluestre, of
the whiche also some is great, and some little: whyte (also)
yelowe, ashe coloured or blacke. Praysinge that whiche is 






Gummie, white, empty, and like a reede, with a plaine and
ashy rynde, or as it weare baked vnder ashes, beyng mean­
ly newe and easy to be broken: but that saieth he, whiche is
not gummie, is weake and troubleth the belly: dyspraysing
also the yelowe and the blacke , the grosse and the leane. 

The curled or wrynkled rynded also, whiche is as it
were sinewy within when it is broken, which is the wilde. 
The olde is weake: The newe dothe lesse trouble and o­
uerturne the bowelles. Some doe adulterate it, by anoyn­
ting the rynde outwardly with melted oyle: but being bro­
ken, it is not gummy within. 

And where as the roote of Thapsia is numbered amonge
the sortes of Turbith: whiche the Apothecaries thinke to be 
theyrs. Andreas Marinus, calleth it Turbith apulum, affirming it
to be that whiche mesues calleth Crassum. The fraude wher
of beynge at the laste discouered, it was reiected & put oute
of vse: for though it purge phlegme as doth the right Tur­
bith, yet that doth it violently, and with the great damage
of the principall members. Whose faculties you may far­
ther reade before vnder the propre title therof. 

Mesues of his Turbith sayeth, it is whotte in the thirde
degree, purgeth meanly by attraction, rayseth wyndes,
that ouerturnethe stomache ad nauseam: and dryeth, being
purged from the thinne excrementes therof. Turbith cor­
rected draweth out grosse, toughe, and putrefied phlegme,
from the breste, the stomache, and the sinewes: Euen from 
the ioyntes and farthest partes. 

Dioscor. lib. 4. 
Dioscor. lib. 4


Tutia.  
TVtia or Tuthia, is called in Greke πομφόλυξ, for the 
whiche looke in Spodio. 
Pompholyx. 




Verbena.  
VErbena or Verbenaca, is of two kindes, described of Dios­
corides in two seuerall chapiters, callyng them both 






περιστερεων, but the seconde ιεραν βοτάνην, Hoc est sacram her­
bam: for whose vertues and larger discription, Looke far­
ther in maister Turners herball. 
Peristercon. 
Hiera botane. 

"Verbena" antedates the earliest OED citation (1600). 




Vermes terrestres.  
VErmes terreni, called also Lumbrici & Intestinæ terræ, beyng
drunke in passo, doe prouoke vrine, heale the iaundise,
and driue away tertian feuers: brused and layde to
cutte synewew, they glewe them together merueylouslye,
and are good for the crampe. Being boiled cum adipe anserino,
and poured in, they heale the peynes of the eares: If they
be boyled in oyle, and put into the contrarie eare, they help
the peyne of the teethe. 


Vernix.  
OVt of the Iuniper tree sweateth certeine teares, in
the spring tyme chiefly: and therfore called Vernix, 
quasi Vernus ros, beyng of the colour and smell of fran­
kinsence: Whiche hardened by heate, becommeth a gumme. 
Whiche sayth Fuchsius, the Arabians, not without a great
confusion of names,) haue called Sandaracham, whiche sayeth Serapio, is whotte and drie, harde, and somewhat bitter: and
is brought from the lande of the Christians. And the Apo­
thecaries cal it Vernicem. But farre is it from Σανδαράχκ of 
the Grecians and Latines: whiche is a stone, founde sayeth
Plinie, in the mynes of golde and syluer. 

Brasauolus sayeth, that Sandaracha is nothynge els but the
redde partes of Auripigmentum, so made by the more natural
boylyng: For there may a kinde of Sandaracha be made, by the
artificiall boylyng of Auripigmentum. And therfore may the
one, (namely Sandaracha,) be called Arsenicum rubrum, and the
other (that is Auripigmentum) Arsenicum Croceum. 

Matthiolus also sayeth, that Sandaracha and Auripigmentum,






are both of one kynde and facultie, neyther differ they in 
any thynge, but only that the one, (to wytte Sandaracha) is
more concocted in the bowelles of the earthe then the o­
ther, whiche is Auripigmentum: and are therfore by the same 
reason in subtilties of vertues, more excellent the one then
the other. 

Dioscorides the surest grounde herein) sayeth, that Auri­
pigmentum is founde in the same mines that Sandaracha is, a­
lowyng that whiche is fyerie redde, or lyke to Cinnaban:
playne, pure, brittle, and smellynge lyke Sulphur. 

It is geuen cum mulso, to them that spytte rotten phlegme. 
The smoke hereof is taken in, agaynste the olde coughe. 
Lycked in with hony, it cleareth the voyce: and in pylles
is geuen, to harde breathyng. Vnto whiche vertues, not
only Plinie, and other Latines doe agree of the same: But
also the Arabians, the more to augmente their error, of
their gummy Sandarachæ: twoo thynges bothe in substance
and nature, (as you see) moste contrarie. 

Wherfore, when you shall among the Greeke authors
fynde Sandaracha, you muste vnderstande the same that Di­
oscorides wryteth of, called afore Arsenicum rubrum: But if
among the Arabian wryters, you must take Gummi iuniperi. 

An other kynde of artificiall or adulterate Sandaracha
there is, made of Seruffa burned in the fyre, tyll it haue chan­
ged his colour, and is called Sandix: wherof Plinie maketh
mencion. 

Vernix out of the later wryters hath the facultie to staie
the fluxe of bloode at the nose: if it be layde to the forehead,
cum Candido oui. And taken with the poulder of Frankin­
sence, or the poulder therof supped in a rere egge, suppres­
seth vomityng: and layde to, or taken with the same, fir­
meth the laxatyue bellye, defendeth the fallynge of destil­
lacions, dygesteth the phlegme in the bowelles, and kyl­
leth wormes, and other lyuynge thynges in the same. 






Mensium fluxus continet: beyng put in, it dryeth the moiste ho­
lownesses of fistules: and helpeth the ryftes, cones, or 
chappinges, of the handes and feete. 
Sandarache. 


Vinum.  
OVlde wyne hurteth the synewes, and other wynes
the senses: though they be in taste swete. And ther­
fore ought they to be ware therof, that fele weake­
nes in any of their bowelles: But beyng taken in smal quan­
titie accordyng to strengthe and delayed, it is vnhurtfull. 
Newe wyne inflateth, doth hardly concocte, and breedeth
many vayne dreames: amd moueth vrine. That whiche is
of meane age, wanteth both the fourmer faultes: and ther­
fore is vsed in the diet, both of sicke and whole. The white
and thynne wyne, is to the stomache profitable, and easily
dispersed into the members. Black wyne is grosse, hard to
concocte, nourisheth fleshe, and causeth dronkennes. Yel­
low wyne, as it holdeth a middle colour: so hath it faculties
meane betwene both. But when health quaileth, or is cra­
sed, the whyte wyne hath moste prayse. Wynes also differ
in sauoure. For swete wyne as it consisteth of grosse partes,
so doth it difficilly breath out of the body, inflateth the sto­
mache, and troubleth the belly and bowelles, as doth newe
wyne: but moueth dronkennes lesse, and is moste apte for
the reynes &  bladder. Tarte wyne doth more swiftly passe
through by the vryne: but maketh peyne in the heade, and
bredeth dronkennes. Sharpe wyne is for the digestyng of 
meates into the membres, moste commodious: restreyneth
the belly and other fluxes, &c. Wyne saieth Galen, gleweth
together holownesses, and is a conuenient medicine for all
vlcers. The Greekes doe call it Οινον 
Dioscor. li. 4. 
De methodo
medendi. li. 3. 
De arte cura­
tiua. lib. 2
Oenon uel
Inon. 


Viola.  
Viola, so written symplie without an adiectiue, is alwayes 






taken for the blewe or purple violet, called in Greke Ιον
πορφυρον, Id est Viola nigra or pupurea: and of some Viola mura­
ria. Some holde that it is called Ιον, because the nymphes
called Ionæ, gaue first the floure therof vnto Iupiter as a 
gyfte. Others because when Iupiter had turned the Nym­
phe Io into a cowe, the earth gaue furth violet floures, as a 
pasture or foode for the same. But many other herbes ther
are, that are called Violae, wherof here to speake weare as
nedelesse as superfluous. Mesues geueth to violettes, cold­
nes and moystnes in the first degree. They are somnife­
rous, purge choler, staye thyrst, and quenche all inflamma­
tions: and therfore are applyed, for the burnynge heate of 
the mouth of the stomache and the eyes. 


Viride æs.  
IS called also Aerugo, that is the ruste of brasse. Of this 
Dioscorides maketh two kyndes. The one is called Aeru­
go rasa or rasilis, and is made sayeth he, by coueryng a ves­
sell of moste strong vineger, with a cauldern or other lyke
vessell, or with plates of brasse, so close that no ayre may passe
between: whiche after the tenth daye beyng opened, that Aerugo that is, must be scraped or rubbed of, &c. Otherwyse
dyuersly. The other he calleth Aeruginem scoletiam, and no­
teth therof two sortes. The one he called Fossilem, that is dig­
ged, for it is taken out of the earth: The other Factitiam, 
which is made by beatyng or labouring the sharpest white
vineger, in a brasen morter, with a copper pestell, till it re­
ceyue a thicknes of filthe: Then must it bee beaten toge­
ther in the Sunne in the canicular dayes, cum alumine rotun­
do, &  sale fossili, uel marino, uel nitro, tyll it growe to a thicknes,
and receyue the colour of Aeruginis: and when it becommeth
lyke wormes, it must be kepte. This therfore hath been
called of some Vernicularis. A fourth kynde also of Aeruginis,
sayeth he, is made by the goldsmythes, of the vryne of chil­
dren, in a brasen morter, with a pestell of the same: 






wherwith they soulder golde. Of the which kyndes of Aeru
genis scoletiæ, Fossilis is the beste: nexte to that is Aerugo Derasu:
the thirde place hath Factitia, whiche yet is moste adstrin­
gent and bytinge Aerugo aurificum, answereth to Aerugini rasæ. 
Here mayst thou see good reader, the difference betwene
Aeruginem & florem æris, whiche is in his place described. All
the Aerugines, doe bynde, extenuate, and heate. They amend
the scarres or blottes of the eyes, cause teares, staie creping 
and eatyng sores, and defende woundes from inflammati­
ons. They purge filthie vlcers, &  cum cera &  oleo, they heale
the same. Put into fistules with Ammoniaco, in the maner of a
collyrie, they errode the callous substance of them: and are
profitable for the swellynges, and excressentes of the gum­
mes. The poulder of Aeruginis (sayeth Galen) put alone into 
vlcers, suffereth them not to putrefie: but it bringeth pein,
and byting, not a little: gnaweth, and maketh inflammations. 
Aerugo rasilis
uel rasa. 
Aerugo scole­
tia.  
Aerugo fossilis
Aerugo facti­
tia. 
Aerugo uermi­
cularis. 
Aerugo aurifi­
cum. 
Aerugo. 
Flos æris. 
De methodo
med. li. 3. 
De comp. me. 
secund. genera
lib. 2. &. 4. 



Virulentia.  
VIrulentia uulnera, uel ulcera, virulent or venemous woundes 
or vlcers: a uiro, whiche is venyme or poyson. 


Viticella.  
THe herbe vulgarly called Viticella, is called in Greke βρυωνία ἤ ψίλωθρον ἤ ἄμπελος λευκἠ, in Latin Vitis
alba psilothrum, and of the Apothecaries Brionia: in En­
lyshe whyte vyne or brionie. The roote and the iuyce of 
Briony sayeth Mesues) purgeth the brayne, the synewes,
and the breste, of rotten phlegme: moueth vryne, and ope­
neth the obstructions of the bowelles. But he appointeth the
temperament out of Dioscorides, (who yet leaueth all thinges
without degree of temperament,) to heate and drie in the 
thyrde degree. 

They vse sayeth Galen, to eate the braunches therof in
the spryng tyme, as a meate (for the adstriction therof,) ac­






ceptable for the stomache. But to that adstriction it is
sharpe, and somewhat bitter: and therby moueth vryne
moderatly. The roote hath a scouring, driyng, and moderat
heating power: and therfore drunke, softneth the harde 
splene, and layde to cum ficubus, healeth psoram & lepram. &c. 
It is somtymes mixed with corrosiue medicines. 
Bryonia. 
Psilothron. 
Ampelos leuce
De symp. li. 6. 

Vitriolum Romanum.  
DIoscorides wryting of Chalcanthum, (which the Grekes
call Κάλκανθον, the Arabians Zeg, the Latines Vitrio­
lum, because it shineth lyke glasse,) and Atramentum sutorium,
ab atro colore: (because it was vsed to dye leather black,) saith
that in kynde it is but one thynge: but deuydeth it into 
three differences. As one, which congeileth of certeyne hu­
mores, gathered together drop by droppe into certeyne 
holes of the earth: and therfore is called σταλακτικόμ, hoc est
Stillatitium. An other is made by a symple reason in caues,
beyng after poured out into certeyne diches that are made
holowe: whiche is properly called πκυτόν, Id est Concretium. 
The thyrde is called Coctile, and is wonte to bee made in
Spayne: beyng moste weake and vnprofitable. But a­
mong the late wryters there is not a little confusion of
names therin. For Matthiolus speakyng of the time present,
sayeth, that of Calcanthum there are twoo kyndes in Hetru­
ria. The one growyng of it selfe in the earth by concretion,
and is vulgarly called Coppa rosa. The other is arteficiall:
whose chiefest vse is for dyers. whiche is either the better
or the worse, as well for the dispositions of regions and ce­
lestiall climates, as for the mater wherof it is made: But it 
is proued that Vitriolum Romanum, excelleth the reste of the 
arteficiall kyndes, though it be of weaker or vnperfecter co­
lour. The seconde place hath Cyprium, but was of the aunci­
entes praysed for the beste. That whiche is brought from
Germanie, is weaker then any that is in Italy. & for that it
hath a blewe coloure, it deceyueth many. 






Among the Apothecaries there are twoo kynds: na­
mely Vitriolum symply so called, (which sayeth Brasauolus,
some haue falsely called Cholcothar,) and Vitriolum Romanum:
(whiche is sayth he, Antiquorum misy. ) And is harde, lyke vn­
to gould, shyning lyke the starres, and beyng broken, gli­
stereth as with golden sparkes: All the whiche notes he
affirmeth exactly to agree with Vitriolo romano of Germanie. 

And for the better vnderstandyng of his mynde therin,
take these notes, as he for the same reason, drew and gaue
forth the same. 

Vitriolum, Atramentum, and the Arabike worde Zeg, are 
sayeth he, common or generall names, to all the sortes therof
as they folowe. 

Σὣρυ Antiquorum. i. Zeg rubeum Serapionis. 

χαλκίτις Antiquorum,
i. Colcothar Serapionis. 
For the late wryters erre saith he
that cal Vitriolum Vstum Colcothar,
whiche ought rather to haue ben 
called Chalcitis. 

Μίσυ
i. Zeg uiride, Vitriolum
Romanum
But out of Germanie saieth he
ther is brought romain vitriole
whiche is more harde & of ye­
lowe coloure. 

Μελαντερί α. i. Bities, atramentum metallicum. 
Chalcanthum, atramentum Sutorium, Vitriolum. 

Herevnto it is to be noted, that Chalcanthum doth by lengthe
of tyme, or by present byrnyng the same, degenerate into
Chalcitin: which yet is suche as beyng disolued in water,
wyll agayne become Chalcanthum. And these names sayeth
he, doe so mutually answere to them selues, that hereby
thou canst not erre. 

Howe be it, (as Matthiolus moste truly sayeth) Calcitis My­
sy &  Sory, haue ben long vnknowne, neither is ther almost
any that can saye that he hath sene those very thynges: yet
doth the sayde Matthiolus reporte, that it chanced him, (after
long diligent serche but al in vayne,) to come at the laste to
the sight of them, by the meanes of a certein Apothecarie






Whose diligence God graunte ours to folowe. They were
founde sayeth he, about Trident. 

But in that Musa Brasauolus, affirmeth that kinde of Chal­
canthum, whiche is called Romanum, to be the true Misy, semeth
to stande saieth he, both against truthe and reason: both be­
cause Vitriolum Romanum, is neyther of a golden coloure, nor
glistereth as with sparkes when it is broken, but is more 
lyke the substance of glasse: And also that Misy is no medi­
cine arteficiall, but is without arte made in the bowelles
of the earth. 

Chalcanthum hath power to bynde, to heate, and to induce
eschares. Latas uentris tineas necat, drachmæ pondere deuoratum, aut
cum melle linctum, and moueth vomite. Beynge drunke with
water, it helpeth against the venim of Musheroms. It pur­
geth the head beyng watered, & dropped into the nosethrilles
with woulle. 

Of Chalcanthum, that is estemed beste whiche is blewe,
rare, faste, and shyning: such is Stillatium, called of some
Lonchoton. The next is Concretitium, but the arteficiall is ap­
ter for dyers, & to make blewe colours with, then the reste:
but for the vse of medicine weaker. 

Chalcanthum. 
Stalacticon. 
Pecton. 
Coppa rosa. 
Sory. 
Chalcitis. 
Misy. 
Melanteria. 

But note 
what is sayde
before of vitri
oleum of Ger
manie. 

"Vnperfecter" not found in OED. "Chalcanthum" antedates the earliest OED citation (1678), and "sory" likewise (1601). 




Vlceratiua medicamina.  
OR exulceratiua medicamina, are suche medicines as by
Corrosion doe excoriate or exulcerate: and commeth of
Vlcerare, or exulcerare, to blister or make vlcers. 


Vlcus.  
Galen in his fourth booke De methodo medendi, sayth: Est
itaque morborum genus, diuortium continui vocatum. Quod qui­
dem in carnosa parte, ulcus: in osse fractura: in neruo conuulsio
appellatur. &c. 

That is. There is one kynde of diseases, called the sun­
dryng of vnittie. whiche in a fleshie parte, is called Vlcus, In
the bone Fractura, and in the synewe, conuulsio. &c. Whervn­






to quitture is alwayes incident: and maketh an exacte di­
stinction, between it and Vulnus. More of it, and the deui­
sions therof, you may see in maister Gales institution. It is
called in Greeke ἔλκος, wherof commeth ἔλκος ἀνίατον,
Hoc est lethale, seu insanabile ulcus, a mortal or vncurable vlcer. 
Elcos. 
Elcos aniaton. 


Looke for it at Cotyledon.  


Vndimia.  
ORYdema, or after others Zimia, but more rightly Oede­
ma, is after Guido, and diuerse others of that age, of . ii. 
sortes: naturall and vnnaturall: the naturall caused
of naturall phlegme, or thinner then the same. The vnna­
turall is none other wyse made, but either by the admixtion
of other humores: as choler, phlegme, &c. Or by their affe­
ctes in the same, as by heating driyng &c. Loke more at Oedema
Ydema. 
Oedema. 


Vngula.  
OR Vnguis in oculo, is that whiche we call the webbe in
the eye: Whiche groweth sayeth Galen, to the pan­
nycle that couereth the eye outwardly, Vsque ad Iridis
coronam, called agnata, or cohærens. Whiche pannycle (sayth he)
beyng compased with inflammation, maye by accidens im­
pedyte the syght of the eye: but Chymosis and Vnguis, doe by
a chiefe and principall reason, hyde and darken the pupill:
euen as the greate vnnaturall tumores of the cheake. 
Vnguis. 
De symptoma
tii causis. lib. 1
De trem. pal­
pi. con. & ri­
gore. 
Chymosis.  

 Vulnus. 
IS properlie Plaga noua sanguinea, in Englishe, a
newe and bloudie wounde, or not sanious: For then is
it no longer a wounde, as before vnder the titles Plaga 
& ulcus. 




Zingiber.  
OR Gingiber, in Greeke Ζιγγίβερ, hath of an olde opinion
been iudged the roote of pepper: but that doth Pliny
denie. And Dioscorides describeth ginger in a seue­
rall chapiter, after he hath spoken of pepper, saiynge. Gingi­






beris, is a plante of his owne kynde, growyng in Arabia Tro­
glodytica, which they vse grene for many thinges, as we doe
Ruta, mixing it with their first meates and drynkes. The
rootes of this are little, lyke the rootes of Cyperus, whyte,
and odoriferus, and in taste lyke pepper: they oughte to be
chosen that are without woodwormes. They ar kept with
salte, because they will otherwyse soone putrefie: and are
brought into Italie, in earthen vesselles. Ginger is con­
uenient in meates and in sauces, hauyng healyng and con­
coctiue power. It gently mollifieth the belly, is vtile for the
stomache, And efficatious for the dymnesse, or dulnesse of
sight. It is put in medicines against venym, and answereth
in summe, to the vertues of pepper. Hitherto Dioscorides. 
Galen sayeth it heateth, but not at the first as pepper, &
therfore is to be estemed of subtiller partes: and semeth to
retayne in it selfe a certeyne grosse and vnlaboured humi­
ditie, lyke Piperi longo: And therfore doth the heate continue
longer, that is made by ginger or longe pepper, then of the
whyte, or blacke. They that haue seen Ginger in India,
(saith Ruellius,) affirme it to haue a creping roote, with
knottes and ioyntes: From the whiche, and from
the stalke, commeth often new rootes, geuing
twise or thryse in the yeare leaues lyke a
reede, but not so long: and that it re­
sembleth wholy Gramen, neither
is there any thing in that 
region more com­
mon. 

Cyperus. 
De sym. lib. 6. 
Piper longum. 

"Zingiber" antedates the earliest OED citation (1902). 




FINIS,






