


THE 
Royal Charter 
OF 
Confirmation 
Granted by KING 
Charles II. 
To the CITY of 
LONDON.

Wherein are Recited Verbatim, All the 
CHARTERS to the said CITY, granted by 
His Majesties Royal Predecessors, KINGS and 
QUEENS of ENGLAND.

Taken out of the RECORDS, 
And exactly Translated into English 
By S. G. Gent.

TOGETHER 
With an Index or Alphabetical Table, and 
a Table explaining all the Obsolete and Difficult 
Words in the said CHARTER.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Lee and Benjamin Alsop, at 
the Feathers in Lombard-street, near the Post-Office, and at 
the Angel in the Poultrey over against the Stocks-market.






A 
TABLE 
OF 
Obsolete and Difficult words
contained in the Charter.



AMerciament, a pecuniary punishment in 
Court of an Offender against the King, 
or any other Lord.

Avoir-du-pois, a French word
signifying in 
our Common Law two things: 1. A kind of 
Weight different from that called Troy­
weight, which contains but twelve ounces to 
the pound, whereas this contains sixteen. 
2. It signifies such Merchandizes as are 
weighed by this Weight.



Brid-toll (or Bridgetoll) a Duty or Tax for
passing over a Bridge.

"Brid-toll" and "Bridgetoll" not found in OED.



Blank-sterling, from the French word Blanch, 
i. e. white, a Coin that was coined in the 
parts of France by King Henry the fifth, 
when they were subject to England, the 
value whereof was 8 d. These were for­
bidden to be currant within this Realm 
2 H. 6. The reason why they were called
Blanks, was to distinguish this Coin by its
colour from a certain piece of Gold which 
was then coined at 22 s.

"Blank-sterling" not found in OED.





Childwite, an
old Saxon word signifying a 
power to take a Fine of your Bond-woman 
begotten with child without your consent.



Corody, A sum of money, or allowance of 
meat and drink due to the King out of an 
Abby or Religious House whereof he is
Founder, towards the maintenance of such 
one of his servants as he shall think fit to 
make a Pentioner there.



Dane-guilt, a Tribute laid upon our Ancestors
of 12 d. for every Hide of Land through­
out the Realm, by the Danes, for clearing
the Seas (as they pretended) of Pirates.

Denizen, i. e. an Alien born, enabled by the 
King's Letters Patents to purchase Lands, 
hold Offices, &c. and his Heirs to in­
herit. But this difference lies, That a per­
son naturalized by Act of Parliament, may 
inherit Lands by descent, which a Denizen 
cannot, though his Heirs may inherit from 
him.

Deodand, In Latine, signifies a thing given
or forfeited to God for the pacification of 
his wrath, for any accident whereby a Chri­
stian comes to his death without the default 
of any reasonable creature. As if a Horse 
kill his Keeper, or a Cart run over a man, 
the Creatures and Instruments are forfeited
to the King to be distributed to the poor.



Flackmote, or Folkmote, a Saxon word, sig­
nifying a Court holden in London, wherein 
all the people of the City did complain of 
Irregularities and Mis-governments with­
in the City.

Frank-pledge, a Pledge or Surety for Free­
men of fourteen years of age (except Clerks
and Knights) their finding Sureties to­
wards the King and His Subjects, or else



they were to be sent to prison.




Guild, a Fraternity or Company combined to­
gether by Orders and Laws made among 
themselves by the Prince's Licence.



Husting, a French word, signifying the prin­
cipal or highest Court in London.



Jeresgive, an antient Tax or Toll in the time 
of the Saxons.

Infangtheft, a Saxon word, signifying a Liber­
ty granted to certain Lords of Mannors
to judge any Thief taken within their Fee.



Keddals, Wares for Fishing.



Lastage, or Lestage, i. e. a Burthen, a Custom 
challenged in Fairs and Markets for car­
rying of things. Whence comes a Last of 
Herrings, a Last of Pitch and Tar, &c.



Miskenning, Changing of Speech in Court.

Murage, a Contribution gathered for repair­
ing old Edifices or Walls.



Outfangtheft, a Liberty granted to the 
Lord to try any Thief taken out of his Fee.



Passage, The Hire a man pays for Transport 
over the Seas.

Portsoken, The Liberties within the Port of 
London.

Pannage, or Pawnage, or Herbage, A Duty 
given to the King for Pasturage of Cattle; 
as also for Fruits, Trees, Masts, Hedge­
rowes, &c.

Pontage, Contribution towards the repairing
of a Bridge.

Pypowder, In Latine, Curia Pedis pulveri­
zati, a Court held in Fairs for redressing
all Disorders committed therein.





Soke, The Liberty in Court allowed to Te­
nants.

Scotale, Punishment of an Officer who doth 
keep an Ale-house, causing men to come to 
his house, and spend their money for fear of
displeasure.



Taillage, From the French word Taille, i. e. 
a piece cut out of the whole, signifying the 
paying a part or share of a man's substance 
by way of Tribute, Toll or Tax.

Toke, Seems to come from the River Teuke,
unde Teukesbury.

Treasure-trove, All Treasure found which 
hath no lawful Owner, belongs to the King, 
in whose grounds soever the same is taken.

Tronage, Toll or Duty for weighing Goods.



Withernam, In the Common Law is the tak­
ing or driving a Distress to a hold, or out 
of the County where the Sheriff cannot come, 
upon a Replevin to make deliverance there­
of to the party distreined.





      