

THE
SWEDISH
DISCIPLINE, 
RELIGIOVS,
CIVILE,
And MILITARY.
THE FIRST PART, IN THE 
Formes of Prayer daily used by those of the Swe­
dish Nation, in the Armie. Together with two se­
verall Prayers, uttered upon severall occasions 
by that pious King; which God immedi­
ately heard and granted him. 

The second Part, in the excellent Orders 
observed in the Armie; whereof we here present 
you the Articles, by which the Souldiery is governed. 

The third Part, in the Kings Commission for levy­
ing of a Regiment: his Order for drawing vp of a 
private Company; of a Squadron; and of a Brigade: with his 
manner of Enquartering a private Regiment; and of an 
Army Royall: vnto which is added the best manner of buil­
ding and fortifying of a Towne of Warre. All, in 
fiue severall Figures expressed and explained. 
Last of all, Is the famous Battell of Leip­
sich, in two fayre Figures also set forth: and 
now this second time more fully and 
particularly described.

LONDON,
Printed by Iohn Dawson for Nath: Butter and Nich: Bourne.
1632.






The Military termes explained.



(1) THe Regiment-Staffe, consists of such as are necessary
people to the Regiment, notwithstanding their office
be not to fight: of which the Quarter-Master is the first, and 
the Hangman the last.

"Regiment-Staffe" antedates the earliest OED citation (1781: "staff," n.1, sense 21a).



(2) The Regiment-Schultz, be the Examiners and Registers
of Criminall matters, brought before the Martiall Court.

"Regiment-Schultz" and "Schultz" not found in OED.



(3) The Stock-knights, be the Provosts or Perforces servants,
that knocke the Irons on and off, and inflict other corporall 
punishments.

"Stock-knights" not found in OED.



(4) The Fuhrer, is an Assistant to the Antient, that somtimes
caries his Colours for him.

"Fuhrer" antedates the earliest OED citation and has a different sense (1934).





(5) The Furryers be vnder Quarter-masters. They march
sometimes with a Halberd, or Partizan.

(6) The Muster-Schreiber, is the Clerke of the Musters.

"Muster-schreiber" and "schreiber" not found in OED.



(7) The Rust-masters, is the Captaine of the Armes, that
sees the soldiours keepe and weare their Armes duly.

"Rust-master" not found in OED.



(8) These 15. Rot-Masters, be Gentlemen of the Company,
that haue some ouersight ouer the Rotts.

(9) (10) The Muster-boyes, be allowed for seruants to 
the Captaine and chiefe officers: and so be the Passevolants.

"Muster-boyes" not found in OED.



(11) Lehnung, is Lending, in the paiement of the soldiours
meanes, for which this is the Kings order. Whereas so much is
due to them at the months end; the King deviding the month
into 13. equall parts; vpon the first, eleuenth, and one and
twentieth day of the moneth, payes them a third part of their
meanes before-hand as it were: which is called Lendings.

 


