


Mundus Muliebris:
OR, THE
LADIES
Dressing-Room
UNLOCK'D,
And Her TOILETTE Spread.

In Burlesque.

Together
With the FOP-DICTIONARY, Compiled
for the Use of the FAIR SEX.


Tanquam fama discrimen agatur,
Aut Anima: Tanta est quarendi cura decoris.
Juvenal. Sat. 6.

Such care for a becoming Dress they take,
As if their Life and Honour were at Stake.


LONDON:
Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel-Street in Coventry
Garden. 1690.
Where Gentlemen 








PREFACE.

THis Paper was not to come abroad with­
out a Preface as well as Comment, for 
Instruction of our young Master, who 
newly launch'd from the University
(where he has lost a year or two) 
is not yet Travell'd, or if haply he has made le petit 
Tour (with the formal thing his Governour *) having 
never yet Read Tully's Offices through, since he came 
from School sets up for a Beau, and Equipp'd for the 
Town at his Return, comes to seek Adventures in an 
Ocean full of Rocks, and Shelves, and wants a Skilful 
Pilot to Steer him, as much as any Vessel that goes 
to the Indies; and oftentimes returns home Leaky,
and as poorly freighted, as those who have been near 
Shipwrack'd or lost their Voyage.

It is for direction of such as are setting out towards 
this great and famous Emporium (whether the design be 
for Miss or Marriage) what Cargo he must provide; 
not as Merchants do for America, Glass-Beads, and 
Baubles, in exchange for Gold and Pearl; but Gold 
and Pearl, and all that's precious, for that which is of 
less value than Knives and Childrens Rattles.   



You see, Squires, what you are to prepare for as 
Adventurers, or by way of Barter, if you think to 
Traffick here, and to carry the Fair One, especially if
she be at her own disposal (or being come some 
considerable time out of the Country) has been ini­
tiated into the Conversation of the Town: The Re­
fined Lady expects her Servants and humble Admirers 
should Court her in the Forms and Decencies of making 
Love in Fashion: In order to this, you must often 
Treat her at the Play, the Park, and the Musick;
present her at the Raffle, follow her to Tunbridge at 
the season of drinking of Waters, though you have no 
need of them your self: You must improve all occa­
sions of celebrating her Shape, and how well the 
Mode becomes her, though it be ne'er so Fantastical 
and Ridiculous; that she Sings like an Angel, Dances 
like a Goddess; and that you are Charm'd with her 
Wit and Beauty: Above all, you must be sure to find 
some Fault or Imperfection in all other Ladies of the 
Town, and to laugh at the Fopps like your self: With 
this, a little Practice will qualifie you for the Conver­
sation and Mistery of the Ruelle; and if the whole 
Morning be spent between the Glass and the Comb, 
that your Perruque fit well, and Cravat-Strings be 
adjusted as things of importance; with these and the 
like accomplishments you'l emerge a consummate Beau, 
Anglice, a Coxcomb. But the Dancing-Master will 
still be necessary to preserve your good Meen, and fit
you for the Winter-Ball.

Thus you see, young Sparks, how the Stile and Me­
thod of Wooing is quite changed, as well as the Lan­
guage, since the days of our Fore-Fathers (of unhappy 



Memory, simple and plain Men as they were) who 
Courted and chose their Wives for their Modesty, Fru­
gality, keeping at Home, Good-Housewifery, and other 
Oeconomical Virutes then in Reputation: and when the 
young Damsels were taught all these in the Country, 
and their Parents Houses, the Portion they brought 
was more in Virtue than Money, and she was a richer 
Match than one who could have brought a Million, 
and nothing else to commend her. The Presents which 
were made when all was concluded, were a Ring, a 
Necklace of Pearl, and perhaps another fair Jewel, 
the Bona Parphernalia of her prudent Mother, whose 
Nuptial Kirtle, Gown and Petticoat lasted as many An­
niversaries as the happy Couple liv'd together, and 
were at last bequeathed with a Purse of old Gold, Rose-­
Nobles, Spur Royals, and Spankers, as an House-Loom 
to her Grand-Daughter.

They had Cupboards of Ancient, Useful Plate, whole 
Chests of Damask for the Table, and store of fine 
Holland Sheets (white as the driven Snow) and fra­
grant of Rose and Lavender for the Bed; and the 
sturdy Oaken Bedstead, and Furniture of the House, 
lasted one whole Century; the Shovel-Board, and o­
ther long Tables both in Hall and Parlour were as fix­
ed as the Freehold; nothing was moveable save Joynt-­
Stools, the Black Jacks, Silver Tankards, and Bowls: 
And though many things fell out between the Cup and the 
Lip, when Nappy Ale, March Beer, Metheglin, Malme­
sey, and Old Sherry, got the Ascendant amongst the 
Blew-Coats, and Badges, they sung Old Symon, and
Cheviot-Chase, and danc'd brave Arthur, and were able 
to draw a Bow, that made the proud Monsieur Trem­



ble at the Whizze of the Grey-Goose-Feather: 'Twas then 
Ancient Hospitality was kept up in Town and Country, 
by which the Tenants were enabled to pay their Landlords
at punctual day: The Poor were Relieved bountifully, and 
Charity was as warm as the Kitchin, where the Fire 
was perpetual. 

In those happy days, Sure-Foot, the Grave and steady 
Mare, carried the Good Knight, and his Courteous Lady 
behind him to Church, and to visit the Neighbourhood, 
without so many Hell-Carts, Ratling Coaches, and a crue 
of Damme Lacqueys, which a Grave Livery Servant 
or two supply'd, who Rid before and made way for his 
Worship.

Things of Use were Natural, Plain, and Wholesome 
nothing was superfluous, nothing necessary wanting: and 
Men of Estate studied the Publick Good and gave Ex­
ample of true Piety, Loyalty, Justice, Sobriety, Chari­
ty, and the good Neighborhood compos'd most differences: 
Perjury, Suborning Witnesses, Alimony, Avowed Adul­
teries, and Misses (publickly own'd) were Prodigies in 
those days, and Laws were Reason, not Craft, when
Mens Titles were secure, and they served their Generation 
with Honour; left their Patrimonial Estates improv'd, to 
an Hopeful Heir, who passing from the Free-School to the 
Colledge, and thence to the Inns of Court, acquainting him­
self with a competent Tincture of the Laws of his Country, 
followed the Example of his Worthy Ancestors; and if he 
Travell'd abroad, it was not to count Steeples, and bring 
home Feather and Ribbon, and the Sins of other Na­
tions; but to gain such Experience as rendred him use­
ful to his Prince and Country upon occasion, and confirm'd 
him in the Love of both of 'em above any other.



The Virgins and Young Ladies of that Golden Age, 
Quæsierunt lanam & linum; put their hands to the 
Spindle, nor disdain'd they the Needle; were obsequious, 
and helpful to their Parents; instructed in the Managery 
of the Family, and gave Presages of making excellent 
Wives; nor then did they Read so many Romances, see 
so many Plays, and smutty Farces; set up for Visits, and 
have their days of Audience, and Idle pass-time. Honest 
Gleek, Ruff and Honours, diverted the Ladies at 
Christmas, and they knew not so much as the Names 
of Ombre, Comet, and Basset. Their Retirements were 
Devout and Religious Books, and their Recreations in the
Distillatory, the knowledge of Plants and their Virtues, 
for the comfort of their poor Neighbours, and use of the 
Family, which wholsome plain Dyet, and Kitching Phy­
sick, preserved in perfect Health: In those days, the
Scurvy, Spleen, &c. were scarce heard of, till Foreign 
Drinks and Mixtures were wantonly introduc'd. Nor 
were the young Gentlewomen so universally afflicted with 
Hysterical Fits; nor, though extreamly modest, at all
Melancholy, or less Gay, and in good Humour; they could 
touch the Lute, and Virginal, sing like to the Damask 
Rose ------ and their Breath was as sweet as their Voi­
ces: They danc'd the Canarys' Spanish Pavan, and Se­
lengers Round upon Sippets, with as much Grace and 
Loveliness, as any Isaac, Monsieur, or Italian of them 
all, can Teach with his Fop-call, and Apish Postures.

To shew you then, how the World is alter'd among us, 
since Foreign Manners, the Luxury (more than Asiatick, 
which was the final Ruine of the Greatest, Wisest, and 
most Noble Monarchy upon Earth) has universally ob­
tain'd among us, corrupting ancient simplicity; and in 



what extravagant Form the young Gallant we describ'd, 
is to Court the Sex, and make his Addresses, (whether 
his Expedition be for Marriage or Mistress) it has been 
thought good by some Charitable hands, that have con­
tributed to this Catalogue, to present him with an Enu­
meration of particulars, and Computation of the Charges 
of the Adventurer, as follows.






THE
FOP-DICTIONARY.
OR,
An Alphabetical Catalogue of
the hard and foreign Names,
and Terms of the Art COS­
METICK, &c. together with
their Interpretations, for In­
struction of the Unlearned.



Attache.  
ANy thing which fastens to another, &c. 

Bas de soye shot through.  
Silk Stokings with Gold, or Silver thread wove 
into the Clock. 

Berger.  
A plain small Lock (a la Shepherdesse) turn'd up 
with a Puff. 



Burgoigne.  
The first part of the Dress for the Head next the 
Hair. 

Branches.  
Hanging Candlesticks, like those used in Churches. 

Brasiere.  
A large Vessel, or moving-Hearth of Silver for 
Coals, transportable into any Room, much used 
in Spain. 

Calumbuc. 
A certain precious Wood, of an agreeable Scent, 
brought from the Indies. 

Campaine. 
A kind of narrow picked Lace. 

Casset. 
A Dressing Box. 

Cassolet. 
Perfuming Pot or Censer. 

Choux. 
The great round Boss or Bundle, resembling a 
Cabbage, from whence the French give it that 
name. 

Cofre-fort. 
A strong Box of some precious or hard wood, &c. 
bound with gilded Ribs. 

Colbertine. 
A Lace resembling Net-work of the Fabrick of 
Monsieur Colbert, Superintendent of the French 
Kings Manufactures. 

Collaret. 
A sort of Gorget. 

Commode. 
A Frame of Wire, cover'd with Silk, on which 



the whole Head-Attire is adjusted at once up­
on a Bust, or property of Wood carved to the 
Breasts, like that which Perruque-Makers set 
upon their Stalls. 

Confidants. 
Smaller Curles near the Ears. 

Coruet. 
The upper Pinner, dangling about the Cheeks, like 
Hounds Ears. 

Cosmeticks. 
Here used for any Effeminate Ornament, also arti­
ficial Complections and Perfumes. 

Creve-cœur. 
Heart-breakers, the two small curl'd Locks at the 
nape of the Neck. 

Crochet. 
The Hook to which are chain'd the Ladies Watch, 
Seals, and other Intaglias, &c. 

Cruches. 
Certain smaller Curles, placed on the Forehead. 

Cuppée. 
A kind of Pinner. 

Exhelles. 
A Pectoral, or Stomacher lac'd with Ribbon, like 
the rounds of a Ladder. 

Engageants.  
Deep double Ruffles, hanging down to the 
Wrists. 

Favorites. 
Locks dangling on the Temples. 

Ferula. 
And Instrument of Wood us'd for Correction of 



lighter faults, more sensibly known to School-­
Boys than to Ladies. 

Fil-grain'd. 
Dressing-Boxes, Baskets, or whatever else is made 
of Silver Wire-work. 

Flandan. 
A kind of Pinner joyning with the Bonnet. 

Firmament. 
Diamonds, or other precious Stones heading the 
Pins which they stick in the Tour, and Hair, 
like Stars. 

Sense not found in OED "firmament," n.



Frelan. 
Bonnet and Pinner together. 

Font-Ange. 
The Top-Knot, so call'd from Mademoiselle de Fon­
tange, one of the French King's Mistresses, who 
first wore it. 

Gris. 
The Grey Furr of Squirrels bellies. 

Japonian. 
Any thing Varnish'd with Laccar, or China Polish­
ing, or that is odd or fantastical. 

Jardiné 
  That single Pinner next the Bourgogne. 

Sense not found in OED "Japonian," adj. and n.



Loo Mask. 
An half Mask. 

Martial. 
The Name of a famous French Perfumer, emulate­
ing the Frangipani of Rome. 

Miroir. 
In general, any Looking-Glass; but here for 



the Table, Toilet, or Pocket Sprunking-­
Glass. 

Molionet. 
The Instrument us'd to mingle Chocolate with the 
Water. 

Monte la haut. 
Certain degrees of Wire to raise the Dress. 

Mouchoire. 
It were Rude, Vulgar, and Uncourtly to call it 
Handkerchief. 

Mouches. 
Flies, or, Black Patches, by the Vulgar. 

Meurtrieres. 
Murderers; a certain Knot in the Hair, which ties 
and unites the Curls. 

Palatine. 
Formerly call'd Sables, or Tippet, because made of 
the Tails of that Animal. 

Palisade. 
A Wire sustaining the Hair next to the Dutchess, 
or first Knot. 

Passagere. 
A Curl'd Lock next the Temples. 

Pastillo di Bocca. 
Perfum'd Lozenges to improve the Breath. 

Pennache. 
Any Bunch or Tassel of small Ribbon. 

Plumpers. 
Certain very thin, round, and light Balls, to 
plump out, and fill up the Cavities of the 
Cheeks, much us'd by old Court-Countesses. 



Polvil. 
The Portugal term for the most exquisite Powders
and Perfumes. 

