



THE 
SVURGIONS 
MATE, 
OR 
A TREATISE DISCO­
uering faithfully and plainely the due 
contents of the SVRGIONS Chest, the vses of the
Instruments, the vertues and operations of the 
Medicines, the cures of the most frequent 
diseases at SEA: 

Namely 
Wounds, Apostumes, Vlcers, Fistulaes, Frac&shy
tures, Dislocations, with the true maner of Amputation, 
the cure of the Scuruie, the Fluxes of the belly, 
of the Collica and Illiaca Passio, Tenasmus, 
and exitus Ani, the Callenture; 

WITH A BRIEF EXPLANATION
of Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury; with certaine 
Characters, and tearmes of Arte. 

Published chiefly for the benefit of young Sea-Surgions, 
imployed in the East-India Companies affaires.

By Iohn Woodall Master in Chirurgery.

LONDON

Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for Laurence Lisle,
at the Tygers-head in Panis Church-yard. 1617.







CERTAINE BREIFE
Remembrances touching the par­
ticular Instruments for the SVRGIONS
CHEST,and the vses of the same.


And first of the vses of the Incision
Knife.  
THe vses of the incision knife are many:
namely, to enter the cutis or skin vpon
euery iust cause, wherein I aduise the 
Surgions Mate not to be too forward,
or too rash, but to take good aduise,
namely, if the Patient may by any bet­
ter way else receiue health, that he for­
beare incision, if not, let him proceed in the name of God.
...



...
Of the dismembring knife, and of the 
Catlinge. 
THese two instruments are to be vsed in dismembring:
as namely, they are to amputate, or to take of any of­
fensiue member or part of mans body: I meane all the 
fleshie part, or whatsoeuer may bee incised euen to the
bone.

"Amputate" antedates the earliest OED citation ("amputate," v., 1; 1638).


...



Of the Rasor. 
THere needeth little to be spoken of the vse of this in­
strument, for that all men know well the vse thereof,
which is chiefly to shaue away haire where neede requi­
reth ...
...
Of the Trapan. 
...
Of the Callenture. 
THe Callenture by all my experience, or what I can
gather from others, is no other thing then a contagi­
ous feuor, for the most part suddenly assaulting Sea-men,
sometimes it is with paroxismes, sometimes continuall,
and hath fits hot and colde in some, and that very violent,
euen to the losse of sences and life also. 
...







Of SVLPHVR.



SVlphur  is generally taken for euery fatty,
oilie, or any way combustible part of any
creature, whether it be Animall, Vegita­
ble, or Minerall...
...







Of MERCVRIE
in Generall.



MErcurie  is generally taken by Chymists
for one of the three principles whereof
each compleat creature is framed by na­
ture, and it is also the first which forsa­
keth his fellowes, being assailed by Vul­
cane, it is in truth a fugitive and vagrant substance...
...







THE 
TERMES OF ART
RECITED FOR­
MERLY IN VERSE, ARE 
heere againe repeated Al­
phabetically, and more plainely 
interpreted.



ALbation  is the abstraction of dust moths, gret,
adhering to a thing with an hares foot, fea­
ther, spather, knife, or the like.

Ablution  is exaltation, cleansing vncleane
things by often infusion, reducing them to purity.

Alcolismus  is an operation by calcination, ribellation,
and other meanes, which reduceth a matter into Alcool,
the finest powder that is.

"Alcolismus" is not defined in the OED. See "alcohol," n., 1.a (1543-): the 1657 citation contains the term "alcolismus," evidently taken from Woodall.
"Ribellation" is not found in the OED.



Amalgamation  is the putting together, solution, or cal­
cination of familiar mettals, by Argentum viuum, &c,

Aromatization  is an artificiall manner of preparation,
whereby medicaments are made more suaueolent and o­
doriferous for the oblectation and strength of the palate,
and vitall faculty.

"Suaueolent" antedates the earliest OED citation ("suaveolent," adj.; 1657).



Attrition  is a certaine manner of preparation, like grin­
ding on a conuenient stone with some humidity, wherby
Lapis Iudaicus, Collyria, and the like are prepared.





Buccellatio  is diuiding into gobbets, or by peece meale.

"Buccellatio" antedates the earliest OED citation ("buccellation," n.; 1657), which copies Woodall.





Calcination  is solution of bodies into Calx or Alcool, by
desiccation of the natiue humidity, by reuerberate Igniti­
on, by Amalgamation, by Aqua fortis, the spirit of salt vi­
trioll, Sulphur, or the like.

Calfaction  is a certaine manner of preparing simple and
compound medicaments, not by boyling or burning, but
by the moderate heat of the sunne, fire, fimus equinus, vel
eius vicarius.

Cementation  is gradation by cementing.

Cementum  is a minerall matter like lute, and penetra­
ting, wherewith mettals spred ouer are reuerberated to
cement.

Ceratio  is the mollification of an hard thing, vntill it be
like wax at the fire.

Cinefaction  is ignition conuerting Vegitables and Ani­
mals by a very vehement heat into Cineres.

Circulation  is the exaltation of pure liquour, as spirit of 
wine by circular solution, and coagulation in a Pelican, a 
moderate heat forcing it.

Clarification  is the expurgation of solide grosse matter
from liquid medicaments.

Coadunation  (sometimes termed by the name of a more
excellent species, Coagulation) is a perfect and skilful wor­
king, whereby disgregate things are vnited.

"Disgregate" antedates the earliest OED citation (1726) of the adjectival form of "disgregate," v.



Coagmentation  like to glutination, is by liquate things,
on which dissoluing powders are cast, and afterwards are
made concrete by laying them in a colde place, or by eua­
porating their humidity.

"Liquated" antedates the earliest OED citations of both "liquate" (v. 1; 1669) and its adjectival form (1874).



Coagulation 