



A SECOND INDEX,
CONTAINING THE EXPOSITION
OF THOSE TEARMES IN LIVIE WHICH ARE 
NOT YET FAMILIAR IN ENGLISH, AND OF SOME
PLACES, OMITTED BEFORE IN THE MAR­
GINALL NOTES:



Whereunto the Reader may have recourse, when hee meeteth with any
such difficultie in the Historie.


A

A. Aulus, the forename to divers families
in Rome.


Ædiles, certaine inferiour magistrates
in Rome : who were of two sortes; Plebeij,
and Curules. Plebeij, of the Commons onely,
two in number, more auncient than the o­
ther, chosen by the people alone to second
and assist the Tribunes of the Commons as
their right hands. This name they tooke of
the charge they had of temples, chappels,
and oratories; albiet they registred the San­
ctions and acts of the people called  Plebiscita,
and kept the same in their owne custodie;
and were clerkes of the market: also they ex­
hibited the games and plaies called Plebeij. Cu­
rules, were likewise twaine, elected out of the 
order and degree of the Patritij: so called, of
the Ivorie chaire wherein they were allowed
to sit, as officers of greater state. They set
foorth the great solemnities called Ludi ma­
gni, or Romani; were overseers of the buil­
dings throughout the cittie as well publicke
as private, in manner of the atumotoi in Athens;
they had regard to the publicke vaults, sinks,
conveiances, and conduits of the cittie wa­
ters; looked to the Arsenall; &c. Moreover,
they had power to attach the bodies of great 
persons; and were charged to see unto the
provision of corne and victuals. At the first,
none but Patritij might be advaunced to this 
place: but in processe of time, Commoners
also atteined thereunto, These as well as the
Plebeij were Sacrosancti, i. unviolable.


Ærarij,  they were, who being citizens of Rome,
were by the Censours deprived of giving
their voices in their Centurie or Tribe; paid
all tribute with cittizens according to the va­
luation of their goods; and served in the wars
of their owne charges; and either because
æra pendebant, or æra non merebant, it seemeth
they tooke that name.


Agmen quadratum : Agmine quadrato ducere, is taken 
in a three-fold sence. First, The same that in­
festo exercitu, infesto agmine, or, infestis signis: 
which signifieth the ordinarie manner of ene­
mies marching with banners displaied, either
to a battaile, or to the siege and assault of a
fort: and this manner of phrase addeth a 
grace onely to the sentence. Secondly, To
march or fight in a foure square battaillon,
though not alwaies with equall sides & right
angles: and the same not charged with the
carriages at all. Thirdly, When an armie is 
spread and displaied at large, enclosing the 
impedimenta or baggage in the mids, for safetie
and securitie.


 Agrariæ,  were lawes preferred by the Tribunes
of the Commons, as well for division of lands
(conquered from the enemies); among the 
Commons; as to restraine the possessions of
the Nobles within a certaine limit and com­
passe.


Ambitus,  The inordinate and excessive desire to 
be in office of state, appearing by indirect
and unlawfull meanes; either to their friends 
and kinsfolkes, or to the people: against
which, many lawes in Rome were provided;
namely, Acilia, Bæbia,  Æmilia, Licinia, and o­
thers.


Ancilia : Ancile was a buckler or scutcheon, that 
(as they say) fell from heaven into the hands
of K. Numa in time of a plague: and hee be­
ing advertised by Egeria, That it was for the
health of the citie, and ought to be kept safe;
caused 11 more to be made unto it, so like,
as they could not be knowne from the pat­
terne: which hereby was preserved. The kee­
ping hereof was committed to the twelve Su­
lij.


Annales, were briefe memorials, Chronicles, or 
commentaries, conteining the names of Con­
suls every yeere, the date of times, and all 



memorable occurrents happening therein.
The high priests, called Pontifices maximi, had 
the charge by their place to gather the same
into tables, and to set them up in their hou­
ses for to be seene: and hereupon they were
called Annales maximi, à Maximis Pontificibus;
and not of their greatnesse, as those huge vo­
lumes, named Libri Elephantini.


Ap. Appius,  a forename appropriate to the House
of the Claudij in Rome.


Appia via,  A notable street or high-way; begun 
by Ap. Claudius reaching from Rome, as far as Ca­
pua: and afterwards by Iulius Cæsar and Tra­
jane, it was extended to Brindis in Calabria.
Of all other it seemeth to be the principall,
by the testimonie of Papinius the Poet, who
writeth thus of it,
Appia cunctarum fertur Regina viarum.
Called it was Triumphalis (as also the gate Ca­
pena;) because through it the triumphes or­
dinarily passed at the said gate.


Ara maxima, The great altar reared by Hercules,
and tooke the name of a great heap of stones
about it.


Arbor infœlix,  Is commonly taken for a tree that
naturally beareth no fruit.


Argiletus imus, Is the base or low part of a street
in Rome; in regard of the upper end there­
of, called Summus: in like sort as Ianus Summus
& imus.


Area,  is taken for some void place, whereupon
nothing groweth, quia aret: as Forum boarium
in Rome, Area quæ posito de bove nonem habet, and
differeth from Campus, for that it is lesse. Also
a plot of ground made levell and cleane for
to build upon: as in Suetonius 26. Forum Cæsar
de manubijs inchoavit the Area whereof,  (id est,
the trimming and levelling of the plot) cost
II-S. millies, id est, an hundred millions of Se­
stertij.  Last of all, the broad yards before tem­
ples, not covered but compassed about with 
columnes, like a cloister with an altar in the
mids, be called Area.


Aruspices, were wisards or southsayers, directed by 
the bowels & inwards of beasts killed for sacri­
fice, called also Extispices, & in Greeke [GREEK],
who prying into them, had especiall regard
of the liver; whereupon their whole Art and
learning was termed [GREEK], albeit they
observed, also the heart, lungs, spleene, and
kidnies.


As or Assis, usually in Livie is taken for a Romane
poise, or coine in brasse, the tenth part in 
value of their silver Denarius. At first it was a 
pound weight of twelve ounces; but after­
wards, the Sextans, id est, the sixt part therof,
was valewed worth the whole: and howsoe­
ver otherwise it altered in poise, it went al­
waies for 3 farthings or thereabout of our en­
glish money.


Augurium,  See AUSPICIA. 


Aurei Romani, Peeces of gold coine currant in
Rome: in round reckoning equivalent to our 
spur-roiall of 15 sh. For 100 Sestertij made
aureum, which amount to 15 sh.7d. ob. the 4
part of mina, i. a lib. in silver, and of an ounce
of angell gold.


Auspicia : Auspices  were properly the observation
of the birds, either by their singing and flying
in the aire; or by their gesture and manner of
feeding in their caveaor coupe: whereby
their Augurs  and Pullarij knew in their lear­
ning, the pleasure and will of the gods, whe­
ther they favoured their enterprises or no.
the birds that gave signe by their voice and
singing, they called Ossines, quasi ore canentes, as
the crow, raven, and owle; and thereof came
Augurium, quasi avium garritus. Those that she­
wed ought by their flight & wings, were na­
med Alites or Pæpetes, as the buzzard, eagle,
crane, grype, swan, and broad-winged foules,
[GREEK]. The good signes were called  Sinistra
auspicia, quasi sinistima, quod sinant fieri, whether
they came from the left hand or the right. In
pullets or chickens kept in cages, they ob­
served whether they came forth willingly to
their meat (for to abstaine from it was thought
unluckie:) whereas their feeding heartily, was
a good signe, and called solistimum tripudium,
quas terripavium & terræpudium, when some of
the meat falleth out of the mouth,  & terram
pavit, i. beateth upon the ground; as it must
needs do, when they pecked either corne, or
gobbets called offæ.



B

BAlists,  were certaine warrelike engines for to
send out and levell mightie stones, to batter
& shake citie wals, made with ropes of sinews
and womens haire especially twined togi­
ther: as appeareth by Venus Calva at Rome, un­
to whom, by occasion that the women of the
citie parted with their haire for that purpose,
a temple was dedicated. According to the 
weight of stones or bullets that this engine
would carrie, they were called Centenariæ, or
Talentariæ balistæ.


Basilicæ, were stately edifices or halles at Rome;
at first serving to plead in under couvert,
wherein they differed from Fora: and also to
minister justice, of [GREEK], which signifieth a
Iudge, as well as a King: but afterwards they
used to meete there in consultation; also to
negotiate and traffique: and these had not
onely benches and barres like law-courts,
but shops also for the better sort of wares and
merchandise.


Bellona,  The goddesse of warre; whose temple
stood before the gate Carmentalis, & neer ad­
joining therunto was a columne named Bel­
lica: from which the Romanes were wont to
launce a dart or javelin towards those parts



where they intended to make war: whereas
in former times they sent their heralds to
the very confines of their enemies, to per­
forme that ceremonie.


Bigati,  were the Romane Denarij, having the
stampe of a charriot drawne with two horses,
called Biga.


Bœotarchæ,  The chiefe magistrates of the Bœo­
tians.



C

 C. Caius Cn. Cneus.  The forenames of sundrie fa­
milies in Rome.


Calends,  was among the Romanes, the day of
the new Moone, which fell out with them 
ordinarily the first of every moneth: so na­
med [GREEK], id est, a calando, because the
pettie Pontifie used then to call the people
to the court Calabra, and there to pronounce
unto them how many daies wer to the Nones
of each moneth, &c.


Candidati,  were they that stood in election and
sued for dignities of magistracie: during
which time, they wore whiter and brighter
gowns than ordinarie, that they might be the
more easily seene and discerned a farre off
among others.


Cataphracti,  as well horse as foot, were they that 
were armed at all peeces with complete har­
nesse: and such horsemen were named De­
fensores.


Catapults,  were engines of warre to shoot ar­
rowes or such like offensive weapons, far off:
and by that name was called not onely the
instrument it selfe, but the arrow or whatso­
ever was shot out of it: as Turneb. writeth
in his 15 Adversar. cap. I.


Censours, Magistrates of State in Rome: whose
charge was to valew and estimate mens  
goods, and enroll them accordingly in their
severall raunges. Also to demise unto cer­
taine Fermars, called Publicanes, the pub­
licke profites of the cittie for a rent, and to
put foorth the cittie workes unto them, to 
be undertaken at a price. Likewise to over­
see mens manners, whereby oftentimes they
would deprive Senatours of their dignitie,
take from gentlemen their horses of service
and their rings; displace Commoners out of
their own tribe, disable them for giving voi­
ces, and make them Ærarij.


Centuries, were raunges and degrees of men ac­
cording to their worth, as they were assessed
and enrolled by the Censors.


Centuriata comitia, were those assemblies and e­
lections, wherein the people of Rome gave 
their voices and suffrages, according to their
haviour and wealth, by Centuries. And such
were at all times most favourable to the no­
bles.


Circenses ludi (as one would say) Circu-enses.  For in 
the beginning before the great listes and 
shew places (called Cirques) were built, the
plot of ground wherein were perfourmed
the horse-runnings and other masteries, was
flanked of the one side with the river, and en­
vironed on the other with swords. Vide Tur­
neb. Adversar. lib. 3. cap.5.


Cistophorus,  A peece of silver coine in Greece
and those parts neere adjoyning, lesse than
Drachma or Denarius: so called of the stamp,
representing a man carrying a panier or cas­
ket with holy reliques, in Cybeles mysterijs, in
Bacchi orgijs, or Cereris imtijs. If it be true, that
7500 of them goe to the Euboicke talent,
which conteineth 4000 Denarij, it is just our 
groat sterling: but if Denarius have proportio­
nem sesquiquartam to it, and that 4 Denarij are
5 Cistophores, (as Glarean collecteth out of
Budæus); it commeth to our teston of 6 pence.


Cloacina, supposed to be the image of Venus, found
by K. Tatius in the great vault or sinke con­
veighed under the citie, called Cloaca maxi­
ma. And for that it was not knowne what
goddesse it resembled, hee gave it the name 
of that place. Others say, it is written Clua­
cina, of the old word Cluo (to fight:) for that
the Romans and Sabines (readie to strike a
battaile) were by meanes of myrtle braun­
ches consecrated unto Venus, pacified and re­
conciled, in that very place where afterwards
the said goddesse was by that name worship­
ed.


Coemptionalis senex,  Paulus Manutius upon the
familiar Epistles of Cicero, giveth this attri­
bute to Scaptius in the end of the third booke 
of Livie, whereas in all editions it is,  Conciona­
lis. Now these Coemptionales senes (saith hee)
were those old men, in whose tuition and au­
thoritie, men by their last will and testament
left their widowes or daughters; and without
whome they might not passe in Dominium vivo­
rum per coemptionem, i. be married according to
the ceremonie called Coemption, whereby
the husband and wife seemed to buy one a­
nother.


Cohort, was ordinarily a band of 500 souldiours;
although once or twice in Livie wee read of
Quadragenariæ cohortes.


Comitium, was a publicke place or Hall within
the Forum Romanum, where the people
used to assemble for audience of justice, plea­
ding of causes, and other occasions: where­
upon Comitiales dies, were such daies upon the
which they might so assemble and meet togi­
ther.


Comitia, or Comices, were the solemn assemblies of
the people at Rome, summoned by the ma­
gistrates lawfully; to choose officers, to en­
act new lawes or cancell old, by their voices:
whereof were three sorts.


Curiata, instituted by  Romulus. Centuriata, by Serv.
Tullius. Tributa, brought in by the Tribunes



of the people: and the first author therof was 
P. Volero. 


Curiata and Centuriata, were Auspicata, i. performed
with the solemnitie of observing the appro­
bation of the birds, and the Senatours.


Tributa, were held by the Commons only, penes
quos non erant auspicia, and required neither Au­
spicia nor authoritatem, i. the allowance of the
Patres. And as in Comitiis Centuriatis, the richer
and greater men had the vantage; so in Curi­
ata and Tributa, the poorer sort (for their num­
ber) went away with the better.


In the Curiata comitia, at the first (untill Serv. Tul­
lius his reigne) passed the election of KK. and
other magistrates, judgements in capitall
matters, and lawes. But in latter times, they 
served onely for two lawes: i.  de imperio, or, de
re militarium; in which the Consull or others
(chosen to their magistracie in Centuriatis co­
mitijs) had authoritie of commaund in the ar­
mie: the other, de adoptione; and these lawes
were called Curiatæ.


In the Centuriata comitia,  from the time of Servius
Tullius, passed the elections of Consuls, De­
cemvirs, Tribunes consular, Censours, Pre­
tours, and such greater magistrates: and con­
firmed they were by Curiata. Also, judgement
of capitall matters, and the lawes named
Centuriatæ. In this, there was one Centuria
drawne forth by lot out of all the rest, to give
their voices first, and that was called Præro­
gativa. After which, were called to their suf­
frages, the Centuries of the first and second
Classis, and they were named Primo-vocatæ:
the rest which followed, were called Iure­
vocatæ.


Tributa,  served for the creation of Tribunes, Æ­
diles of the Commons, and other inferiour 
magistrates. Also the laws as touching peace,
or enfranchising allies, judgements penall
and fines, and those ordinances concerning
the good of the Commons, called Plebiscita.


Some have thought amisse, that Curiata and
Tributa comitia, were both one: but Curiata
were more auncient, and of greater state as
beeing Auspicata, and ex authoritate Patrum.
Herein onely they agreed togither and diffe­
red from the Centuriata, that in delivering 
their voices, the Tribes and Curiæ were in­
termingled: wheras the Centuries were sor­
ted and gave their voice according to their
degree, age, and abilitie in the Censors book.


Congius or Chus,  A measure among the Romanes
conteining 6 Sextarij, and every Sextarius
about 20 ounces: so that Congius receiveth
X. librales mensuras; as appeareth by the old
pourtraict thereof in brasse, with these two
characters, X.P. i. ten pound. Whereby in
round reckoning it may go for our wine gal­
lon or somewhat better. And for that great 
persons were wont at first to give dole unto
the common people, of wine or oyle by the
Congij; all other donatives and largesses of 
that kind, were afterwards called Congiatia


Consull,  one of the soveraign yeerely magistrates
in Rome, succeeding in the place of KK. so 
named, a Consulendo, either of asking counsell
of the people and Senat in State matters, and
withall giving his owne advise, and providing
for the good of the weale-publicke: or else,
of judging, for so Consulere signifieth; as when
we say, boni consulere. And Livie saith, that Præ­
tores, Consules, and Iudices, may be taken one for 
another. Two of them were usually chosen e­
verie yeer, as appeareth by the law of the 12
tables: REGIO IMPERIO DUO SUNTO:
IIQUE PREAEUNDO, IUNDICANDO,
CONSULENDO, PRAETORES, IUDI­
CES, CONSULES, APPELLANTOR, &c.


Corona, hath divers significations in Livie. Corona
urbem cingere, i. to invest a citie round about 
with armed men, and to give the assault from
all parts at once. Sub corona vendere servos, i. to 
sel slaves in open market, either having guir­
lands on their heads, as the manner was; or 
environed about with a guard of souldiours,
which also is called Corona militum. Sundrie
guirlands or chaplets there were moreover,
called Corona, wherewith souldiours were re­
warded by their captaines, or they honoured
by their souldiours; (besides those that were
presented to Generals by their friends and
well-willers, or offered to the honour of the
gods:) as Obsidionalis or Graminea, which was a
wreath of a cuich grasse called Gramen, given
to him that delivered an armie from streight
sieges, and was by the whole armie bestowed
up, on that savior. Civica, made of oke branches,
for him that in battell saved the life of his fel­
low citizen. Muralis, resembled the battle­
ments of walls; which he received of his cap­
taine, that first skaled the walls and mounted
over, in the assault of cities. Castrensis, in forme
of a pallaisade or rampier made with pales or 
strong stakes; the honour of him who first en­
tred the enemies campe. Navalis or Rostrata,
pourtraied with the stemmes or beake-heads
of shippes, called Rostra; his reward that first
bourded the enemies ship, and gave the first
meanes of a navall victorie: These were the
principall. For, others there were not so ordi­
narie, as namely, Exploratoria, garnished and
set out with the sunne, moone, and other
stars; bestowed upon them that did speciall
service in espial and discoverie of the enemies
quarters.


Curiæ,  were parishes in Rome, 30 in number, in­
stituted by Romulus. Certaine halls besides, ap­
pointed for assemblies & convocations about
church matters and religion: whereof some
were old, called simply Veteres; others new, na­
med Novæ. As for Curia Hostilia, it was the or­
dinarie auncient place of publicke counsell 
within Rome.




Curio, the priest belonging to ech Curia or parish
aforesaid: and Curio Max. the chiefe superin­
tendent over them all.



D

D. Decius, a forename: for Decius, although it
were the gentile name of a house, grew af­
terwards to bee a forename, as Paulus: and
likewise forenames as the first, came to name 
families, as Posthumius.


D. Decimus, a forename likewise, as of that Brutus
surnamed Albinus, who killed Cæsar.


Decemvirs, were magistrates, officers, or fellow­
ships, ten in number.


Decemvirs legibus scribendis, were ten men chosen
to make laws in Rome: who afterwards usur­
ped the soveraigne authoritie, and tyranni­
zed.


Decemviri sacrorum, were certain priests, who had the 
keeping and perusing of Sibyls bookes of de­
stinies, and thereout gave order for sacrifices 
and expiation of prodigies.


Decemvirs; ten iudges or ministers of iustice, sele­
cted out of the great court or counsell of the
hundred Centumvirs, and they were called,
Decemviri Sclitibus iudicandus: assistant they
were to the Pretour of L. chiefe iustice.


Dictatour, a soveraigne magistrat above all others
in Rome, from whome no appeale was gran­
ted, meere absolute and king-like: but
that his time of rule was limitted within sixe
months ordinarily: so named, either because 
he onely said the word and it was done, or be­
cause hee was Dictus. i. nominated onely by 
one of the Consuls, and not otherwise cho­
sen, usually in some time of great daunger of
the state. Hee was called also Pretour Maxi­
mus: and namely when he was made for the 
ceremonie of striking up or driving a naile:
also Magister Populi, as Cicero 3 de fin. Moreo­
ver he was sometimes appointed to ordeine
and hold solemne feasts, in regard that it had 
rained stones.


Duumvirs, magistrates two in number, of divers
sorts.


Duumvirs capitales, judges to sit upon life and
death: from whome it was lawefull to ap­
peale to the people.


Duumviri sacrorum, out of the Patritians as, ordeined for
dedication of temples, preparing the sacred
beds for the gods, called Lectisternia; and for
the bookes of Sibylla: these afterwards were
increased to five, and so to ten. See DE­
CEMVIRI.


Duumviri Navales, two wardens of the navie,
ports, and sea-coasts.



E

EPulones, were certaine priests whose office
was to prepare and set out the solemne feast
for Iupiter called Epulum, and for other gods.
Of them were three, called Triumviri Epu­
lones, and after seven, Septemviri Epulones.



F

FÆciales were the Heraults: of whom there was
a colledge of 20, the principall of them was
Paterpatratus, as it were their Deane. And ac­
cording to Plutarch, hee ought to bee a man
that had children of his owne, and his father
living: for having the charge of making peace
and alliances, it behoved that he should be a
person accomplished, & as well to looke be­
fore as behind [GREEK], to regard what
is past and what is to come: the one was signi­
fied by his father, the other by his children.


Fasti  signifieth sometimes  festos dies. i. holidaies:
and in that sence Ovid entituleth his bookes
Fasti, wherein he setteth downe the ordinarie
feasts of every month. Otherwhiles they are
put for law-daies, wherin the L. chiefe iustice
or Pretour might use these three words, Do,
Dico, Addico, which betoken to give leave to the
partie for to plead, to minister law and justice
betweene plantife and defendant, and to
pronounce the sentence and award.


Flamines, certaine priests among the Romanes:
they tooke that name of Filamen, a filet of 
wollen yarne, that they used to weare upon
their heads. Three of them there were Patritij,
and those were called Majores, namely Dialis,
for the service of Iupiter, 2. Martialis, of Mars.
3. Quirinalis, of Romulus deified. Of Commo­
ners were twelve more, called Minores, de­
puted to inferior charges, and the meanest of
them all attended the service of Pomona the
goddesse of appuls and such fruits.


Fortune a great goddesse in Rome, entituled with
many and sundrie surnames.


Fors Fortuna, a goddesse of Rome, whose temple
was in Transtyberina region, where shee was
honored and worshipped of idle persons, such
as professed nothing, but lived of their rents
only, and namely for that she came unlooked 
for and undeserved.


Fortis Fortuna  i. strong fortune, so called for her
power, especially in battaile. Publica, when
she favoured the common wealth. Mascula,
good to the male kind, & Muliebris, to the fe­
male. Virilis, kind to folke of ripe yeeres.  Pri­
migenia, gracious to the first begotten or the
eldest. Equestris, either for running to
helpe with great speed, or assistant in horse-
service. Ubsequens, pliable and easily intrea­
ted to accomplish all their vowes and de­
sires. Parva, for advancing meane and ob­
scure persons to wealth and worship. Seia,
for the kind and seasonable ripening of corn
and fruit. Prospera, which was alwaies pre­
sent and vouchsafed her helping hand, Ma­
la, when contrariwise shee was backeward



and evermore crossed their designes. Viscata,
for that many a one hath beene by her en­
ticements snared and entangled. Redux,
[GREEK], Bene Sperans, Respiciens, Propria, Virgo, Cal­
va, Convertens, gracis [GREEK], quasi æstuans, cæ­
ca, Vitrea, &c. See  Alexander ab Alexandr. Mar­
lian.


Forum Romanum or Latium, The great common 
place at Rome, wherein causes were plea­
ded, and audience given to publicke Orati­
ons. Under the name of Forum were other
places also and courts, as also markets, distin­
guished by their proper adjuncts, as Forum
Boarium, Olitorium, &c.


Furca,  Whereof slaves were called Furciferi, was
a kind of forke or gibbet which slaves car­
ried upon their shoulders when they were
scourged by their maisters, either about the
Forum or Cirque: whereupon afterwards
they were crucified and executed: howbe­
it, some thinke they bare it onely for a pub­
licke shame.



G

GAbinus cinctus was a kind of habite and wea­
ring of a gowne after the Gabines fashi­
on, when it was cast over the shoulder
so backeward, that it seemed to compasse
and gird round the whole bodie. In that man­
ner the Consull clad, used solemnely to set
open the dores of Ianus temple, before hee
went to the warres.


Genius, Genij  were supposed to bee [GREEK] and
pararij, brokers (as it were) between men and
the gods, or rather interpreters and Salutige­
ruli, messengers betweene, of a middle na­
ture betwixt the one and the other, Cœlius
Rhodigin, lib.2.cap.3. But according to Empedo­
cles, each one was thought to have his angell
from the very day of nativitie, unto whome
they used to sacrifice upon their birth day, as
to their protector. Also every place had their 
peculiar Genij and then were they called
Lares, as Rurales, and  Permarini in Livie.


Galli, Priests of Cybele that guelded themselves
in a frantike furie, and used in their service to
her, for to strike and beat upon tabers and 
drummes.



H

Hasta, Besides the ordinarie signification, sig­
nifieth the Centumvirall or Decemvirall
jurisdiction in supplie or assistance of the
Prætorian, for that they set up a speare to bee
seene at the place of judgement. Also it be­
tokeneth port-sale, when they sold either
goods or slaves to him that would bid most
at such a speare. Moreover, the putting forth
of the cities works, called *Vltro tributa, to cer­
tain Publicanes or undertakers by the great,
at a price, and it was called Subhastatio.

*[GREEK]



I

IAnus is a god in Rome, sometime represented
Bifrons with two faces, signifying the time
passed, and that to come: otherwhiles Quadri­
frons, and betokeneth the foure times of the
yeere; having in his right hand a character re­
sembling three hundred, in the left another,
shewing threescore and five, according to the 
daies of the yeere. But in the plurall number
Iani, betoken certaine hals or great foursquare
buildings, with foure prospects and crosse
thorow fares, whereof were divers in Rome.


Ides, Eight daies in every moneth; of an old 
word Iduo, to devide: for that they common­
ly fall about the middest of the month, name­
ly upon the thirteenth or fifteenth daies, ac­
cording to Horace, Idus tibi sunt agendæ, qui dies
mensem Veneris marinæ, findit Aprilem.


Interdicted of water and fire, were they who for
some crime were banished. Which judge­
ment, although it was not by expresse sen­
tence pronounced, yet by giving order, that
no man should receive such an one into his
house, but denie him fire and water (the two
necessarie elements of life) he was condem­
ned (as it were) to a civile death: and this was
called Legitimum exilium. But voluntarie exile
was, when a man to avoid the paiment of a
greevous fine, or imprisonment, went out of
the way of his owne accord, and left his na­
tive countrey.


Iugerum, which commonly I translate Acre, see­
meth among the Romanes, to bee in measu­
ring of land the Basis, ground, and foundati­
on of all other measures in that kind; like as,
the Asse or Assis, of weights: of which it bor­
roweth the tearmes in sub-division and mul­
tiplication, whereof the least is Semiscrupu­
lum. Now is the Scrupulum in land measure fif­
teene foot square, according to which, it may 
soone bee gathered, how much Iugerum con­
taineth, considering it hath that name, a duo­
bius actibus junctis: by which reckoning it 
beareth 28800 foot of ground within the
square. But for that, others thinke that Iuge­
rum is as much as uno juge houm uno die exarars po­
test i. one daies worke of a yoke or teeme of
oxen: for want of another fitter word (except
I would call it a journell) I have expressed it
by our familiar tearme of an acre, which is not
much under or over a daies worke in plow­
ing of oxen here in England.


Interregnum or Interregencie, is properly the time
betweene the former king deceased, and the 
creation of a new: and hee that ruled in the
meane space was called Interrex. Which
tearms continued afterwards in the free state



when there were no kings, in the case of va­
cancie of head magistrates.


II-S. This Character compounded of two capi­
tall I I, and the letter S. thus coupled toge­
ther, is Sestertius, that is to say, a silver
coine among the Romanes, consisting of two
Asses and an halfe, and thereupon it hath
the name Sestertius, as a man would say,
Semis tercius, i. two, and halfe the third: and
therefore you see the numerall note of two,
and S. for semis, which is halfe. It is the fourth
part of the Romane Denarius, and in value
among us is three halfe pence farthing cue. But
Sestertium in the neuter gender, betokeneth
as much as mille Sestertios, i. a thousand Se­
sterces, so that decem Sestertia signifieth tenne
thousand Sestertij, and decem Sestertium is
as much: for you must in this manner of
speech understand millia for the regimen of
the Genitive case. But if you adde unto
Sestertium the numerall adverbe, it sheweth
the same Sestertium in the neutre above said,
multiplied a hundred times so much as the
said numerall beareth. For example, decies
Sestertium, is decem Sestertium, a hundred times
told, and as much to say as decies centena mil­
lia Sestertium, which is a million of Sester­
ces in the primitive signification: whereby a
man may soone reckon how much is millies
Sestertium and the rest, either under or over
decies. The same is to bee said of Numus and
Numum, for it is the same that Sestertius and
Sestertium. Moreover, decies, millies, and such
like adverbes, whether you put Numum or 
Sestertium thereto, or no, is all one: so that
by this forme of speaking, ejus bona fuerunt
vicies, is meant thus, his goods amounted 
unto two millions of Sesterce peeces. Thus
much for Livie and other Historians and wri­
ters in prose: for I am not ignorant that 
Poets for the verse sake confound these two
words many times, and put Sestertij for Se­
stertia, as Georgius Agricola hath well obser­
ved.


Iupiter Indiges, Indigetes were these called, aut
quia nullius rei indigeant, because they need
nothing, or quasi in deis agentes, i. conversing
among the gods, having beene sometimes
men; or by reason that they might not in­
digetari, i. bee named; or rather for that they
were easie to bee entreated; and last of all,
quasi in loco degentes, & ideo propitij, i. the tutelar
gods and protectours of this or that place:
which I rather encline unto.


Institium was the stay of civile jurisdiction and
pleas for the time, upon some suddain trou­
bles, as Tumultus Gallicus,&c. Which vaca­
tion, if wee will bee somewhat bold, may
bee called not unfitly a Lawsteed, as Solstiti­
um the Sunne-steed.



K

K. Kaius. The forename of many Ro­
manes.



L

L.  Lucius.  The forename of manie Ro­
manes.


Latinæ, sc. feriæ,  Certaine holy daies  Conceptivæ, i.
appointed by the Priest or magistrate, as oc­
casion required, and not set feasts. The solem­
nitie was published and held by the Romane
Consuls newly created, upon the mount Al­
banus to Iupiter Latialis: and a sacrifice was
there offered which they call Latar, for the
health of the Latine people: at which, the ma­
ner was to give a dole of flesh called Visceratio
to the Latine States.


Lectisterne, is in some sort declared in the fift and
two and twentie bookes of T. Livius, and is 
as much to say, as the solemne ceremonie of 
trimming and setting out a bed, not for re­
pose but repast, according to the ancient ma­
ner: wherein they laid the images of their
gods, reared upon boulsters and pillows: the
principall whereof was that in the honour of
Iupiter at the Epulum Iovis, whereupon Iupiter
was laid, Iuno and Minerva sitting of either side
by him.


Lectus is usually to be understood in Livie for the
bed whereupon they laid themselves at ease
when they tooke their refection, and Tricli­
nium is taken for Conclave, i. the parlour where
they were woont to sup, because the usuall
manner was to set three such beds or pallets
together: (wherof the roume had the name)
and a table raised somewhat higher from the
floore, & placed so, as it served all three pal­
lets, and was open at one side for the servi­
tours to come unto it, and either set meat
thereupon, or to minister what was called for.
Vpon each of these beds there sate or leaned
ordinarily three persons: so as nine was the 
ful number of guests at the bourd, according to
the rule, NO FEWER THAN THE GRA­
CES, NOR MORE THAN THE MUSES. For 
Horace in this verse, Sæpe tribus lectis videas cœnare
quaternos, seemeth to glaunce at the niggar­
dise of him that would rather want meat
than guests, and so set twelve at the table
which was but for nine, wherby also they were
pent up together too streight.


Legati, are usually taken for Embassadours sent
from one prince or State to another. Also for
Lieutenants in an armie, having the charge of
a legion under the Generall, and in his ab­
sence, the charge and command of all. Who
likewise were sent as Nuntioes or messengers
of credence from the Generals in the field, to
make true report unto the Senat, of the suc­



cesse of their affaires. Moreover, they are of­
tentimes put for deputed-delegates, or com­
missioners assistant to the Cos. or L. Generall,
in matters of state; having their principall di­
rections from the Senat, but commission to
deale in the particulars after their owne dis­
cretion: much like to those that bee called
Legati a latere.


Libitina, the goddesse of funerals; and after a
sort, the superintendent over sepultures; sup­
posed to be Venus Epitymbia. In whose temple
were all things to be sold necessarie for the
interring and burial of the dead. Wherupon
they also who were emploied to carrie forth
and burie corpses, were called Libitinarij as
well as Vespillones; in Greeke [GREEK] and
[GREEK]. It is put for death in Horace when he
saith, Non omnis moriar, magnaque pars mei, Vitabit
Libitinam: and in Livie, as well for the ministers
as furniture to sepultures belonging. the chap­
pell to this goddesse stood without the cittie,
and a gate there was Libitinensis, at which
they carried foorth their dead. For at Rome
they might not commonly burie or burn a dead
corps within the citie, unlesse it were upon a 
special priviledge: & the law of 12 tables pro­
vided therefore in these expresse words, IN
URBE NON SEPELITO NEVE URITO:
but in some barren part of their land, each
man bestowed the ashes or bodies of their
dead. The practice whereof is evident by ma­
ny examples in histories; and at this day are
monuments standing of their tombes reared
neere the great causey Appia, and elsewhere
about Rome. The consideration hereof; with
some other circumstances of a place in the 3
booke of Livie, gave me occasion haply to
translate amisse. There happened to bee a
great mortalitie in Rome and the territorie
about it, not onely of men but of cattle also;
at what time as the Volscians and Æquians
were encamped within three miles of Rome,
with a purpose to give the assault to the citie,
but they were suddainly stricken with a feare
that they durst not approach neere, tectaque
procul visa atque imminentes tumuli avertere mentem
eorum, &c. where I have englished imminentes
tumuli, tombes and graves neere at hand, in
opposition of tecta urbis [Romanæ] procul visa: and
the rather, because it presently followeth, In
deserto agro, inter tabem perorum atque hominum:
where tumuli, may well be put for tombes and
monuments; and [imminentes] neere at hand:
as Livie and others doe take those words. But
if any man would have it meant rather of the 
7 hils of Rome commaunding and overloo­
king those houses aforesaid, I will not be a­
gainst it, but rather my [GREEK] shall go
with him: and pardon me I hope he will, if ei­
ther there or elsewhere I have seemed to nod
and take a little nap, Namque opere in longo fas
est obrepere somnum: seeing that I have taken
my selfe in the manner, and not slept untill 
my neighbour awaked me.


Lictours, in Livie, are ministers or sergeants atten­
ding upon the magistrates of Rome; name­
ly, Dictatours, Consuls, Pretours: for those
only were called somtime magistrates ­
 as superiour to the rest: so called (as Fe­
stus thinketh) quod fasces virgarum ligatos ferant,
for that they carried rods tied up in bundels;
which rods were of birch, willow, hazell, or
the Carpine tree, [a kind of Plane or Maple]
and within them stuck an axe, all to signifie
whipping & death. These officers made way
before those magistrates, and were ministers
also of the execution.


Lituus, was the Augurs staffe, much like a bishops
croisier, crooked at the end.



M

MAgister Equitum, Master or Generall of the
horsemen. This was an office or dignitie
among the Romanes, incorporate as it were
in the Dictatour alone, who ever had the ab­
solute naming and chusing of him: and ordi­
narily he was subject to him, howsoever Minu­
tius was by strong hand and a violent course
of the people, made equall to Q. Fabius his Di­
ctatour. Commaunder hee was under him of
the Cavallerie: also his Lieutenant-generall
and coadjutour with him in all execution.
The same that Tribunus celerum in the time of
the KK.


M.  Marcus.
M'. with the note of A­
postrophus Manius.
The forenames of cer­
taine Romanes.


Manipulus, in an armie, was at the first a pettie
companie of ten soldiors following one jave­
lin, having a wispe of hearbs or hay fastened 
to the upper end, as a man would say, an
handfull of men: used after, for a small band
of squadron of souldiours: and Manipulares
were they tearmed, who served in one such
Manipulus.


Matuta,  otherwise called Leucothea or Ino, the 
daughter of Cadmus. Into her temple, at the
time of her solemne feast, might no maid ser­
vant enter: and if any did, they were sure to
be beaten forth by the dames or wives there
assembled; in remembrance of one Antigera,
the chamber-maid of Ino, with whome her
husband Athamas, as shee thought, was more
familiar that she liked well of.


Megalesia, were plaies or games at Rome, not (as
the letter seemeth to import) Magni, which
were Romani, but in the honour of Cybele the
goddesse, named also Idæa, Magna mater, i. the
great mother of the gods. 


Mulcta decem millium æris gravis, &c. was no doubt,
a fine of brasen money set upon a mans head,
after the weight of so much: every As weigh­
ing a lib. of 12 ounces. For before that silver



was cast and stamped for coine, Æs grave plau­
stris ad ærarium convehebant (as Livie saith) when
they paid tribute or subsidy to the citie cham­
ber, as they were assessed.


Mundus Muliebris, the Elegancie of women. Nam
quem [GREEK] Græci nomine ornamenti appellaverunt,
cum nos perfecta absolut aq; elegantia mundum. i. the
world. Plin. first booke fourth chapter.


Murcea or Murtia, one of the names attributed to 
Venus, quia præter modum, non moveret sed faceret
hominem murcidum. i. nimis desidiosum, & inactuo­
sum: contrarie to that other goddesse Ageno­
ria, quæ ad agendum excitaret. And hereupon it is
that Murtea is put for the goddessse of sloath
and lithernesse.



N

NOvæ tabulæ,  was an easment proposed in fa­
vour of debters at rome, whereby the
old debt-bookes and obligations were can­
celled, or the Nomina dashed out. Among the
Athenians this practise was called Sisacthia. i. an
easing of burden or Chreocopia, a cutting off
or striking out of debts.


N. Numerius, a forename to some houses of 
Rome.


Nundinæ, were the market daies appointed eve­
ry ninth day at Rome, for the paisants of the
countrie to repaire unto the cittie, to sell
commodities or to buy their necessities. And
hereupon Trinundinum, is the space of 27. daies,
comprehending three market daies.


Nones, were daies in the month so called, because
they began the ninth day ever before the 
Ides: honoured by the Romanes both for the
birth-day of king Servius, and also for the cha­
sing out of the KK. for otherwise it was not   
festivall (as Ovid saith) Nonarum tutela Deo caret.



O

OVales or Ova,  were egges set upon the goles
in the solemnitie of the hors-running, at
the plaies Circenses, to reckon or skore up (as
it seemeth by Livie) the races, which were
performed with 24 courses, to represent foure
and twentie houres of the day. Neither was it
for nought, that choise was made of egges, ra­
ther than other things: for as egs are laid by
birds (the swiftest of al other living creatures)
so they also were to contend and strive to bee
most active, &c. or else because Castor and Pol­
lux (those renowmed horsemen) came of an 
egge, as Poets fable.



P

P.  Publius, a forname to some Romane fami­
lies.


Panætolium or Panætolaik, was a solemne diet or
counsell, wherein all the states of Ætolia as­
sembled to consult of publicke affaires.


Patres, were at Rome an hundred Senators or no­
blemen, counsailors of state; chosen in this
maner: three out of every one of the 30 Curio;
& those make 90; three more out of ech tribe,
(which then were but three) & one by Romu­
lus himselfe: and as this number made the bo­
die of the Nobilitie or Senate at the first; so,
out of every Curia, he chose ten of the most
personable and active young men, to the num­
ber of 300, (which he called Celeres) to guard
his person. From whence came the order of 
the knights or gentlemen of Rome; a mean
degree betweene the two estates of Nobles
and Commons, as it were the seminarie, to re­
plenish the Senate, when the places were void,
and to augment the number of them. These
were called Patres Conscripti, Ascripti, and Selecti.
And like as the former were named Patres Ma­
jorum gentium; so the latter sort, Minorum genti­
um; alluding to the severall raunges of the 
gods, who were some of them, Majorum genti­
um, such as ever were counted in heaven; termed
also Selecti: others, Minorum gentium, who had bin
men, and were after cannonized gods. The
offspring and progenie of the Patres, were Pa­
tritij, in opposition evermore of Plebei, i. Com­
moners.


Porticus, were either the porches and other state­
ly buildings before temples, as belonging un­
to them: or else goodly galleries & walking
places apart by themselves; under which men
retired in the raine, and where they used to
walke to coole themselves in summer.


Præda, bootie, pillage, or saccage in the own kind,
as it was gotten from the enemie, to wit,
slaves, prisoners, beasts, goods, armour, &c.
Manubiæ, the mony raised of such pillage or 
prey, sold.


Prætour,  one of the superior magistrats of Rome.
In the citie he ruled as L. chiefe justice: in the
province he commanded as L. governour and
deputie; and was General in the field as well
as the Consull. At first, the name of Consull,
Pretour, and Iudges, was all one.


Prærogativæ centuriæ,  were those centuries in Comi­
tijs Centuriatis, which by lot had the first place
in giving their voices: the rest that followed,
were called Primo-vocatæ & Iure-vocatæ, & de­
livered their suffrages in their course.


Prætexta toga, a robe embrodered of purple, com­
mon to men and women, Ingenuitatis insigne, &
ornamentum. Cicero in Verrem. 3. Whereby it
appeareth, that it was allowed but to certain
persons; and as P. Manutius writeth, to 6 sorts.
1. The children of the Patritij, until 17 yeres age.
2. All Senators upon festival daies. 3. Wardens
at the games or plaies called Compitalitij. 4. Al
magistrates, as well in the citie, as in the co­
lonies or bourrough townes incorporate, cal­
led Municipia, and Maisters of Confraternites.
5. All priests, and among them, the Augurs.
6. They that triumph. And this differed from the



rest, being wrought with gold and damask worke.

It seemeth that these differed likewise one from 
the other, in the manner of the guarding; laid
broader and narrower: as also in the rich or
deep colour, wherupon they were called Di­
baptra: or that some of these robes were al one
purple, other but parcell. And whereas the
gentlemen of Rome are said Purpuram induere,
it is to be understood either of angusti-clavus,
or else of some lighter colour, as the violet,
and not of that rich red purple, which is skar­
let. For that robe which was done upon our
Saviour Christ,  * one of the Evangelistes
called [GREEK] and other two, &bullet; [GREEK] 

 * Math. 27.
 &bullet;  Marc. 15. John 19.


Pullarius,  the Chickmaister or pullitier; one that
had the charge and overseeing of the sacred
chickens, kept in a pen or coupe for auspicia:
who by observing their gesture or feeding
betimes every morning, related what was 
foretokned thereby good or bad. See more
in AUSPICIA.


Pro-consull.
Pro-pretour.
Pro-questor.
 Some have thought,
that they should bee
writteen otherwise thus,
Pro consule.
Pro pretore.
Pro questore.
but they are in mine opinion out of the way:
for in deed Pro-consull is he, who having bin
Consull, went out of his magistracie at the
yeeres end, and nathlesse was sent foorth in­
to his province againe with full Consular au­
thoritie: whereas Proconsule (to speake pre­
cisely) is the Viz-consull, namely one that ha­
ving never bene Consull created, but some
private person, yet upon an urgent occa­
sion, might for the while supplie the place of
the Consull. The same is to be said of the rest.
And hereof you may read in the Oration of
Cicero, pro lege Manilia. Howbeit in my translati­
on of Livie, I have sometime used Viz-pre­
tour and Viz-consull, for Pro-pretour and 
Pro-consull: because that maner of composi­
tion frameth wel with our tearmes in English.
Moreover wee read once in Livie of a Pro-di­
ctatour, in the proportionable signification
to the other.



Q

QVadrigati, were the Denarij Romani, having the
stampe of a chariot drawn with foure hor­
ses, called Quadriga.


Quadrans, a peece of base brasse coine or poise at
Rome, the fourth part of As, which is a cue
and a c.


Quæstors, were inferior officers in Rome, as trea­
surers to receive and lay out the citie-mo­
nie, whereof there were Vrbani, Provincia­
les, and Castrenses.


Quæstorium, a plot or quarter in the Romane
campe, where the treasurer lodged and other
officers of the campe.


Q. Quintus, the forename of sundrie Romanes.


Quindecemviri, the same that Duumviri first, and
Decemviri sacris faciundis. Their number was fif­
teene: and albeit they were encreased by
Sylla Dictator to sixtie, yet they reteined still
the name of Quindecemviri.


Quintana was a gate in the Romane campe, at
which, provision was brought in to serve the
market. Read the annotation in the end of 
English TACITUS.


Quinqueviri Mensarij  were certeine men, five in
number, appointed upon occasion to discharge
the debts of the commons, so called of Mensa,
a table set out in publicke place; upon which
they either counted or weighed their mo­
ney. 


Quinqueviri muris resiciendis, were five officers at
Rome chosen extraordinarily for repairing of 
the wals and turrets of the cittie.


Quinquatrus or Quinquatria, were certeine feasts
and games at Rome in the honor of Minerva.
They continued five daies, and began the fift
day after the Ides of march. i. the twentieth
of March: and these were called Quinquatrus
Majores. For others named Minores, fell about
the Ides of Iune, & that was the minstrels ho­
liday, as appeareth in the ninth of Livie. 


Quintilis, the month of Iuly, before Iulius Cæsars
time.


Quirinalia, was a festivall day to Quirinus, appoin­
ted for them to sacrifice, who had neglected or
missed to doe divine service in their parish
at the feast Fornacalia: and it was called
the fooles holiday; for that they were igno­
rant of the time of the former feast, or knew
not their owne Curia.


Quirites, the name appropriate to the cittizens
of Rome: and so they loved to bee called
within the cittie: but in the campe, if the Ge­
nerall gave them that tearme, it was taken
for a great disgrace unto souldiours and men
of armes.



R

ROrarij, were light armed footmen, resembling
our forlorne hope: so called a rore i. Deaw.
For like as there falleth commonly a drisling 
deaw before a good shoure of raine: so these
Roraijskirmished loosely, before the legiona­
rie souldioors came to the battaile. 


Rostra, were three-tined pikes of brasse, set in
the nose or beak-head of war-ships to of­
fend the enimie, as appereth by Virgil, Rostrisq; 
tridentibus: and thereupon by Synecdoche, the 
stemmes of ships were so called. And for that 
the publicke pulpit for orations at Rome, was
reared and adorned with such, it also was cal­
led Rostra.


Rudera,[Cum milites religione tacti rudera jacerent.] To 
make sense of this place, I have translated
Rudera, peeces of brasse money: for that I can­
not see what should be ment by rubbish stone
in that place, which was not demolished by



Anniball, for any thing that I can find; but on­
ly robbed of the silver and gold within the
chappel of Feronia: in stead wherof were found
æris acervi: by reason that the soldiors, who had
some sence of religion and touch of consci­
ence (whereof their leader Anniball had never
any) cast from them [Rudera.] Now, probable it
is that Rudera, is corruptly put for æra, the
latter end of the word: or if we admit Rudera:
it is well knowne that Rudus as well as æs sig­
nified brasse and brasen money, as appeareth
by Rudusculum the diminutive: for as of æs came
Æsculum, so of Rudus (no doubt) Rudusculum: and
like as of Æculum, Æsculanus, a god of the Pai­
nims, father of Argentinus (because copper and
brasse money was before silver coine:) so, of
Rudusculum, the gate Rudusculana in Rome, set
out with brasse. Now that Rudusculum is put for
a small peece of brasse coine, it is proved by 
the forme of words in buying and selling, and
in manumission (Rudusculo libram ferito) which is
all one with ære Libram percute or fer. By which
I collect, that Rudera in this place may stand for
æra, i. peeces of coin. For there went afore, æris
acervi, which Horace putteth for heaps of brasse
money, and not for brasen images. And well
it may be, that the souldiours upon some de­
votion, threw into the church their oblations
of such money as they had in their belts or
bandoliers. This conjecture & construction of
mine may serve, untill somewhat here may be
made of rubbish stone, or better exposition
come in place. The word (I am sure) will bear
it, and the context in al sence and congruitie,
doth require it.



S

SAlutere Deos ] after a devout & reverent maner
they bowed unto the Idols or gods of the 
heathen as they passed by, & withall, touched
their hands: which Lucretius sheweth in these
verses,
-- Tum portas propter, aliena
Signa manus dextras ostendunt attenuari
Sæpe salutantum, tactu præterque meantum.


Sceleratus Vicus, a street in Rome named before­
time Cyprius, which in the Sabine language
signifieth [good:] but upon occasion of a wic­
ked act committed therin, it was by the con­
trarie, called Sceleratus


Secession, was a generall insurrection and revolt of 
the commons in Rome, wherein they left the
cittie, untill such time as they had the autho­
ritie of their Tribuns strengthened & confir­
med: yea and certaine lawes enacted and
established by a solemne oth, with a curse de­
nounced to all them that went about to abro­
gate or abolish the same: which thereupon
were called Sacratæ leges. 


Sex. Sextus.
Serg. Sergius.
Serv. Servius.
All, forenames to Ro­
mans


Sextilis, the month of August, so called by the 
Romanes before Augustus Cæsar his daies, for
that it was the sixt in number: as Quintilis the 
fift, beginning at March.


Suburra. 97a.  In Iuventutem grass antem in Suburra. It 
might well be that yonkers there made a fray
or committed some roiot and felonie: for it
was a street most of all others frequented; and
besides, in it kept strumpets and courtisanes,
like enough to give occasion of much quar­
rell and misrule among youth, as appeareth
by Iuvenal and Martial in this Distichon.
Famæ non nimium bonæ, puellæ,
Quales in media sedent Suburra.


Suffrages, were the voices of the people given by
Centuries, Curiæ, or tribes, which in Rome went
affirmatively under this forme, Uti rogas, i. be it
according to your bill: and negatively thus,
Antiquo, i. I denie or reject it.


Sordidati, were they that chaunged their weed in
reatu i. (whiles either themselves or their friends
were in trouble and daunger of judgement)
that is to say, put off white, which was the or­
dinarie colour, and did on blacke: but if they 
chaunged their apparrell upon sorrow and
mourning for the losse of friends or any pub­
licke calamitie, they were called rather Pulla­
ti and Atrati.


Sella Curulis, a seat or chaire of estate. One of the
regall ornaments at Rome, belonging to the
kings first: afterwards, during the free state,
used by Dictators, Consuls, Pro-consuls, Pre­
tours, and Propretours, Censours and Ædiles,
namely those called Curules, for distinction
from those that were Plebeij: and last of all,
by the emperours in the time of the monar­
chie. This chaire was made of Ivorie: on
which the abovesaid magistrates usually sat,
not onely in the Senat-house when they con­
sulted or gave audience, or when they be­
held the publicke games and plaies, and rode
either in triumph, or otherwise in the strets,
mounted upon their Chariotes: but also
at home within their private houses, and
wheresoever else it pleased them. And this
badge or ensigne of honor they had both in
time of their magistracie, & afterwards. And
as such Senatours were called Curules (for
the rest, who had not atteined to those digni­
ties, they named Pedanei, as some thinke, for
that they went on foot to the Senat or places
before mentioned) so those magistrats likewise
abovesaid, were entituled by the name of Cu­
rule. And Curulis was that chair called either of 
Currus a chariot, for that they sate thereupon
within their chariots; or, quasi Curva, because it
was made crooked or curb-wise, like unto 
our folding chaires.
 

Senatour, A Counsailour of state. A name it was of 
honour, and not of age, as the word implieth:
for to that place men attaineth often times ve­
ry young. Senat was the bodie of that degree



and common Counsell, opposite unto Plebs
at Rome, namely when it was biceps, and
the whole people comprehended under Sena­
torius ordo and Plebeius.


Sextans, a small brasen peece of money at Rome,
which being the sixt part of As, commeth to a 
cue or halfe a farthing.


Sextarius was the Basis of measures in Rome, as 
As of weights: and looke how As was divided 
into twelve ownces, so Sextarius into twelve
cyathi, and in measures Sextans was the sixth
part of Sextarius, which weighed twentie oun­
ces, much about a wine pint and a halfe a­
mong us.   


Of Sibyls bookes so often mentioned in Livie,
which being three in number, were bought of 
Sibylla by king Tarquin the proud, at the price
of nine, after she had burned sixe of them be­
fore his face: which bookes were kept dili­
gently in the Capitoll: and wherout the De­
cemvirs by their learning made report of the 
will and pleasure of the gods, See A. Gellius.
I. booke 19 chapter.


Signum, was the generall name of all the ensigns
in the field. But Aquila more particularly was
the maine standerd to a whole legion: so cal­
led, for that upon the top of a speare was rea­
red and fastned an Eagle in silver all full re­
leife, and the same sometime was gylded stan­
ding upon a base or footstall of the same met­
tall.  The other ensignes, as well of cohorts,
which were bands of five hundred men usu­
ally, as of centuries, i. companies of hundreds,
named more especially Vexilla, & were gene­
rally called Signa, had the portaiture of Mino­
taures, wolves, bores, horses, dragons, with
sundrie other devises according to the fancie
of the Colonels or captaines, containing also
the name of the cohort or Centurie, and the 
legion to which they belonged.



T

TAlentum Atticum, As well ponderale, which 
was weighed, as numerale or numarium,
which was counted in mony, was of two sorts:
The lesse, of sixtie pound Atticke, and every 
one of them consisted of a hundred Dracmæ; 
or Denarij Romani. If Mina then, bee three
pound tenne shillings sixe pence, sterling,
the lesse talent Atticke amounteth to 187 
pound two shillings of our English monie.
The greater, or simply the great, talent, in Li­
vie, is fourescore, Mina, and hath proportionem 
[GREEK] or Sesquitertiam, ad minus, which com­
meth to two hundred and fiftie pound ster­
ling. Now was the Euboicke talent (where of
Livie also speaketh) halfe of Talentum majus
Atticum.


T. Titus. A forename to many houses of the 
Romanes.


Testudo, A targuet-fence, which the Legionarie
Rom. soldiors, made either in the open field
when they were overcharged with their ene­
mies, or in approching the walls of townes to 
give assault. In the former, after they had en­
closed within them their baggage and light
armed men, they rested themselves upon their
knees, with their targuets close couched to­
gether over their heads, to avoid the ene­
mies shot: and after they had well breathed
they would rise up all at once againe, fresh
and lustie to a new skirmish. In the latter,
they had the like targuet-roufe, but pent­
house wise, one overlapped the other after
the manner of tiles, and so they skaled walls
without offence from above.


Templum hath in Livie three significations, 1. a sa­
cred house or chappell dedicated to some god
or goddesse for divine service, as the temple
of Iupiter in the Capitoll, &c. 2. An open
place, from whence a man might see al about
him, as having nothing to hinder his prospect,
and which likewise might bee seene from all
parts, whereof commeth the verbe Contem­
plari, i. to behold. And such did the Augures
chuse for to take their signes of bird-flight.
3. Any place hallowed, although not for di­
vine service, yet for debating of serious hu­
mane affaires, as their Curiæ and Counsell-
chambers, yea, and the Rostra at Rome.


Thalassio, An Auspicate or luckie word used at
Bridales or weddings in Rome, like to this
among the Greekes. [GREEK] Hymen 
ó Hymenae, hymen &. Catull.


 Thensæ, wherof Livie writeth in the fifth & ninth 
books, were certain pettie chariots or dreyes
of silver or yvorie, carrying the images and 
ornaments of their gods in great pompe up­
on certaine high daies: and they who led the
horses drawing the same, wore their richest
apparrell, holding in their hands and trai­
ning the false reines stretched out at length
in solemne wise, whereupon Festus thinketh
they tooke the name Thensæ quasi Tensæ.


Trabea was a roiall robe or mantle of estate, all
of deepe purple or skarlet onely at the first:
but afterwards, embrodered richly with gold.
Livie seemeth to confound it with Vestis pur­
purea, Pieta, Palmata, and Triumphalis. And in 
truth, all one they were in the principall sub­
stance and matter thereof, namely, purple or 
scarlet; but different in the setting out, being
embrodered with gold, more or lesse, distin­
guished also with white among (for that was a
roiall colour) as may appeare by the diademe,
which was a white wreath, or band done about
the head of kings, or in the manner of the 
worke: for either it was palmata, so called a lu­
titudine clavorum, i. to the bredth of ones
hand, as Festus thinketh: or braunched and
damasked with floure-worke, like to the date
tree: or else picta, i. of tyssew or embroderie.




Tribunes of the Commons were certaine magi­
strates, as Provosts or protectors of the Com­
mons, to restraine & keepe downe the exces­
sive power of the nobilitie; chosen and con­
firmed by the generall oath of the people,
whereby they were Sacrosancti, i. sacred or in­
violable, and no violence might be done to
their person. They had  negative voice and
power of inhibition, called Intercessio, whereby
they might crosse & stop the proceedings of
the Senate, or any magistrate, save only the
Dictatour: even the very Consuls, whome in
some case they might commaund.


Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie or Con­
sularie, governed the state of Rome many 
yeeres in steed of Consuls.


Tribunes militarie in the armie, were Colonels
over a thousand.


Tribuni ærarij, were the keepers of the cittie
chamber or common Treasure, as it were, the
maisters of the exchequer.


Tribes in Rome,  first three, containing each of
them tenne Curiæ: but afterwards they were
five and thirtie, containing all the naturall
citizens of Rome.


Tribu moveri, was a kind of ignominie and dis­
grace, when a man was displaced by the Cen­
sors out of his owne tribe into another more
base than it, and namely e rustica in urbanam; of 
which urbanæ there were foure, Suburrana,
Esquilina, Palatina, and Collina: into which 
king Servius distributed those that were ma­
numised, and Rullus afterwards, forensem tur­
bam.


Triumviri capitales, Three Iudges delegate to sit
upon life & death, touching fellonious crimes.
They were called also Quæstores parricidij, &c.


Triumviri Monetales, Three officers for the mint
of money, either brasse, silver, or gold. They
are represented in old coines, by these five
letters stamped thereupon, Æ. A. A. F. F. for 
ære, auro, argento, flando, feriundo: that is to say, for
the melting, coining, and stamping of brasse,
silver, and gold. They were afterwards foure
in number, and named Quatuorviri.


Triumviri or Tresviri nocturni, Three overseers of
the night-watch, for fire, &c.


Triumviri Mensarij, Three Commissaries deputed
for the time, and as occasion required, in steed
of bankers or treasurers to receive a stock of 
mony, & to lay the same out upon extraordi­
nary charges, as in the time of the second Pu­
nicke war, when the citie chamber was with­
out mony. Which stocke was put into their
hands out of private mens purses, by way of a
voluntarie benevolence and contribution, as
appeareth in the sixe and twentieth booke of
Livie.


Triumviri [Extraordinarij] Three likewise to levie
souldiours and able men for to beare armes
(without the usual order of musters) through­
out Italie, upon some speciall occasion.


Triumviri colonijs deducendis, three commissioners
who had authoritie to enroll new inhabitants
into any colonie: also to set out and divide
the cittie lands gotten by conquest, at their
discretion among them.


Triumvirs also there were three, Wardens to
oversee the sacrifices, the oblations & offrings
to the gods.


Taurilia, certaine feastivall games instituted (as
Festus saith) by king Tarquin the proud, for to
pacifie the infernall gods; upon occasion of a
contagious maladie that hapned to women
great with child, endangering both them and
those they went with: which arose upon the
corrupt flesh sold abroad in the market of
oxen and buls, killed for sacrifice  wherupon
the mony emploied about those solemnities,
was called Tauricum æs.


Solitaurilia or Suovetaurilia, was a solemne sacri­
fice at the lustration, review, or purging of
the cittie every fifth yeere; & this was called
Lustrum conditum. It was performed by killling
a bull, a ram, and a bore. At which solemnitie
all that were able to beare armes, assembled in
order of battaile. 


Triumph, a solemnitie in honor of them who have
vanquished their enemies: so called, for that
their souldiors resounded, Io triumphe; (as  Varro
thinketh) or of [GREEK] for [GREEK] one of Bac­
chus names, the first inventer thereof: or of 
[GREEK], three voices: because it was graun­
ted by the suffrages of souldiours, Senatours,
and common people: as it may appeare in Li­
vie, by the triumph of L Paulus Æmilius, who 
had like to have bene disappointed therof, by
his owne souldiours.



V

Venus Erycina, Ovid. 4 Fast. à siculo nomina colle te­
net: shee was so called of a promontorie in
Sicilie, called Eryx, where there was a goodly
temple built in the honour of Venus; and after­
wards at Rome also in memoriall thereof.


Versus Fescennini, certaine licentious and unchast
songs, used among the Painims at weddings;
the manner whereof, came first from the citie
Fescenninum (as some thinke:) or as others,
Quia fascinum putabantur arcere, because they
were thought to have vertue to withstand
witchcraft and sorcerie.


Vestales virgines, were certain professed Nuns vow­
ing virginitie, who had the keeping of the sa­
cred fire of Vesta. Nec tu aliud vestam, quam pu­
ram intellige flammam.  Ovid.  This Vesta was broght 
from Troie with the image of Minerva, cal­
Palladium, and other holy reliques.


Vltro tributa [GREEK] , were certaine cittie workes,
for which the Censours did bargaine with the 
Publicans or undertakers, at a price.


Verbena, although it signifieth a speciall hearb,



called Verbenaca, i. verven in english, & in Greek
[GREEK] because doves delight much to bee a­
bout it: yet the word is attributed to divers
other herbes put to holy use among the Pai­
nims, which are called Sagmina in Latine, and 
in Greeke [GREEK]. But Dioscorides describeth
one sort therof which runneth by the ground,
and groweth not so high as our vervein doth,
and it seemeth to be that which the Physici­
ans, Herbarists, and Apothecaries call Gramen,
[GREEK] in Greeke, dent de chien in French, and
the coich grasse in English: according to 
which saith Livie,  Fæcialis ex arce puram grami­
nis herbam attulit. 


Victoriatus, i. quinarius numus, A peece of Romane
silver coine, halfe Denarius, and a double Se­
stertius, having the image of Victorie stamped
upon it, either standing on foote crowned
with a chaplet of bay, or els carried in a tri­
umphall charriot drawne with foure steeds,
holding foorth in her right hand the foresaid
guirland, as is to bee seene in diverse antiqui­
ties of coine.


Veteres signifieth a place in Rome called Veteres: 
Curiæ in respect of Novæ, or certain shops cal­
led Argentara of bankers, in regard of others
also, named Novæ.




