


A 
PHYSICAL 
DICTIONARY, 
Expounding such words, as being terms of Art, or other|
wise derived from the Greek and Latin, are 
dark to the English Reader.

This Dictionary is of use in the reading of all other Books of 
this Nature, in the English Tongue.

LONDON: 
Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden-Hall, and are to be sold 
at his Shop, at the sign of the Printing-press in 
Cornhil. 1655.






A 
Physical 
Dictionary.

A
APophlegmatisms, Medicines drawing
flegm out of the Head.


Agaricktrochiscated, See the London 
Dispensatory in English.


The use of "trochiscated" antedates the first OED citation of the verb (1657).



Apozeme, A Medicine made of the Broth of di|
vers Herbs, and other Ingredients; unto which 
somtimes certain Syrups are added.


Animal Faculties, The Powers of Hearing,
Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling; of Ima|
gination, Understanding, Memory, Will, Go|
ing, Standing, and all Voluntary Motion. 


Aranea Tunica: The Cobweb-Coat, or Tu|
nicle


"Cobweb-Coat" not found in OED.



Abdomen: The Belly, or Paunch


Apoplectick Water: Good for the Apoplexy


"Apoplectick Water" not found in OED.



Autumn: Harvest, the Fall of the Leaf


Actual Heat: is Heat that may be felt by 
the hand, such as is in Fire, and all things heated
thereby; or in the Body of one in a Feaver:
It is opposed to Potential Heat, viz. That 
cannot be felt by the Hand, as the Heat in 
pepper, in Mustard seed, in a Flint, in unsla|
ked Lime: and the contrary of Actual Cold.


"Actual Heat" and "Potential Heat" are not found in OED.



Affected: Troubled, Diseased: An Affect, a 
Disease, Trouble, Disorder.


Aquae Acidulae: The Spaw Waters, like those 
of Epsam, Barnet, and Tunbridg, with us.


Absurdities: Unreasonable things


Acrimony: Sharpness, such as in Mustard, Pep|
per, and in divers Humors of the Body which 
cause sickness.


Ascent: Going up.


Apply: lay on.


Actually Cold: see Actual Heat.


Augment: Encrease.


Accidentally: By hap, by chance, upon occasi|
on.


Adventitious: not Natural, but springing from 
external causes. 

Attracting: drawing together, or causing.


Attracts: draws to.


Accident: somthing that happens upon a Dis|
ease; vide Symptome. 


Adstriction: binding together, shutting up.


Antecedent Cause: foregoing Cause. is oppo|
sed to the Conjunct Cause. Abundance of
Flegm in the Body is the Antecedent Cause 
of the Optick Nerves being stopped by flegm;
but the Flegm in the said Nerves, is the Con|
juct Cause &c. of other Diseases.


"Antecedent cause" not found in OED.



Articulate Voyce: A distinct Voyce, such as 
that of Man-kind, termed Speech.


Abstergent: Clensing away filth.


Access: Addition, joyning to, help, or company.


Afflux: flowing to.


Astringents: Medicines that bind together, and 
straiten the Pores and Passages of the Body.


Astriction: binding, knitting together.


Anodines: Medicines which asswage pain.


Anastomosis: an opening of the Mouths of Veins,
by which means Blood issues.


Astringe: bind, fasten, close.


Acute: sharp, violent: a Disease is termed A|
cute, when it quickly changeth to health or death.


Adustion: burning:

Adust, burned. Blood is
said to be adust, when by reason of extraordi|
nary heat, the thinner parts are evaporated,
and the thicker remain dreggy and black, as if 
they were burnt.


Asthmatical: troubled with shortness of breath.


Attest: witness, declare.


Aneurism: a Swelling caused by a dilatation of 
the Arteries external Coat, the internal being 
broken.


Axungia: Grease.


Atrophy: want of Nourishment, when the Bo|
dy pines away.


Attenuating
Medicaments: are such as make 
thick Humors thin.


Axiom, or Theoreme: an acknowledged, un|
doubted Truth.


Adjacent: lying neer, bordering upon.


Aromatized: Spiced, perfumed.


"Aromatized" antedates the earliest OED citation (1661).



Anus, the Fundament.


Astringe, to bind.


Atomes: smal Moats hardly visible, and that 
cannot admit of any division.


Adverse: contrary to, of a contrary Nature.


Augment, is the time of a Disease, while it
grows still more vehement, until it comes to 
its height, which is called the state of the Dis|
ease, and then the Augment ceases, because 
the Disease is now at a stand, and encreaseth
no more.


Alteratives, are such Medicines as only change



the qualities of the Body and its Humors, by 
heating, cooling, moistening, drying, &c. they 
are opposed to such as do cause Vomiting, 
Purging, Sweating, Transpiration, &c.


Adjuncts of a Disease, are qualities, dispositions,
and Symptomes annexed thereunto.


Aliments, are what ever is taken into the Body 
to nourish the same; as all kinds of Meat and 
Drink.


Adjuvant Causes, are such as serve and assist the 
principal Cause; so is the Taylors Boy an ad|
juvant Cause assistant to his Master, the prin|
cipal Cause of a Garment. So in Diseases,
whatever assists the Primary Cause, is termed
an Adjuvant Cause.


Alexipharmical things, are such as resist Plague, Poyson,
and all venemous Diseases.



B

BAlneum Mariae; the manner of stilling or 
digesting, when the Glass containing the 
Ingredient, stands in a Vessel of Water, with 
Fire made under it.


Bolus: A Morsel; a Medicine to be taken from 
a Knifes point.


Bellilucanae Thermae: Hot Baths in France, 
so called from the place where they are.


Breathing of a Vein; Blood-letting, properly
if but little Blood be taken away.


Bronchia; the hollow gristly Pipes that spread 
themselves through the Body of the Lungs, be|
ing Branches of the Wezand or Wind-pipe.


"Bronchia" antedates the earliest OED citation (1675).




C

CAruncle; a little bit of Flesh that grows
and sticks out on any part of the Body.


Catarrh; a Defluxion or Distillation of Hu|
mors from the Brain, into any part of the Bo|
dy, especially the Lungs, causing Coughs.


Condense, to make thick.


Distillations by descent: are when the Liquor
which comes from the Materials stilled, doth 
not rise up above the said Materials, as in or|
dinary distillation; but falls down under the 
Materials stilled, which are therefore laid up|
on a Grace, that the bottom of the Vessel may 
be empty, and free to receive the distilled Li|
quor.



E
EXcrement: the Dregs of Digestion in the 
Body, voided by Dung, Urine, and Sweat.


Evacuation: an emptying or voiding forth, 
purging.


Epispastick: a Plaister to draw a Blister, called
also a Vesicatory, or any strong drawing Plai|
ster.


Errhines: Medicinal Liquors to be snuft up the 
Nostrils to purge the Brain.




Empyema: Empyems a corrupt matter between 
the breast and the lungs following a Pleurisie.


Erysipelas Oedematosum: a tertian swelling a|
rising from choller and flegm.


Eliphantiasis: a leprous disease, which makes
the Patients skin like the Hide of an Ele|
phant.


Electuary: See the London Dispensatory.


Expulsion: driving forth; as of Excrements,
Dung, Urine, Sweat, &c.


Expel: to drive forth. 

Eruption: breaking forth.


Extinguished: quenched, put out.


Emunctuaries or Emunctoryes; certain waies
and passages that Nature finds to drive ill Hu|
mors into, from the Principal Parts; as cer|
tain Kernels behind the Ears; and in the 
Groins, under the Arm-pits, &c. where risings
happened in time of Pestilence &c.


Essentially springing P. 11. that is primarily and 
principally, not accidentally or occasionally.


Ebullition: boiling and working of the blood 
in the Veins, like New-wine in a Cask.


Extension: stretching out.


Extenuation: Leanness, Consumption of flesh.
Extenuating making thin.


Expulsive faculty: the power of our body which
drives forth Dung, Urine, Sweat, Vapors &c. 
every part partakes of this Ability, or Faculty.


Eminent: neer at hand approaching.


Erysipelas: a swelling caused by choller. Ery|
sipelas Phlegmonodes, or Phlegmon Erysipe|
latodes. Is a swelling caused by Inflamation
of Choller and Blood.


Emulsions: Almond milkes; and milkes made
of cool Seeds, &c.


Electuaries. Medicines made up of Conserves
of Flowers or Herbs; to which is added some 
sweet Spicy pouder for the most part, and so 
with Syrup it is made up in the form of Mi|
thridate or Treacle.


Epithemes: are Medicines applyed in Bags, com|
monly upon the Heart or Stomach Liver or 
Spleen &c. Certain convenient pouders being
put in a Bag, or between two cloths, and so wet 
in Wine or other convenient Liquor, are laid
upon the Stomach, Heart, &c.


Essential to the Disease: that is of the be|
ing or substance, so that without that, the dis|
ease could not be. So Heat is Essential to a 
Feaver.


Excrements: dregs and refuse of our meat and 
drink after Concoction, voided by dung, 
Urine, Sweat, and invisibly through the 
Pores.


Excrementitious: of or belonging to Excre|
ments, impure, preternatural humors are so 
called.


Extenuate: make thin.


Expressed: Squeezed out.


Epidemical: common to a whol Nation. So the 
 Plague, small Pocks, Loosness, Sweating|
sickness, &c. when they are rise all over a Na|
tion; or Country at one time, they are called
Epidemical diseases.


Elixir Proprietatis. A Medicine invented by 
Paracelsus. Take of the best Aloes, Myrrh 
& Saffron, of each half an ounce: Pouder them
and put them into a Glass. Then take Musca| 
dine made tart with Oyl of Sulphur, and 
pour upon the pouder, til the liquor stand four 
fingers above the pouder: Let them stand and 
digest in a warm place. Then pour off the 
Liquor and put on more, till all the Colour 
and vertue be drawn out from the pouder. At 
last still the settlings with a gentle fire, and 
pour that which comes away, to the former 
Liquor, and let all stand and digest a Month 
in a warm place, close stopped. The name 
signifies such a Quintessence, as hath a special 
propriety of agreement with Mans nature, 
whereby it comforts and restores the same, in 
al kind of weakness.


Emollient: Medicines that soften.


Eroded: eaten a sunder, eaten up.


Extraction: pulling out.


Exquisite: perfect, in an high degree.


Escharoticks: see Causticks potential.


Embrochated: moistened, bedewed, bathed.


Erosion: fretting, eating.


Eclegma. See Lambitive.


Extream parts: the Armes and Legs.


Emplastick diet: consists of such meats as are of 
a clammy substance, viz. Calves Head and Feet,
Sheeps-trotters; all Feet of Beasts, Tripes, 
Gellys, &c.


Excreta and Retenta: things voided out of the 
Body, things retained, or kept in.


Eradicate, pluck up by the Roots.


Exasperated: pained, vexed, molested.


Equivocal: Signs of a Disease, are such as are 
common to it and other Diseases.


The Efficient Cause: is the working or making
Cause, so a Tailor is the Efficient of a Gar|
ment; The Material Cause is the stuff, a thing 
is made of which the Efficient works upon; So 
the Cloth or Silk is the Material Cause of the 
Garment. The formal Cause, the shape that 
makes it a Coat, or Cloak, or Doublet; the 
Final Cause, is the end why it was made, viz. 
to hide nakedness, keep off Sun and Cold, and
to adorn the body.


Emulgent Veins: which bring the Wheyish Ex|
crement of the blood unto the Kidneyes where 
it becomes Urine, and is passed by the Urecers 
into the Piss-bladder.


Evaporation: a steeming
out of Vapors.


Egress: coming
forth.


Evaporated: steemed away, as Water that 
spends away in boiling.


Evacuators: Medicines which empty out evil 
Humors, either by vomit, Purge, &c.




Exhalations: Vapors drawn up by the Sun, out 
of the Earth and Waters.


Eventilated: Fanned, purged as Corn by fan|
ning. So Exercise is said to eventilate or fan 
the Body; because the motion opens the 
Pores, and drives many vapors out.


Eneorema: that which hangs like a cloud in U|
rines, especially when the Disease is breaking
away.


"Eneorema" not found in OED.



Emollient Decoction: a softening moistening 
Decoction, made for Clysters to soften and 
moisten the hardened Excrements of the Guts.


An Eschara, or Eschar; is
the Core that falls
off from a part that hath had a Caustick ap|
plied thereto.



F
FUmigations: Perfumes and others things,
burnt to qualifie the Air in a sick mans cham|
ber.


Fracture: breaking, as fracture of the Skul or 
Arm, &c.


Fomentation: when linnen Cloaths or Spunges
are dipped in some Liquor, and applied to the 
diseased part, and after renewed.


Functions of the Brain: the Abilities of the 
Brain, to Hear, See, Imagine, Understand, 
Remember, &c.


Frictions: Rubbings.


Furor Uterinus: Hemorrhagies: breaking forth of Blood from 
any part of the Body.


Hysterical Fits: Fits of the Mother, Womb|
sickness.


Hermetical Physitians, and Hermets: Chy|
mists, such as trade with Furnaces, Pots, and 
Glasses, to draw Spirits, Oyls, Waters; to 
make Salts, Quintessences, &c. called so from 
Hermes Trismegistus, an old Egyptian Phy|
losopher, who is thought to have been a Chy|
mist.


Horrors: Shiverings.



I
INfuse: that is, steep.


Inflamation: great Heat.


Indication: is an hinting to the Physitian what 
he is to do. So extream heat is said to give in|
dication of cooling; extream fulness of blood 
gives indication of blood-letting; want of a 
womans Courses gives indication of blood-let|
ting, &c.


Jugular Veins: that is, the Throat Veins. See Veslingus Anatomy in English.


Insensible Passages: which cannot be seen, nor felt, by reason of their smalness.


Influence: flowing in.


Inherent: sticking fast within, seated and  abi|
ding within.


Inordinate: disorderly, unnatural, and unfit|
ting.


Internal and External Sences: The Internal 
are, Common Sence, Imagination, Under|
standing, Memory: The External are, Seeing,
Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling.


Intercepted: stopped in the middle way.


Internally and Externally: inwardly and out|
wardly.


Juleps: pleasant Drinks made of distilled Wa|
ters, or the broth of Barley, and other conve|
nient things, and sweetened with Syrups or Su|
gar; given chiefly in Feavers to cool and 
quench Thirst.


Infusion: a strained Liquor wherein  Medica|
ments have been steeped, either hot or cold.


Incrassate: thicken.


Incrassating: thickening.


Insensible: not to be perceived
by the outward Sences,
of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, &c.


Illumination: enlightening.


Influx: flowing into.


Inversion; turning the inside out.


Intermission: ceasing, leaving off.


Inveterate: old, of long continuance, rooted.


Inclination: that is, by holding the vessel on the 
one side, and so powring the cleer from the set|
lings: this is called to clarifie by Inclination, 
in opposition to clarifying with the white of 
an Eg by boyling, or any other way.


The Iris: a party-color'd round Circle in the 
sight of the Eye like a Rainbow, from whence 
it hath its name.


Incarnate: to breed flesh.


Irritation: provocation, stirring
up.


Involuntary Tears: which are not shed by force 
of sorrow working upon the mind, but by force 
of a bodily Disease.


The day of Indication: is that day in a Feaver
on which may be collected what wil betide up|
on the following Critical day. So the fourth 
day doth hint what is like to happen on the se|
venth; and the eleventh hints what is like to 
happen upon the fourteenth; and the seven|
teenth what will happen upon the twenty one; 
and the twenty four what will betide upon the 
twenty eight. Therefore the fourth, eleventh, 
seventeenth, twenty four, are called daies of 
Indication, or telling and declaring.


"day of Indication" not found in OED.



Judged, see Day of Judgment.


Infirm: weak.


Insipid: Tastless.


Incising Medicaments; are such as cut and di|
vide tough flegm, and other clammy humors, 
whereby they become fit for expulsion; such
is Oxymel, &c.


Intestines: the Guts.


Intension and Remission: Increase and decrease, growing stronger or weaker.


Injection: is a Medicinal Liquor cast with a fit|
ting Instrument into the Womb, Bladder, or 
Fundament, when there is soreness of hemor|
roids, &c.


Inserted: fastened or planted
into.


Inspissate Juyce: is Juyce of some Herb boyled
till it be thick, as Honey.


Illustrated: made cleer and manifest.


Invasions of the Gout: fits of the Gout, or of 
Agues, may be called Invasions of the said Dis|
eases.


Intense: vehement, strong.


Indicate: declare, point out.


Impacted: wedged in, thrust far in.


Irrigations: moistenings, sprinklings, waterings.


Intervention: coming between, happening toge|
ther with.


Intermediate: coming between.


Intermitting Pulse: is that which holds
up a 
while, and then beats again; and then stops,
and then beats again, which is a sign of great 
weakness.


Incoctibility: an unaptness to be concocted or 
digested, or an impossibility thereof.


"Incoctibility" not found in OED, and not found in Google (17 July 2019).	




L
LEnitive: a gentle, refreshing, cordial Medi|
cine.


Ligatures: or strings wherewith the Joynts of 
Bones and the Gristles are compact and bound
together.


Lozenges: the same with Tablets, being the



form of a Medicine made up.


Luxation: is when one Joyne is loosned from 
another.


Liniment: Oyntment.


Ligatures: bindings of several parts to draw the 
blood and Humors from the part diseased, to 
the parts bound, by reason of the pain of bind|
ing which must be very hard and straight.


Loosness of Continuitie: separating and dividing
of things closed and united. So a wound is
termed a loosening of Continuitie; because, 
it separates these parts of the skin and flesh 
which were formerly united together.


Laxe: loose, slack, as an unbended Bowstring.


Livid: black and blew.


A Lambative or Lohoch: is a medicine to be lickt
from a Liquoris stick, and to be swallowed
softly down, being chiefly ordained for the 
Lungs.


Iron-water: Water wherein Iron hath
been
quenched. Smiths forge-water.


"iron-water" not found in OED. "forge-water" antedates earliest OED citation (1725).



Laxative: which makes the belly loose.


Livid: black and blew, Lead-coloured.



M

MEninges: or films of the Brain, coats
that cover the brain.


Masticatories: that is Medicines to be chewed to 
bring away Rheum.


Mesenteraick
Veins: little Veins that are thought 
to carry chyle from the stomach to the Li|
ver. See Vestingus Anat. in English.


Malignity: venemous or poysonful quality 
of certain humors and Diseases which make them 
very dangerous, and for the most part dead|
ly.


Matter, or Quittor: a snotty kind of filth which
comes out of Imposthumes when they break, 
and out of Ulcers when they are in a good way 
of cure.


Magistral Syrup: is such an one as is
invented
by a Physitian for his Patient, in opposition 
to those Syrups commonly kept in shops.


Matrix: Womb.


Membrana: skin or coat of the Arteries, Veins,
&c. Membranes, skins or coats.


Mortification: a deading of any part of the 
body.


Malign: venemous, poysonful. See Maligni|
ty.


Mother: the Womb in Women is so called.


Mitigation: abatement, lessening, growing
mild.


The Medium: is that through which we see, as principally the Air, which we look thorough 
upon objects; also the Water and Glass, 
 Horn, or what ever is cleer, and may be seen
thorough, may be termed a medium of sight.


Mammilarie passages, or  productions: certain 
little knobby bunchings out of the Nerves,
which serve for smelling, resembling Teates,
called therefore Teat-like productions. See 
the English Anatomy.


Malax: soften. To Malax a lump of Pil|
stuff, is to soften it, that it may work up into
Pills the better.


Mercurial Purges: Purges made of Quicksilver, Chymically prepared, such as Mercurius dul|
cis, some kind of Precipitate, Mercurius 
vitæ, &c.


Macerate: steep.


Mesenterie: the skin which knits the Guts toge|
ther, and runs all along among them, embossed
with Fat. See Vestingus his Anatomy in Eng|
lish.


Membranous: of the Nature of Skin or Parch|
ment.


Morbifical, or Morbifick
matter; is that which is
the principal cause of any Disease.


Minorative purgation: is gentle purgation, such 
as takes away only a part of the matter of a 
disease: it is opposed to Eradicative purgati|
on, which is strong, and pulls the whol matter 
offending up by the Roots; as it were.



N
NUtrition: Nourishment.


Narcotick medicines: stupefying medi|
cines: that dull the sence of feeling, and cause 
profound sleep. 


Nitre: salt Peter, as some hold; but Matthio|
lus conceives the true Nitre is rarely found in 
these daies.


Natural functions: actions of the stomach, Li|
ver, Spleen, Gal, Kidneyes, in concocting the 
meat, making blood, and separating and expel|
ling the excrements.


Nauseousness: sickness of the stomach enclining to vomit.


Nidorous: smelling of burnt fat, or scortched
Roast-meat, or fryed Oyl.


Noxious: hurtful.


Nausiosis of the Veins: is when the Veins are 
sick of bad blood, and doth as it were spew it 
out into the habit of the body: from whence 
comes scurvy-spots, morphew, scabs, &c.


"Nausiosis" (a Latin form) not found in OED.



Neotericks: are late writers in physick, or any 
other Art, so called in opposition to the Anti|
ent Authors.



O
ORgans: peculiar parts of the body fitted
for some notable service of the Spirit, such 
as the Eye to see, the Ear to hear, the Nose to 
smell, the Skin to feel, the Lungs to breath, 
Stomach to digest.


Os Sacrum: the great bone whereon the Ridg 
bone resteth.


Opisthotones: a Convulsion so named, when the



Body is drawn backward.


Oval forme: that is the shape of an Eg.


Original: beginning, foundation.


Oedema: a swelling caused by flegm, which is
soft and whiteish, and has little heat or pain 
with it.


Obstruction stopping.


Opiate signifies an Electuary: properly it is
put for Venice Treacle, Mithridate, Diascor|
dium, &c. which have Opium in them: from 
whence the name is derived. But secondarily,
it signifies any Electuary or Antidote made up 
in such a body as Treacle, &c. though it have
no Opiate in it.


Orifice: the whol which is made by a Surgeon 
when he lets blood. Also the mouth or pas|
sage into the Womb, or Stomach, &c.


Opticks: a Part of Natural Philosophy (though
falsly reckoned for a branch of the Mathema|
ticks) opening all the Mysteries of sight, and 
the reasons of the Deceptions, or mistakes
thereof, and teaching to make augmenting
Glasses, multiplying Glasses, Perspective Glas|
ses, burning Glasses, &c.


"augmenting Glasses" antedates the first OED citation (1658; "augmenting," adj., 1).



Oblique: slantling, athwart, crooked,


Obnoxious: liable, or subject unto.


Ophthalmy: an Inflamation of the Eyes, cau|
sing foreness and redness.


Oscribosum: the bony Sieve. A bone full of 
small holes, like a Sieve or colendar, placed a|
bove the Nose, through which Snot and Sni|
vil, is drained from the brain.


Occult: hidden, unknown.


Oxycrate: Vineger and water mingled
together.


Organical Disease. See similar diseases.


The Systole, or diastole of
the Pulse: are the 
double motion thereof. For when the Arte|
ry is extended by the blood, Issuing out of 
the Heart, and smites the Finger of him that 
feels the Pulse; that motion is called Dia|
stole, or a widening and stretching of the Arte|
rie: but when the Arterie falls, contracts it 
self, and sinks from under a Mans Finger, that 
motion is called Systole, a contraction.


Oxyrrhodine: Vinegar of Roses, and Medicines
made principally thereof.



P
PRognosis: the foreknowledg of Diseases.


Plethora: a too great fulness of good blood 
in the body.


Paralysis: the Palsie.


Paraplegia: Parisis, Palsie.


Peripneumonia: an Inflamation of the Lungs,
or Lights.


Pericranium: the skins which compasseth the 
Scul.


A Pugil of Herbs viz. as much as is taken up  be|
tween the Thumb and the three fore-Fingers.


Physical Regiment: is the right ordering of 
a Patient, having taken a Purge, or other strong 
Medicament. As to keep the Patient warm, to 
give posset or thin-broath after every stool; 
not suffer him to read, or her to Sow or hold 
down the head, or to be sad, or to sleep; espe|
cially after a vomit, &c.


Phrensie: rageing, Madness joyned with a  Fea|
ver. see Chap. 11. Book 1.


Prognostick: foretelling. A Prognostick sign 
is a sign foretelling what will become of the 
Disease, and patient.


Privation: loss. 


Plethorick: full of blood, too full of blood.


Pores: little holes in the skin, through which 
vapors and sweat come out. Sometimes they 
are visible upon the Arm or Leg, being swelled
and closed with cold; resembling a Goose 
skin for roughness.


Preternaturally: otherwise then the Course of 
Nature requires.


Perspicuous: cleer, that may be seen through, as 
Glass, fair-water, &c.


Peritonæum: the inner coat of the Belly,  which
covers the Guts: See the English Anatomy.


Poplar Oyntment: in the shops called Popule|
on. See the English Dispensatory.


Potential coldness: that is coldness in operati|
on, though not to the feeling. So a draught 
of Whey in which cooling Herbs hath
been boiled, being drunk down warm from 
the fire; is said to be actually hot, because it 
is so to the hand and palate; but Potentially
cold, because it afterward cools the stomach, 
Liver, &c.


Pulsation: beating of the Arteries, in any part 
of the Body.


Precede: go before.


Preparing of humors: is the qualifying of them,
so as that they may be fit for expression which
preparation consists in separating them from 
the mass of good blood: in making them thick, 
if they be too thin and sharp: in cutting them
and making them thin, if they be too thick and 
clammy.


Phlebotomy: blood-letting.


Preternatural: beside the intent or custom of Nature. vide Preternaturally.


Propriety: a pain by propriety, is when the 
cause of the Pain is in the part pained, so when 
the Head-ach comes from the Humors in the 
Head, it is called a pain by propriety; when 
it comes from Humors in the Stomach, 
or any other part that sends up vapors; it is
called Head-ach by Consent. And the like 
may be said of other Symptoms or accidents.


A Pyramis: is a Geometrical figure, broad and 
angular at the bottom, and growing less and less 
towards the top, till it come to a point. The
Sepulchers of the Egyptian Kings were made
in this form, and therefore called Pyramides.
Naturalists do make use of this Figure to shew



how the Eye receives the representations of 
visible objects.


Pupil of the Eye: is the midlemost round circle, which we commonly call, the sight of the Eye, 
and which in Cats, is seen to widen and con|
tract it self.


Pulse: Beans, Pease, Hastivers, French-pease,
&c. called so, because they are gathered by 
pulling, and not by mowing down, as corn.


"Hastivers" (a kind of pease) not found in OED.



Probable: likely, possible.


Profound: deep.


Producing: breeding, causing.


Peccant Humor: the Humor offending, cau|
sing the Disease.


A Phlegmon: is an Inflamation or swelling cau|
fed by blood. If no other Humor be adjoy| 
ned, it is a true Phlegmon. If choller be joy|
ned, it is called a Phlegmon erisipelous; if
flegm, ædematous; if melancholly, Scirrhous.


Paroxysme: the fit of an Ague, of the Mother, or 
any Disease that comes by fits.


Perforated: bored through.


Putrid: rotten, filthy, stinking.


Pustula: a pustle, push, or whelk. 

Ponderous: weighty.


Peristaltickmotion of the Guts: is whereby the 
Guts do contract and purse themselves toge|
ther above the excrements, and so squeez them
out.


Pomum curtipendulum: an Apple so called.


Pubes: the hairy Hillock above the privities in 
men and women. The word signifies ripeness, 
because that hair being grown out, testifies the 
parties to be fit to engender.


Pærineum: the space which runs like a ridge be|
tween the privities and fundament in men and 
women.


Praeposterous: unnaturall, undue, unfitting.


Perturbation of the Eyes: a troubled, drousie,
frighted look of the Eyes.


Procatarctick Causes: primarie, first working
and occasional Causes. So in a Feaver, the 
next immediate Cause, is putrefied choller &c. 
but the first working & occasional causes, were
the patients taking cold, by swimming in the 
cold-water; whereby the pores became shut, 
and the Matter of the Disease was retained in 
the Body. So the Procatarctick Cause of 
worms in Children, is their greedy eating of 
Fruit; but the immediate Cause, is putrid 
humors occasioned by those Fruits; out of 
which humors the worms breed.


Precipitated: thrown
head-long, forcibly
cast down.


Palliative Cure: is when a Disease is not taken
away, but only mitigated and made more 
mild, so that the patient may have as much 
ease as possible. Or if the Disease deform the 
Body, a palliative Cure, does hide as much as 
may be that deformity. So an Eye being thurst 
out, cannot be properly cured; but it may 
admit of a palliative cure, in asswaging the 
pain, and other Symptoms, and by putting in|
to the place thereof a Glass or other Artifici|
al Eye.


Potent: powerful.


Perspirable: the Body is
said to be Perspirable, 
when the invisible Pores or holes in the skin, 
are kept open, so that the vapors arising from 
evil Humors may freely breath out. See Tran|
spiration.


Pernicious; deadly, causing
death, & destructi|
on.


Protraction: is
a lengthening out of a Disease 
and making the same to last long.


Pharmaceutick Remedies: whatsoever kind of 
Medicines are made by the Apothecary.


Præposterous: disorderly, undue, unfit, the 
Cart before the Horse.




Quittor.: See Matter.



R
Repletion. over much fulness of blood, or 
Humors.


Resolution, weakening or dissolving the strength 
of a part, as when it is palsyed &c.


Revulsion: drawing back of blood or Humors
from the part affected.


Repelling: Medicines which draw back the hu|
mor from the part affected,


Repellers, the 
same.


Relaxing: Slacking as the string of a bow when 
the bow is unbent, is said to be relaxed or 
slackned.


To Revel: to draw back Humors from the part 
diseased.


Remitted: lessened, abated.


Restriction: exception, limitation.


Ruption: breaking, or tearing asunder.


Reliques remainders of an Humor after Solemn 
purging, bleeding &c.


Retraction: drawing back.


Radical moisture: the fundamental juice of the 
 body, which nouri|
shes and preserves the natural heat, as the oile 
in a lampe preserves and feeds the flame.


Revelled: drawen back,


Revulsives, remedies
to draw back the Humor from the Diseased
part.


Repelled: driven away.


Retentive faculty:  the power in our body and
its parts to hold fast its nutriment and what 
ever is agreeable thereunto.


Rough Arterie or Aspera Arteria, is 
the wind|
pipe or Wesand, which is rough on the out side 
with circles and gristly rings.


Reduced brought back againe.


Refractions: breaking of the Representations
of visible objects. a terme used by the writers
of Opticks, or the Art of seeing.


Recruted: repaired, restored, made up, a mi|



litary term.


Resolving medicaments: are such as loosen and 
scatter evil humors which are gathered and 
combined together in some diseased part of 
the Body.


