





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 3 1 4 5

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )



CERTAINE TEARMES OF COSMOGRA­
graphie, brieflie expounded, for those that are not
learned in that science, to the intent they
may the better vnderstand
this Treatise.


The Axle
tree of the
world.
The two
Poles.
The greter
Circle.

THe Axle tree of the Worlde  is a 
right line, imagined to passe
through the Center or midst of the
earth, from the one ende of heauen
to the other: the vpper ende of
which Axle tree is called the Pole
Artike, that is to say, the North
Pole: & the nether end, the Pole
Antartike, that is, the South
Pole: vpon which two Poles, otherwise called the hooks
or hengils of the world, the heauens doe turne rounde a­
bout the earth. Moreouer the Cosmographers doe de­
uide the worlde into diuers partes by certaine Circles,
whereof some are called greater, and some lesser. 

The greater are those which doe deuide the world in­
to 2 equall partes: whereof there be 6: that is, the Equi­
noctiall, the Zodiake, the Meridian, the Horizon, and the 2
Colures.


The Equi­
noctiall.

The Equinoctiall  is a great Circle, girding the world
in the verie midst betwixt the 2 Poles, by reason where­
of there are two latitudes, the one Northern, & the other
Southerne.


The north
latitude.

The Northerne latitude  is that space, which is con­
teined betwixt the Equinoctiall and the North Pole.


The South 
latitud.

The Southerne latitude  is that space, which is contei­
ned betwixt the Equinoctial & the South Pole; and either
of these two spaces conteineth in bredth 50 degrees.







A Degree.

A Degree  is one part of a Circle, beeing deuided into
360 partes called degrees.


Longitude.

Againe, the circuit of the Equinoctial,  containing 360
degrees, is the verie longtitude of the Earth: the first de­
gree of which longitude beginneth at the first Meridi­
an, placed in the West, and so proceedeth Eastward vn­
to the 180 degree of the Equinoctiall, and from thence re­
turneth by the West vntill you come againe to the 360
degree, which is the last degree of longitude. And note
by the way that euerie degree of the Equinoctiall contai­
neth 60 English miles, so as the longitude of the whole
Earth is 21600 miles.


The Zodiake,

The Zodiake  is a great, broad, and slope or shoring
Circle, carrying the 12 Signes: in the middest whereof
is a line called the Ecliptike line, from which the Sun
neuer swarueth.


The Meridian

The Meridian  is a greate Circle, passing ouer our
heades, in what parte of the World soeuer we be, and al­
so through both the Poles: which line when the Sunne
toucheth it aboue the Horizon, it is Noonetide or midday
to those that dwell vnder the same.


The Horison.

The Horizon  is a great Circle, deuiding the vpper
halfe of the World which we see, from the nether halfe
which wee see not: in the very middest or Center of
which Circle, if in a plaine field you looke rounde about
you, you shall alwaies finde your selfe to be.


The 2 Colures

Now as touching the two Colures,  because they differ
not in effect, though in name, from two Meridians, I
leaue to speake of them, aswell for that I haue spoken of
them at large in my Sphere, as also for that they are not
mentioned in this Treatise.


4 lesser circles



The Circles 
Artike and
Antartike.

Of the lesser Circles  there be foure: that is, the two
Polar Circles, and the two Tropikes. Of the two Po­
lar Circles, the one enuironeth the North Pole, & ther­
fore is called the Circle Artike, & the other enuironeth
the South Pole, and is called the Circle Antartike, bee­






cause it is opposit to the other.


The Tropike 
of Cancer.
The Tropike
of Capricorn.
The greatest
declination of
the Sun.

Again, of the two Tropiques,  the one is placed betwixt
the Equinoctiall and the Circle Artike, and is called the
Tropike of Cancer: and the other is placed betwixt the
Equinoctiall and the Circle Antartike, and is called the
Tropike of Capricorne: and each of these Tropikes is di­
stant from the Equinoctiall 23 degrees and a halfe, which
is the greatest declination of the Sun from the Equino­
ctiall, for he neuer mounteth higher then the Tropique of
Cancer, nor descendeth lower than the Tropike of Capri­
corne, and these two Circles are Paralels to the Equi­
noctiall.


Paralels.

Zones.

Paralels  are 2 lines or Circles, equally distant in all
places one from another. And by these foure lesser Cir­
cles the Earth is deuided into 5 Zones or broade spaces,
whereof there be two colde. 2. temperate, and one hotte
described both in my Sphere and also in this treatise.


A Paralell of
the longest day.

A Paralell  of the longest day, is a space of the Earth,
wherein the day increaseth by one quarter of an hower,
proceeding from Equinoctiall towards any of the Poles.


A Clyme.

A Clime  is a space of the Earth, conteining two such
Paralells wherein the day increaseth by halfe an hower,
of which Clymes according to the old Writers, there be
7 declared at the full in my Sphere, and also somewhat
touched in this Treatise.





