 


 PLATONICA: OR 
A Platonicall Song 
of the 
SOUL, 
Consisting of foure severall Poems; 
viz.






Hereto is added a Paraphrasticall Interpretation 
of the answer of Apollo consulted by Ame­
lius, about Plotinus soul depar­
ted this life.

By H. M. Master of Arts, and Fellow of 
Christs Colledge in Cambridge.

Nullam majorem afferre solet ignaris inscitia voluptatem 
quam expeditum factidiosúmque contemptum. Scal.

CAMBRIDGE 
Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Univer­
sitie. 1642.





The interpretation of the more unusuall 
names or words that occurre in 
the foregoing Poems.

IF any man conceive I have done amisse in using such ob­
scure words in my writings, I answer, That it is some­
time fit for Poeticall pomp sake, as in my Psychozoia: 
Othersome time necessitie requires it, 



Propter egestatem linguae, & rerum novitatem,



as Lucretius pleads for himself in like case. Again, there 
is that significancie in some of the barbarous words (for the 
Greeks are Barbarians to us) that, although not out of su­
perstition, yet upon due reason I was easily drawn to fol­
low the Counsel of the Chaldee Oracle, , 
Not to change those barbarous terms 
into our English tongue. Lastly, if I have offended in using 
such hard names or words, I shall make amends now by 
interpreting them.

A
AHad.  , One, or, The One. The Platonists 
call the first Originall of all things  and , 
for these reasons:  or One, because the multitude or 
pluralitie of Beings is from this One, as all numbers from 
an unite:  or The Good, , or , because all things are driven drawn or make haste to 
partake of it. , Procl. Theolog. Plat. lib. 2. cap 4. 

Abinoam. , Pater amoenitatis, Father of de­
light. 

Autocalon, , The very beauty. 

Arachnea hath its name from , a spider. 

Adonai. . The Lord, or the sustainer of all things, from 
, the Basis or foot of a pillar. 

Autaestthesid, , Self sensednesse. 



Adamah.  Earth, The earthly or naturall mans
abode.  

Autophilus, , a lover of himself. 

Anthropion, The same with Adamah: Onely Adamah 
signifies earthlinesse; Anthropion from , upright­
nesse of body or looking up. 

Alopecopolis, . The foes citie or politie. 

Autaparnes, , from  and . 
Simon, Autaparnes and Hypomene are but the soul, thrice 
told over. Autaparnes is the soul denying it self; Hypomone 
the soul bearing the anguish and agonie of this deniall of it 
self: From these two results Simon, the soul obedient to 
the spirit of Christ. Now there is no self-deniall where there is no corrupt or evil life to be supprest and unsatisfied; nor any Patience or Hypomone, where there 
is no agonie from the vexation of self-deniall. So that the soul, so long as it 
is Autaparnes or Hypomone, is a thing complex or con­
crete, necessarily including the corruption of that evil life 
or spirit, which is the souls self for a time. Hence is that 
riddle easily opened, How the strength of Autaparnes is the 
weakning of Simon; and the destruction of him and 
Hypomone in the valley of Ain Simons consummation and 
perfection, or rather his translation or . 

Anautaesthetus, , One that feels not him­
self, or at least relisheth not himself. 

Aelpon, , not hoping, or without hope. 

Apterie, , from a negative, and , a wing. 
It signifies the want of wings. 

Apathie, , To be without passion. 

Autopathie, , denotates the being self-struck­
en, to be sensible of what harms us, rather then what is ab­
solutely evil. 

Ain, Not to be, To be nothing; from  Non, nihil, or 
nemo. 

Anautaestthesie, , Without self-sensednesse, 
or relishing ones self. 

Aeon, , Eternitie. 

Æther, , from  to burn. The fluid fiery
nature of heaven, the same that  which signifie 
as much. viz. a fierie fluour, or a fluid fire. 



Aides. , It ordinarily signifies Orcus or Pluto;
here the winter Sunne: the etymon fits both, . 
Hell is dark, and the Sunne in winter leaves us to 
long nights.  

Apogee, , is that absis or ark of the circle of a 
Planet, in which the Planet is further off from the earth, as 
the word it self intimates. 

Autocineticall, , That which moves it self. 

Africk Rock. See Pompon. Mel. lib. 1. cap. 8. Rom. 9. 33. 
1. Cor. 10. 4. 1. Pet. 2. 5. Revel. 5. 10. Psal. 105. 15. 

Ananke, , The same that Hyle is. But the proper 
signification of the word is Necessitie. See Hyle. 

Alethea-land, That is, the land of truth, , 
as the Platonists call it. 

Acronychall. See Cronychall.  


B
BEirah or Beiron, The brutish life, from . brutum. 

Bacha, Weeping. Bacha vale is the valley of tears; 
from  flevit. 
 

C
CHaos. In our blew Chaos, that is, In our corporeall 
spirit. For that is the matter that the soul raiseth her 
phantasmaticall forms in, as the life of the world doth bo­
dily shapes in the heavens or aire. 

Cronychall or Acronychall, that is, , vespertine, 
or at the beginning of night. So a starre is said to rise or set 
Acronychall when it riseth or setteth at the sunne-setting; 
For then is the beginning of night. 

Clare. Claros a citie of Ionia, famous for Apollo's tem
ple and answers, amongst which was this, which I have in
terpreted in Psychathanasia: 




Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 18.

 

D
DIzoia, , Double-livednesse. 

Dæmon, any particular life, any divided spirit; or ra­
ther the power ruling in these. This is  
divido.



Duessa, division or dualitie.  

Daemoniake, That which is according to that divided life 
or particular spirit, that rules for it self. 

Dicæosyne, , Justice or morall righteousnesse. 

Diana, the Moon, by which is set out the dead light or 
letter of the law. 

Deuteropathie, , is a being affected at se­
cond rebound, as I may so say. We see the Sunne not so pro­
perly by sympathie as deuteropathie. As the mundane spi­
rit is affected where the Sunne is, so am I in some manner; 
but not presently, because it is so affected, but because in my 
eye the Sunne is vigorously represented. Otherwise a man 
might see the Sunne if he had but a body of thin aire. 
 

E
EIdos, , Form or Beautie. 

Eloim or Eloah,  signifie, properly 
the strong God. 

Entelechia, : It is nothing else but forma, or 
actus, and belongs even to the most contemptible forms, 
as for example to Motion, which is defined by Arist in the 
third of his Physicks, . 
Scaliger in his 307 exercitation against Cardan descants ve
ry curiously upon this word: Cùm igitur Formam dixeris 
(that is ) intelliges immaterialitatem, simplici­
tatem, potestatem, perfectionem, informationem. Hoc enim 
est : quod innuit maximus Poetarum, Totósque infusa per 
artus. Hoc est, : quia est ultima forma sub cœlestibus, 
& princeps inferiorum, finis & perfectio. Hoc est , 
posse. This goodly mysterie and fit significancie seems plainly for­
ced or fictitious, if you compare it with what was cited out 
of Arist, about Motion, so that when we have made the 
best of , it is but the form of any thing in an ordi­
nary and usuall sense. If we stood much upon words,  
would prove more significant of the nature of the 
soul, even according to Scaligers own etymon, from  and : 
from its permeation and colligation or 
keeping together the bodie from defluxion into its ancient 
principles, which properties be included in  and  
moves forward the body thus kept together:  in­
timates the possession or retention of the body thus mov'd,



that it is rather promov'd by the soul then amov'd from the 
soul. But of these words enough, or rather too much.  

Energie, . It is the operation, efflux or activity 
of any being: as the light of the Sunne is the energie of the 
Sunne, and every phantasm of the soul is the energie of the 
soul. 

Euphrona, , The Night. 
 

G
GAbriel, The strength of God; from  robustus fuit, 
and  Deus. 
 

H
HYle, Materia prima or that dark fluid potentiality of the 
Creature; the straitnesse, repugnancy and incapacity 
of the Creature: as when its being this, destroyes or debili­
tates the capability of being something else, or after some 
other manner. This is all that any wary Platonist will un­
derstand by . 
in Plutarchs . 

Hattove, , the Good, or that eminent 
Good or first Good from whence all good is derived. See 
Ahad. 

Haphe, , The touch. 

Hypomone, , Patience. See Autaparnes. 

Har-Eloim, . The mount of Angels, Genii, 
or particular Spirits. 

Helios, , The Sunne. 

Heterogeneall, is that which consists of parts of a diverse 
nature or form: as for example, a mans body of flesh, bones, 
nerves, &c. 

Homogeneall, That whose nature is of one kind. 
 

I
IDea-Lond, The Intellectuall world. 

Idothea, The fleet passage of fading forms; from , 
Forma, and , curro. 

Ida. See Pompon. Mel. lib. 1. cap. 17. 

Isosceles, A triangle with two sides equall. 

Idiopathie, , is ones proper peculiar , 
mine or thine, being affected thus or so upon this or that oc­
casion; as , is this or that mans proper tem­
per. But this property of affection may also belong unto  



kinds. As an Elephant hath his idiopathy and a man his, 
at the hearing of a pipe; a cat and an Eagle at the sight of 
the Sunne; a dogge and a Circopithecus at the sight of the 
Moon, &c.  

Iao. A corruption of the Tetragrammaton. Greek wri­
ters have strangely mash'd this word , some calling it 
, others , some . It is very likely that from this 
 came Bacchus his appellation , and the Mæna­
des acclamations  in his Orgia. Which sutes well with 
the Clarian Oracle, which saith that in Autumne, the Sun 
is called , which is the time of vintage.


. See Fullers Miscel. 
2. Book. 


 

L
LOgos, , The appellation of the Sonne of God. 
It is ordinarily translated, the Word, but hath an am­
ple signification. It signifieth Reason, Proportion, Form, 
Essence, any inward single thought or apprehension; Is any 
thing but matter, and matter is nothing. 

Leontopolis, , The Lions city or Politie. 

Lypon, from , sorrow. 
 

M
MOnocardia, , from  and , single-­
heartednesse. 

Myrmecopolis, , The City or Polity of Pis­
mires. 

Michael, Who like unto God? from  Quis, and  
similitudinis, and  Deus. 

Monad, , is unitas, the principle of all numbers, 
an emblem of the Deity; And so the Pythagoreans call it 
, God. It is from , because it is , stable 
and immoveable, a firm Cube of it self. One time one time 
One remains still one. See Ahad. 
 

N
NEurospast, , a Puppet or any Machina that's 
moved by an unseen string or nerve. 
 

O
ON, , The Beeing. 

Ogdoas, , numerus octonarius, the number of 
eight. 



Onopolis, , The asses City or Politie.  
 

P
PSyche, , Soul or spirit. 

Penia, , Want, or poverty. 

Physis, , Nature vegetative. 

Proteus, Vertumnus, changeablenesse. 

Psychania, The land of Souls. 

Philosomatus, , A lover of his body. 

Psittacusa, The land of Parots. 

Pithecusa, The land of Apes. 

Pithecus, , an Ape. 

Phobon, from , Fear. 

Phrenition, Anger, impatiency, fury; from , phren­
sie or madnesse. Ira furor brevis est. 

Pantheothen, , All from God. Which is true 
in one sense, false in another. You'll easly discern the sense 
in the place you find the word. This passage of Panthcothen 
contains a very savory & hearty reproof of all, be they what 
they will, that do make use of that intricate mystery of fate 
and infirmity, safely to guard themselves from the due re­
prehensions and just expostulations of the earnest messen­
gers of God, who would rouse them out of this sleep of sin, 
and stirre them up seriously to seek after the might and spirit 
of Christ, that may work wonderfully in their souls to a 
glorious conquest and triumph against the devil, death and 
corruption. 

Pandemoniothen, , All from the devil; 
viz. all false perswasions and ill effects of them. 

Panoply, , Armour for the whole body. 

Pteroessa, , The land of winged souls; from 
 a wing. 

Perigee, , Is that absis or ark of a Planets circle, 
in which it comes nearer the earth. 

Psychicall, Though  be a generall name and belongs 
to the souls of beasts and plants, yet I understand by life 
Psychicall, such centrall life as is capable of Aeon and 
Ahad. 

Parelies, , are rorid clouds which bear the image 
of the Sunne. 

Psittaco, Don Psittaco, from Psittacus a Parot, a bird



that speaks significant words, whose sense notwithstanding 
it self is ignorant of. The dialogue betwixt this Parot and 
Mnemon sets out the vanity of all superficiall conceited 
Theologasters, of what sect soever, having but the surface 
and thin imagination of divinity, but truly devoid of the 
spirit and in ward power of Christ, the living well-spring of 
knowledge and virtue, and yet do pride themselves in prat­
ling and discoursing of the most hidden and abstruse myste­
ries of God, and take all occasions to shew forth their good­
ly skill and wonderfull insight into holy truth, when as they 
have indeed scarce licked the out-side of the glasse wherein 
it lies.  

Plastick, , is that efformative might in 
the seed that shapes the body in its growth 

Phantasme, , Any thing that the soul con­
ceives in it self, without any present externall object. 

Parallax, , is the distance betwixt the true and 
seeming place of a starre; proceeding from the sensible dif­
ference of the centre, and the height of the superficies of the 
earth in reference to the starre, and from the stars declining 
from the Zenith. 

Protopathy, . It is a suffering or being affe­
cted at first, that is, without circulation. If any man strike 
me I feel immediately; because my soul is united with this 
body that is struck: and this is protopathy. If the aire be 
struck aloof off, I am sensible also of that, but by circulation 
or propagation of that impression unto my eare; and this is 
deuteropathy. See, Deuteropathy. 

Periphere, Peripheria, it is the line that terminates 
a circle. 
 

Q
QUadiate, A figure with foure 
equall sides and foure right angles. The rightnesse of the angles, is a plain 
embleme of erectnesse or uprightnesse of mind: The num­
ber of the sides, as also of the angles, being pariter par, that 
is equally divisible to the utmost unities (, 
as it is in Aristotle) intimates equity or justice. The sides 
are equall one with another and so are the angles; and the 
number of the sides and angles equall one with another. 
Both the numbers put together are a number pariter par a­



gain, and constitute the first cube which is eight: That addes 
steddinesse and perseverance in true justice and uprightnesse 
toward God and man. Hypomone bears all this, that is, 
all that dolour and vexation that comes from the keeping 
our perverse heart to so strait and streight a rule.  
 

RR
RHomboides, is a parallelogrammicall figure with une­
quall sides, and oblique angles. 
 

S
SPerm. It signifies ordinarily seed. I put it for the , 
the ratio seminalis, or the invisible plasti­
call form that shapes every visible creature. 

Solyma, or Salem from , Peace. 

Simon, intimates obedience from , obedivit. 

Semele, Imagination; from , imago. 

Scalen, a triangle with all sides unequall. 
 

T
TAsis, , extension. 

Tagathon, , The Good; the same with Hat­
tove. 
 

U
URanore, The light or beauty of heaven, from , and 
 lux, or  pulchritudo. 
 

Z
ZEus, , Jupiter, from , ferveo, or , vivo.






