


A 
GLOSSARY 
TO EXPLAIN 
The Original, the Acceptation, and Obsoleteness
Of WORDS and PHRASES. 

And to shew the Rise, Practice, and Alteration 
Of Customs, Laws, and Manners.

A

ABUNDA.A mete or bound.---
Juxta ripam de Charwell usque 
ad metas & abundas ibidem per
me concessas, p. 208. from Sax. banð
a bond, from binðan to bind. Hence 
Hat-band, wrist-band, neck-band: to
bound, to rebound: A Ban, an enclosed 
field or limited piece of ground. The 
Ban of a house or a mill, the close or 
back-yard adjoining to it. A Bandog, 
a Mastiff kept close, or tied up. A Ban­
dore, or veil of a widow to bind over 
or cover her head and face. A Horse-­
Bin, which in Kent is that apartment 
of a stable, where the chaff and cut 
meat is secured by a partition of boards. 
A Bin or Bing, a Safe, an Aumbry or 
Cupboard in a Buttery or Larder. The 
kiln of the furnace wherein they burn 
their Charcoal for the melting of met­
als, is commonly call'd the Bing. And 
the Cistern, into which they throw their 
crystallized Allom for the water to 
drain from it, is call'd a Bing at Whitby 
in Yorkshire. A Bind of Eels, is a string 
or stick of Eels. A Binne of hides or 
skins, is in some Countries a quantity 
for common sale, consisting of thirty 
three skins or hides. 

OED lists but gives no date for "horse-bin(n)". "bandore(n)" predates the first recorded OED entry (1712).



ABUTTARE.To abutt, vid. Buttes.
Abuttat super prædictam terram, p. 399. 
In a Terrier, or description of the site 
of land, the sides on the breadth are 
said to be adjacentes, lying or border­
ing, and the ends only in length are 
abuttantes, abutting or bounding. Which 
in old surveys they sometime expressed 
by Capitare to head, or the head-land so 
bounding. As in the Rental of Wye in 
Kent belonging to the Abby of Battel 
in Sussex, Tenent octo acras juxta Go­
reswall capitantes ad prædictam wal­
lam, Custumar de Bello. f. 241. Hence 
to go about was properly to go round 
by the end, instead of striking cross the 
middle. 

ACOLYTHUS. An Acolite, who in
our old English was call'd a Colet, from 
which office came the family of Dean
Colet Founder of Pauls school. An
inferiour Church-servant, who next 
under the Sub-Deacon, waited on the 
Priests and Deacons, and perform'd the 
meaner offices of lighting the candles, 
carrying the bread and wine, and pay­
ing other servile attendance.Vacante 



Ecclesia de Ambresdon, Rector & Con­
ventus de Asherugge Johannem de Ca­
pella Acolythum præsentarunt. p.346.

ACRA. An acre, from Sax. Æen a 
field. The word at first signified not 
a determin'd quantity of land, but any 
open ground, especially a wide cam­
pagne: and that sense of it seems pre­
served in the names of places, Castle-­ 
Acre, West-Acre, &c. in Com. Norfolk
When the word was applied to the mea­
sure of ground, the quantity was still 
various, but determin'd by the Statutes 
of 31. Edw. I. and 24. Hen. VIII. c. 4. 
One acre to consist of eight score 
perches, fourty in length and four in 
breadth, or so in proportion. Tho'
the Perch still differed in different Coun­
ties, vid. Perch. At the great Dooms­
day Inquisition, the common pasture 
seems measured by hides, the arable land 
by carucates, and the meadow by acres, 
p. 65. ------ Exceptis virgis & buttis, 
quarum quatuor virgæ faciunt unam a­
cram, & aliquando plures, suniliter ali­
quando quatuor buttes, aliquando quin­
que, aliquando sex, aliquando septem,
aliquando octo faciunt unam acram, vide­
licet secundum quantitatem earundem in 
longitudine & latitudine. p. 534

ACQUIETARE. To acquit or dis­
charge, or to testifie the receipt of a 
debt by giving an Acquittance. Pro ifta 
donatione & concessione acquietavcrunt 
fratres prædicti de quinque marcis ar­
genti. p. 126. It was the common forms in 
Deeds of gift, and other conveyance. ----
Nos autem ---- warantizabimus acqui­
etabimus & defendemus in perpetuum.
---- Pro hac autem warantia acquietan­
tia & defensione. ---- Hence to quit any 
claim or pretension. To get quit of any 
danger or trouble. Quite perfectly, en­
tirely, as quite dead, &c. Quotted, satis­
fied and cloyed, as his stomach is quite
quotted.

ACTIONES. The whole process
and transaction of a gift and Charter, 
and other formal rites and solemnities 
of a public conveyance. So in the do­
nation of Musewell in Ambrosden to 
the Abby of Missenden. ---- Assuerunt 
hiis actionibus præsentes & testes, p. 76.

ADRAMIRE, Adrhamire, Arra­  
mire, Arramare. To Arrain, i. e. to
appeal to the Law, to offer proof for
the claim of right, to proceed to an 
Assise or Trial, and stand to the verdict 
of a Jury. So, To arraine a writ of No­
vel disseisin, i. e. To prefer such an
Action, and prosecute the issue of it. 
To arraign an Assise, i. e. To make plaint, 
to open the cause, and sue for justice. 
To arraign a Criminal, i. e. To indict 
and bring him to his trial. Dr. Cowel 
would derive this term from the French 
Arranger, to dispose or set in order,
which conjecture is approved and justi­
fied by the latter Editor of that Inter­
preter. But the more learned Sir Hen.
Spelman refers it to the old French 
word Arramir, to swear or take a so­
lemn oath. As if Arramire Assisam were
to appeal to the oaths of witnesses, and 
to the verdict of a Jury. But indeed I 
rather think that Adramire was at first 
a contraction of Ad arma ire, because 
the old legal trial both for the title of 
estates and the charge of crimes, was 
by solemn combat or duel, when Arra­
mire or Arramare was to alarm or call
the accused person to a decisive trial at 
Arms. And because the Champions 
were upon the first challenge to swear 
that they would put themselves on this 
military issue : and at the time and place
of combat were again to take formal 
oaths to observe the stated laws of the
Camp ; Therefore Arramire was to 
swear, but in a secondary sense, as so­
lemn swearing did attend and relate to
their solemn fighting. When this bar­
barous custom of determining a cause 
by arms and blood, was succeeded by the
more civilized way of Assise or Trial by 
Jury, temp. Hen. 2. then the word was
continued, when the method was alter'd, 
and Arramire versus aliquem was to 



appeal for justice against a person, and 
to sue for the benefit of a public trial. 
And Arramire reum was to arraign a 
Criminal, and offer proof for the con­
viction of him. ---- Thomans Abbas de 
Egnesham in Curia hic adramivit ver­
sus eos de Advocatione Ecclsiæ de Sul­
thorn, p. 351. 

ADVOUSON OF CHURCHES.
No church legally consecrated without 
an allotment of manse and glebe, made 
generally by the Lord of the Mannor, 
who thereby became Advocate or Pa­
tron of that Church, p. 222. So as the 
Lordship of the Mannor and Patronage 
of the Church were rarely in different 
hands, till Advousons were unhappily 
given to Religious Houses, p. 276. Du­
ring a controversie for the right of Pa­
tronage, the Diocesan presented to the 
Church salvo jure utriusque. So in a 
suit depending between William Earl 
of Sarum and the Abbat of Barlings, for
the Advouson of the Church of Midle­
ton, p. 192. So Hugh Bishop of Linc.
presented to the Church of Godington,
in a dispute of title between Thomas 
de Camvill and the Abbess of Alveston,
p. 193. When two several persons 
presented their respective Clerk, an In­
quisition was directed from the Arch­
deacon to be executed within the pa­
rish, and return'd into the Court, p. 346.
No such Inquisition, if the right were 
apparent, Nulla inquisitione in hac parte 
capta, quia Domino constabat de jure pa­
tronatus, p. 507. When the King pre­
sented a Clerk upon a false title, the 
Bishop instituted the other's clerk, but
with great deference to the King's pre­
tended title, and obliging the Clerk so
instituted to an oath of resignation, if
the King's right should afterward ap­
pear. Post institiitionem suam prædictam
juravit tactis sacro sanctis Evangeliis
quod si contigerit dictum Regem evin­
cere jus Patronatus Ecclesiæ memoratæ 
(i.e. de Ambresdon) illam sine coactione
aliqua resignaret, p. 347. If the Patron
presented not within six months, there 
was a lapse to the Bishop, Dicunt e­
tiam quod tempus semestre nondum
elapsum est, p. 351. The King and 
other Guardians presented in the right 
of Wards, p. 192, 193. When the right 
of Advouson was determin'd by Law, 
a Writ lay to the Bishop to admit the 
right Clerk, Concessum est quod præ­
dictus Thomas Abbas habeat Breve E­
piscopo Lincoln. quod ad præsentationem
ipsius Abbatis ad prædictam Ecclesiam
idoneam personam admittat, p. 351. 
The Advouson of Churches in such 
Mannors, as were held of the King in 
Capite, not to be given by the Lords to 
Religious or Charitable uses, without 
Inquisition Ad quod dampnum, and li­
cence of the King, p. 352.  Trails for
right of Advouson were in Courts Chri­
stian, p. 642. To prevent ligitious suits 
for the title to Benefices, the Rural
Deans took an account of the names
and number of the Parish Churches
within their respective districts; what
the Christian name and Sirname of the 
several Incumbents, the time of their 
collation to such Benefices, by what
title they held them, whither by Insti­
tution, Commendam, or Custody; of what
age they were, and in what Orders;
whither Beneficed in more than one 
Church; the name and quality of the 
Patrons; and the value of every Bene­
fice by the last taxation. This Register
was distinctly transcrib'd, and a fair
copy delivered to the Diocesan, by him
transmitted to the Metropolitan in 
the next Provincial Council, p. 647. 
vid. Patron.

ADVOUSON of Religious Houses.
As those who built and endowed a 
Parish Church, were by that title made
Patrons of it: So those who founded
any House of Religion, had thereby the
Advouson or Patronage of it. Some­
time the Patrons had the sole nomina­
tion of the Prelate, Abbat, or Prior; ei­
ther by investiture or delivery of a 



pastoral staff, as Will. Mareschal Earl 
of Pembroke to the Abby of Noteley
Com. Buck. p. 147. Or by bare dona­
tion or presentation to the Diocesan; 
As Reginald Earl of Bologne in his Char­
ter to the Priory of Cold-Norton, Non
hoc autem prætermittendum est, quod
domus illa de nostra donatione est, & nos
ibi Priorem apponere debemus, p. 163.
If a free election were left to the Reli­
gious, yet a Conge d'eslire or license of 
electing was first to be obtain'd from 
the Patron, or in his absence out of 
England, from the Seneschal or Steward 
of his Barony. So in the Nunnery of 
Stodley, the Founder Edmund Earl of 
Cornwall thus provided, Nec est præ­
termitterndum, quod quotiescunque Prio­
rissam eligere contigerit ad eundem Pri­
oratum, de seipsis Priorissam de assensu
meo vel Seneschalli mei, si in Anglia non
fuero, eligere licebit. Cum autem electa 
fuerit, ad præsentationem meam vel Se­
neschalli mei si in Anglia non fuero Do­
mino Lincoln. Episcopo debet præsen­
tari, p. 165. When the title of Patro­
nage was in dispute, the religious ap­
plied themselves to which they pleas'd 
of the contending parties: so the Monks 
of Notley ask'd license of electing their 
Abbat from the Lady Maud de Morti­
mer, whom they presum'd to be their 
Patroness, tho' the Earl of Glocester 
claim'd that right, p. 314. The Patro­
nage lapsed to the Lord of the Honour, 
if the family of the Founder was ex­
tinct; So Edmund Earl of Cornwall 
became Patron of the Nunnery of Go­
ring, by no other title, than as that 
House was situate within the Honour 
of Walingford, p. 329. On the death 
of the Prelate or Governour, the lands 
escheated to the Patron as Lord of the 
fee, and were to be compounded for by 
Relief, Heriot, and other burdens of 
Military service: unless their endow­
ment was Frank-Almoin, or such right 
in the fee was expresly renounc'd: As 
Edmund Earl of Cornwall in his Char­
ter to the College of Bonhommes at Ashe­
rugge. - Ita quod cedente vel decedente 
Rectore Ecclefiæ de Efferugge prædicta,
quod nos vel Hæredes nostri - nullate­
nus habeamus ingressum in prædictis
maneriis seu Advocationibus Ecclesia­
rum prædictarum sive in aliquibus suis
pertinentiis quicquam nos intromitta­
mus tempore vacationis quo carebunt
Rectore, sed semper in manibus ipsorum
fratrum tam tempore vacationis quam
aliis temporibus remaneant, ne statum
suum in aliquo mutent, p. 311. In the
vacancy of any Religious House the
Patron presented to the Churches of 
which the Religious had the Advouson,
- Lucia de Arderne recognovit advoca­
tionem illam (i.e. Ecclesiæ de Souldern)
esse jus prædictæ Abbatiæ de Egnesham
& post mortem cujusdam Giberti Ab­
batis vacante prædicta Abbatia quidam
Richardus de Gravefend quondam Lin­
coln Episcopus loci illius Ordinarius, &
Advocatus prædictæ Abbati&Aelig; contulit
illam Ecclesiam cuidam Galfrido de
Stoke clerico suo , p. 351. When an
Abby of Royal foundation was engag'd
in great debts, at the next vacancy the
King took the Abby into his hands, and
committed the custody to some Steward,
to receive the profits and discharge the
said incumbrance, p. 359.

AFRICANA. A Turkey, either 
from Africa the Country from whence 
they were brought into these Northern 
parts; Or perhaps from the old Latin 
Afra, a Bird. - Afras aves esse aiunt, 
Lat. Gloss. MS. - Sex Africanæ fœ­
minæ, p. 287. A certain number of
this sort of fowl was frequently reser­
ved among the provisions paid to the 
Lord from his custumary Tenents.

AGILLARIUS. A Heyward, i.e. 
A Herd-ward or keeper of the herd of 
cattel in a Common field, sworn at the 
Lord's Court by solemn oath, of which 
the form is delivered by Kitchin of 
Courts, f. 46. Quoddam pratum viride
quod vocatur Heywards-mere, eo quod



pertineat ad officium Agillarii Domini
Lestraunge, p. 354. Which pratum
viride was I believe the same with what
is now call'd Tadbury balk or The Ed­
burg way balk, in the field of Bisiter
Kings-end, of which the grass or her­
bage is still the right and profit of the
Tithing-man of Kings-end. The office
of Agillarius was of two sorts, first,
The common Heyward of a Town or
village, to supervise the greater cattle or
common herd of beasts, and keep them
within their due bounds; He was o­
therwise call'd Bubulcus, Cowward,
(which is turn'd into a name of re­
proach, a pitiful Coward) who if he was
a Cottager or other servile Tenant, he
was exempted from the custumary works
and labours, because he was presum'd
to be alway attending on his herd, as a
Shepherd on his flock, who had there­
fore the like privilege. - Sunt ibi xvi.
Cotarii, quorum alii sunt Bubulici Do­
mini, alii sunt Pastores, qui si non es­
sent deberet quilibet unum opus singulis
septimanis per annum. Cartul. Glaston.
MS. f. 40. Secondly, the Agillarius of
the Lord of a Mannor, or of a Religi­
ous House, who was to take care of the 
tillage, and harvest work, to pay the
labourers, and to see there were no en­
croachments or trespasses committed, &c.
The same in effect with that officer
who is call'd the Fields-man and the
Tithing-man. - Et in solutis diversis
hominibus & fœminis primo die Julii
conductis ad sarculandum diversa blada
ut patet per talliam contra Agillarium
hoc anno xvi. sol. x. den. p. 576. His
wages in 3. Hen. VI. was a noble, - Et
in stipendio Roberti Clerk Agillarii hoc
anno xiii. sol. iv. den. p. 576.

AGISTATOR. The Agister in a 
forest, from the Fr. gister to lie and
feed for a certain giste or rate paid to
the King. Agister in the modern French
Ajouster, to receive in cattel to be so
pastur'd or gisted, to keep them within
their bounds, and deliver them to the
owners upon the payment of such terms
for their feeding. Agistare forestam was
to take in cattel to pasture within the
bounds of the forest, for one month, viz.
fifteen days before Michaelmass, and
fifteen days after, when the running of
cattel would be no prejudice to the
game. Agistator was the forest officer,
who was to take account of the cattel
so agisted, whither they belong'd to Te­
nants within the forest, who had free
gistment, or to neighbouring Inhabitants
who paid a common rate. The Agista­
tores in an old version of Charta de fo­
resta, are called Gyst-takers or walkers.
- Omnium Regardatorum & Agistato­
rum forestæ prædictæ, p. 209. Homines
sui reddent paunagium dicto manerio
cum agistamentum acciderit. p. 229. - 
eorum animalia agistata fuerunt per duos
annos jam elapsos, & solvent Joh. Appulby
pro agistamento xiii. sol iv. den. p. 497.
Hence our Grasiers now call the foreign
cattel, which they take in to keep by
the week, Gisements or Juicements,
(pronounc'd like the Joices in building,
corrupted from the French adjoustment,
the cross pieces of timber that are ad­
justed or fitted to make the frame of the
 floor.) And to gise or juice ground,
is when the Lord or tenant feeds it not
with his own stock, but takes in other
cattle to agist or feed in it. All Glosso­
graphers agree to derive this word from
the French gister to lie, gest a bed, &c.
But I rather think Agistamentum bears
relation to Ager the field or feeding
place of cattle, and might be the same
as Agrarium, Agerium, Agroticum, the
profit of feeding cattel upon such a 
ground or field. Unless it were so, I 
cannot imagine why the duty or levy 
for repairing the banks and walls in
Romney-marsh, was call'd Agistamen­
tum, and the laying such a proportion
of this duty upon the several estates,
was call'd Agistatio. - Tunc sequitur
numerus omnium acrarum infra dictum 
mariscum - Et etiam agistatio tam in 



magna wallia de Apuldre quam in
parva wallia ad quantitatem terrarum.
Ordinatio Marisci de Romney p. 20.

"herd-ward(n)" not found in OED.



ALTA VIA. A high way or com­
mon road. item alta via & generalis
inter Brehull & Pidinton maneria Do­
mini Regis omnino esset astopata: which
was adjudg'd a trespass against the King
and County, p. 250. Criticks might 
dispute whether the Latin Altus gave
name to, or was borrowed from, the
British Al high, or Alt the ascent of 
any mountain, as Alpen the Alps, from
Al high, and Pen a head or top. Whence
Alpes past into an appellative for any
mountainous or rising places. As High
gave a common to a Highal or Hill.

ALTARAGIUM. The profits a­
rising to the Priest from the peoples
offering at the Altar. Out of these cu­
stumary dues the Religious assign'd a
portion to the Vicar: So the Prior and
Canons of Saint Frideswide, - De præ­
fatæ Ecclesiæ nostræ (i.e. de Oakle)
& Capellarum ejusdem altaragiis, ut te­
nemur, congruam portionem reservatam
eidem Vicario de qua valent commode
sustentari, p. 455. Sometime the whole 
Altarage was alotted to the Vicar, Ha­
bebit Vicarius de Cestreton totum alta­
ragium, p. 543. The Regulars and Se­
cular Priests invented a great many
pretty arts to augment the Altar-offer­
ings; Among other, this one was so
ludicrous, and convey'd such thoughts
of impurity, that it was expresly pro­
hibited by the great Reformer of his 
age Bishop Grofthead. - Audivimus au­
tem unde non mediocriter dolemus, -
quod quidam Sacerdotes hujus lucri ple­
nas injungunt pænitentias, quales sunt,
quod Mulier cognita a Viro post partum
ante suam purificationem deportet de­
inceps oblationem ad Altare cum quali­
bet Muliere purificanda in eadem paro­
chia - quod penitus inhibemus. Constit.
Roberti Episc. Lincoln. MS. f. 3. Since
the Reformation, several disputes arose 
what dues were comprehended under
the title of Altaragium, which were
thus remarkably determin'd in a trial
in the Exechequer in Michaelmass term,
21. Eliz. on Thursday November 12. 
Upon the hearing of the matter betwixt
Ralph Turner Vicar of West-Hadden 
and Edward Andrews, it is ordered,
that the said Vicar shall have by reason
of the words (Altaragium cum manso
competenti) contained in the composition
of the profits assigned for the Vicar's
maintenance, all such things as he ought 
to have by these words, according to the
definition thereof made by the Reverend
Father in God John Bishop of London,
upon conference with the Civilians, viz.
David Hewes Judge of the Admiralty,
Bartholomew Clerk Dean of the Arches,
John Gibson, Henry Joanse, Laurence
Hewes, and Edward Stanhope, all Do­
ctors of the Civil Law: that is to say, by
Altaragium, Tithes of wool, lambs, colts,
calfs, piggs, goslings, chickens, butter,
cheese, hemp, flax, honey, fruits, herbs,
and such other small Tithes, with offer­
ings that shall be due within the parish
of West-Haddon. 

And the like case was for Norton in
Northamptonshire, heard in this Court
within these two or three years, upon
the hearing ordered in the like manner.

Which Judgement I presume was 
grounded on these and the like autho­
rities. Vicarius de Colingham habeat
totum Altaragium, exceptis decimis feoni
& nutrimentorum animalium proveni­
entium de dominico Domini Regis. Mon.
Ang. tom. 3. p. 139 - Ita quod præ­
dictus Vicarius - prædictis oblationi­
bus & obventionibus, non bladis, aut gar­
bis nisi plantatis aut pede fossis ad alta­
ragia communiter spectantibus contentus,
&c. Will. Thorn cap. 30. §.4,&c. Yet 
it seems to be certain, that the Religious
when they alotted the Altaragium in
part or whole to the Vicar or Capellance,
they meant only the custumary and vo­
luntary offerings at the Altar, for some
divine office or service of the Priest,




and not any share of the standing tithes,
whither predial or mixt. 


AMASIA. A Mistress or Concubine
ab amando, as Amorous, Amiable, &c.
Henricus primus filius Willielmi Ba­
stard dedit Editham filiam Forne Ama­
siam suam Roberto de Olleio secundo in 
uxorem, p. 88.


AMERCIAMENTUM. A pecuniary 
punishment impos'd upon offendors a
la mercie at the mercy of the Court,
and therefore in our Law cases is fre­
quently called Misericordia; And there­
fore this difference is commonly stated
between fines and amercements, Fines
are punishments certain and determin'd
by some Statute: Amercements are ar­
bitrary impositions proportion'd to the
fault, at the discretion of the Court. If
the amercement were too grievous, there 
was a relief to be sued by a Writ call'd
Moderata misericordia. The amerce­
ments in County Courts or the Assises
held by Itinerant Judges, were some­
times granted by the King as a special
profit and privilege to a Servant or Fa­
vourite: So King Hen. III. to his bro­
ther Richard Earl of Cornwall, p. 219.
The amercements in the view of Frank­
pledge or Court-Leet, were due to the 
Lord, and receiv'd by his Bayliffs, Bal­
livi Commitis Gloucestriæ venient quolibet
anno semel ad tenendum visum Franci
Plegii in eodem manerio, & asportabunt
omnia amerciamenta inde provenientia,
p. 319. A common privilege that Per­
sons should be amerced by their Peers 
or Equals: So in the Lords Court 
within the Mannor of Hedingdon, -
Quoties contigerit aliquem prædictorum
hominum pro aliquo delicto quoquo modo
amerciari in eadem Curia, per Pares suos
& non per alios amercientur, & hoc se­
cundum modum delicti, p. 320. Ameri­
ciamenta illevabilia were such amerce­
ments, as thro' poverty or escape of the
persons became desperate debts, and 
were deducted in the Accompts of the
Bayliff or Steward, or Collector of rents
and dues: The Prior and Canons of 
Burcester to the Receiver of their rent
and Kirtlington, - In Allocatis eidem pro
amerciamentis illevabilibus hoc anno vi
den. p. 573.


ANABATA. Anaboladium, a Gr.  
ΑγαϐάΜϭαζ to cast over or cover. A Cope 
or Sacerdotal vest to cover the back
and shoulders of the Priest. Et in bolt
rubei say apud Steresbrugge propter ana­
batam faciendam, iv. sol. viii, den, p. 574.


ANCA. A goose, generally female
in distinction from the gander, which
in the North they call a Steg. Anca 
seems a corruption from Anserina, - 
Cum decima ancarum & ovorum - por­
cellos, ancas, ova, p. 455. Anca, Ancus,
was the thigh, or hind legg. - Af­
fer quatuor panes, affer ancum porci,
i.e. a leg of Pork. Hence a hanch of 
Venison, up to the hanches in dirt.
And hence with some allusion to have 
a hank upon, to hanker after.

"hanch(n)" not found in OED.




ANNIVERSARIUM. An Anniver­
sary, call'd by our fore-fathers a Year­
day and a Mind-day, i. e. a memorial­
day. The yearly return of the day of 
death of any person, which the Reli­
gious registred in their Obitual or Mar­
tirology, and annually observ'd in gra­
titude to their Founders and Benefa­
ctors. It was sometime made an express 
condition in a Charter, Yoland Countess 
of Dreux to the Abby of Brueil, - quod 
singulis annis post obitum meum Anni­
versarium solempniter celebrabunt, p.
190. Reginald de Pavelly Founder of 
the Abby of Lisle-Dieu in the Diocese 
of Rhemes, had his Anniversary there 
observ'd Octob. 29. which practise of 
the Religious was a great advantage to 
the history of Men and times. A pie­
tance or portion of meat and drink was 
sometime granted for this purpose. Hen­
ry Vicar of Weston, gave six shillings 
yearly rent to the Abby of Oseney, - 
quos quidem attornavi ad unam pietan­
tiam faciendam in conventu Osneiensi
annuatim in perpetuum in die Anniver­



sarii mei obitus pro anima mea, p. 283.
This was one of the trading arts of the 
Religious, who frequently sold the pur­
chase at very considerable rates. Ed­
mund Rede, Esq. gave largely to the 
Abbat and Convent of Dorchester for 
their sale of this privilege, - Unum 
Anniversarium novem lectionum vide­
licet Placebo & Dirige semel in anno,
p. 626. Whatsoever was given to this 
use was forfeited to the Crown by Stat. 
I Edw. VI. cap. 16. - The surviving 
Relations made custumary offerings at 
the Altar, at every return of such An­
niversary, in gratitude to the memory, 
and in charity to the soul, of their de­
parted friend: This the Religious did 
sometimes assign for a part of the Vicar's 
maintenance, Omnes oblationes in Nup­
tiis, purificationibus, Anniversariis, in
cera, pecunia, ovis, aut fructibus, p. 455.

ANTECESSOR. The word not so 
often applied to the Ancestor of a fa­
mily, as either to the prepossessor of an 
estate, or the predecessor in an office. 
Sicut Antccessores sui tenuerunt melius 
de me & Antecessoribus meis, p. 73. -
Alexander Episcopus Lincoln. - Sicut
Antecessores nostri eam præfatæ Ec­
clesiæ de Egnesham dederunt & conces­
serunt, p. 90.


APPENDICIA. The same as Per­
tinentiæ, the appendages or apperti­
nences of any estate. So Simon Earl of 
Northampton gave to the Knights Tem­
plers, Meritonam cum omnibus appendi­
ciis suis, p. 110. Hence our Pentices or
Pent-houses, Appendicia domus, a Pent-­
stock, &c.


APPELLATIO. An appeal from 
some sentence or jurisdiction to a pre­
sumedly higher judicature, which ap­
peals were frequent, both from the Civil
Magistrates to Ecclesiastical powers, and 
again from the Courts Christian to the 
common Law. This liberty of appeal­
ing was expressly renounc'd to make 
some compacts the more firm and unal­
terable. So the Prior and Convent of 
Burcester, upon a bargain with the Ab­
bat and Convent of Oseney, - Renun­ 
tiantes in hoc facto omnibus impellatio­
nibus super hoc habitis, appellationibus, 
in integrum restitutioni, regiæ prohibi­
tioni, æ omni alii remedio juris Canonici 
& Civilis, p. 344. Appeals to Rome
when made common, were so great an 
interruption of all justice, that they 
were forbid, and severely punish'd. So 
when Gilbert de Segreve Archdeacon of 
Oxford, in 34. Edw. I. appeal'd from 
the King's Court to the Pope, he was 
summon'd to Westminster, and oblig'd 
to renounce his appeal by oath, and to 
find pledges for appearing at the next 
Parliament, p. 353. 


APPROPRIATIO. The granting 
a Parochial Church or the great tithes 
and better profits, ad proprios usus, to 
the proper uses of some Religious house, 
to enjoy for ever: whence they call'd it 
perpetuum beneficium. The Prior 
and Convent of Burcester had two parts 
of the great tithe in Compton-Basset ap­
propriated to them, nomine perpetui 
beneficii, p. 205. In this manner was 
the illegitimate birth of most Appropri­
ations, the Lay-Patrons devoutly and 
(as they thought) innocently resign'd 
their right of Advouson to Religious 
Houses, who by their interest and mony
procur'd from the Popes and Bishops
the annexion of all tithes and profits to
themselves, p. 312. They had many
artificial pretences to allege to the Pope 
and the Diocesan, to extort their con­
sent, p. 481. The methods of appro­
priating and the fatal abuse of thus 
robbing Church and Clergy, discours'd 
at large, p. 433. The Appropriators 
often encroach'd upon the remnant of 
the Vicar, for which invasion of right 
the stout Vicar of Ellesfeld, in 24 Ed. I. 
entred an action against the Prior and 
Canons of St. Frideswide, p. 326. A 
Canon or other Religious who was not a Monk, 
by the Pope's indulgence could 
hold a Vicarage with his station in the 



Convent, - Proviso tamen quod Eccle­
sia (scil. de Acle) per idoneum Cano­
nicum domus vestræ prædictæ (scil. S.
Frideswidæ) prout sede Aprostolica vobis
est indultum, & antiquitus extitit con­
suetum, deserviatur: Qui quidem Cano­
nicus tanquam Vicarius perpetuus a 
loci Diocesano curam animarum recipiet,
p. 375. Unum de Canonicis nostris ut
olim suisse dignoscitur rite electum &
ad ejusdem Ecclesiæ Vicariam legitime
institutum accepimus, p. 455. The Re­
ligious took advantage of the vacancy
of a Church, and then prevail'd with 
the Patron to appropriate and give them
immediate possession: So Robert Gait
in the time of Hugh Wells Bishop of
Lincoln, gave the vacant Church of
Hampton-Gay to the Abbat and Con­
vent of Oseney, and then notified it to
the Bishop, defiring him to give them
admittance, - Noverit discretio vestra
quod defuncto G. Persona Ecclesiæ de
Hampton me eandem Ecclesiam vacan­
them dedisse & concessisse in perpetuum
eleemosinam Abbati & Conventui de
Oseney, p. 404. At other times, the
Religious obtain'd leave to appropriate
a Church of their own Patronage, when
it should next be vacant, and then im­
patient for their prey, bought out the
Incumbent, or got it void by resigna­
tion or exchange, p. 407. One great 
mischief of Appropriations was this,
In the Ordination of a Vicarage the
Altarage or voluntary Oblations were
often divided between the Vicar and
the Religious, which soon lessened the
charity and piety of Christian People,
who grew less free in their Offerings,
when they found a great share must go
away from the Parish-Priest, to whom 
they design'd that bounty, p. 455. The
Religious very apt to oppress the Vicar,
by throwing procurations and other
burdens on them, and particularly, 
when they had convenanted to maintain a
Capellane in some Chappel of ease
within the parish, they shifted off that
charge, and cast it on the Vicar, p. 588.
That the Bishops might not lose by
granting their assent to Appropriations,
they sometimes compounded with the 
Religious for an annual persion to an­
swer the dues that might otherwise arise
to their See from the succession of
Rectors: So in the appropriating of
Merton to the Abby of Egnesham, -
Reservamus insuper nobis & successori­
bus nostris Episcopis Lincoln. nomine
recompensationis indemnitatis & com­
moditatis quæ de dicta Ecclesia obvenire
solebat in singulis vacationibus ejusdem,
& poterit similiter obvenire, pensionem
annuam viginti solidorum ex causa con­
simili, p. 483. One great and popular
pretension of Appropriating Benefices
to the use of the Religious, as to en­
able them the better to relieve the poor,
and in the form of Appropriation it was
sometimes expresly ordain'd, that a per­
petual portion should be alotted at the
discretion of the Bishop to relieve the 
indigent parishioners: So when the
Church of Charlton upon Ottmoor was
given to the Nuns of Henwode Com.
Warwic. - Et etiam pro recreatione
pauperum Parochianorum ipsius Ecclesiæ
alia perpetua portio moderanda arbitrio
Diocesani loci deputari debet, p. 522, 524.
After the Statute of Mortamin, the Re­
ligious still carried on their gainful
trade, by obtaining a dispensation from 
the King: So in the appropriation of
Merton to the Abby of Egnesham, p. 482.
vid. Vicarage.

APPROPRIARE ad honorem. To 
bring a Mannor within the extent and
liberty of such an Honour. Petrus de
Asherugge tunc Seneschallus honoris
Sancti Walerici appropriavit dictum
manerium ad honorem Sancti Walerici,
p. 336. 



APPROPIRARE commmunam. To
separate and enclose an open Common,
or part of it. -   Quod possint sibi appro­
priare & includere pro voluntate sua
tres acras prædictæ placiæ, i. e. in com­
muni pastura, p. 336.

APPRENTICIUS. An Apprentice
or young person bound by Indentures
to a Master, who, upon such covenants
is to teach him his mystery or trade. In
12. Edw. III.  Confirmavi Willielmo
fratri meo Apprenticio apud London,
p. 449. This I think is the oldest au­
thority for the name of a servile Ap­
prentice: at least, I have met with no
mention of them till the beginning of
the next reign, when Henry de Knigh­
ton sub an. 1381.  Apprenticii quoque re­
lictis Magistris suis illuc accurrebant.
And Tho. Walsingham in Ric. II. p. 301.
De londoniis multi Apprenticii, plures
servi, sumptis albis capuciis, invitis
Magistris & Dominis sunt profecti.
The Students and Professors of the
Common Law had the appellation of
 Apprentitii ad Legem, Apprentitii ad
barras, Juris Regni Apprentitii: of
which titles see Selden's Notes on For­
tescue, p. 2.

 ARCHIDIACONUS.  Archdeacons
were at first employ'd by the Bishops in
more servile duties, and alway in sub­
servience to the Urban or Rural Deans
of Christianity, to whom they were as 
much inferiour, as their Order of Dea­
con was to that of Priest. Till by the
advantages of a personal attendance on
the Bishop, and a delegation to examine
and report some causes, and a com­
mission to visit some remoter parts of a 
Diocese, their power and dignity was
advanc'd above the Arch-presbyter or
Dean, p. 638. Archdeacons within the
Diocese of Lincoln collected the Spirit­
tualities of the Bishop, and paid him 
some pensions or portions out of their
Office, - Summa redditus de quo Ar­
chidiaconi respondent Episcopo Lincoln.
per an. ccxvil. xvis. viiid. p. 350.

ARGENTUM ALBUM. Silver
Coin, or current mony. By Doomsday
tenure some rents to the King were paid
in  argento albo common Silver mony,
others in  libris ursis & pensatis, in the
metal and full weight. So the King's 
Mannor at Brehull, reddit per annum
xxviii. libras de albo argento, & pro fo­
resta xii. libras ursas & pensatas, p. 165.
Hence in the next age, that rent which 
was paid in mony was call'd Blanch­
fearm, now the White-rent: and what 
they paid in provision, was term'd 
Black-mail. 

ARIETUM levatio. An old spor­
tive exercise, which seems to have been 
the same with running at the Quintan
or Quintal, which was to fix a post per­
pendicularly in the ground, and place
on the top of it a slender beam turning
on a spindle, with a slob or flat board
at the one end; that while the rider 
strikes at the shield or board, he must
shew his strength and dexterity to escape 
a blow from the turn of the other end.
This sport might be call'd Arietum le­
vatio, because such violent manner of
riding at and striking, did seem to re­
semble the Roman ways of playing their
battering rams: or rather because the
shield or board upon the striking end
was made in the fashion of a ram's head: 
or because they fastned the horns of a
ram at the returning end, to make the
blow more comical. This custumary
English sport, practis'd usually at Wed­
dings, was either so ludicrous or so
dangerous, that it was often forbid by
Ecclesiastical authority. Among the
enquiries to be made by the Archdeacons
within the Diocese of Lincoln, An. 1233.
An alicubi leventer Arietes, vel fiant
scotalla, vel decertetur in præ eundo cum
vexillo matricis Ecclesiæ. In the Synod
at Worcester An. 1240. Can. 38. a strict
command was given, Ne intersint ludis
inhonestis, nec sustineant ludos fieri de
Rege & Regina, nec Arietes levari, nec
palestras publicas. There be two other
authorities that seem more directly to
imply, it was the same with the Quintan.
A constitution of that great Preserver
of Church discipline Bishop Grosthead
commands, that in every Church should



be publish'd a prohibition, Ne quisquam 
levet arietes super rotas, vel alios ludos
statuat, in quibus decertatur pro bravio,
nec hujusmodi ludis quisquam intersit.
And another Constitution of Walter
Bishop of Durham, An. 1255. Insuper
interdicimus levationes arietam super
rotas. & ludos quibus decertatur ad
bravium exequendum. In both which 
injuctions, the expression of levare su­
per rotas, seems to determine it a versa­
tile sport, like a beam or rafter turning
equilibrious upon a pole or post erect.
And the Bravium or Prize which was 
to be given to the Victor. is so de­
scrib'd in the Quintal, by Mat. Paris sub
an. 1253. Eo tempore Juvenes Londi­
nenses statuto Pavone pro bravio, ad sta­
dium quod Quintena vulgariter dicitur,
vires propria & equorum cursus sunt
experti. From whence I am apt to con­
clude, that Quintana and Arietum leva­
tio were the same manly exercise, or
at least that the latter was but a va­
ried improvement of the former, p. 21.

ARMA DARE. To make a Knight.
An. 1144. 9, 10. King Steph. Ego Bri­
entius filius Comitis quem bonus Rex
Henricus nutrivit, & cui arma dedit &
honorem, p. 101.

ARMA CAPERE. To be made a
Knight. An. 12-8. 5, 6. Edw. III. A
die quo dictus Comes (scil. Henricus de
Lacy) arma militaria a Domino Hen­
rico Rege Ratre nostro cepit, p. 289.

ARMIGERI. Not only a title of
dignity, but the common appellation of
servants, especially in Convents. I sup­
pose the better sort of servants, yet such
as wore Liveries in the Priory of Bur­
cester, where in 4. Hen. VI. the Prior
and Bursar accounted, - Et in blodeo
panno empto pro Armigeris & valectis
Prioris de Johanne Bandye de magna
Tue, p. 576. This the same servile 
office which by Sir Hen. Spelman is
call'd quædam species Armigerorum in
the Abby of Battle Com. Suss. where
the Abbat and Convent granted to 
Hugh Fraunceis Armigero suo, a yearly
pension of wages, and a custumary
Livery, Ac etiam liberaturam nostram,
de secta Armigerorum nostrorum, quo­
tiens nos liberaturam generalem dare
contigerit. - Necnon tabulam suam in­
fra idem Monasterium in Aula nostra
prout alicui Amigerorum nostrorum ibi­
dem deservitur seu deservietur, dum
tamen idem Huge Fraunceis nobis & 
successoribus nostris suum congruum ser­
vitium medio tempore, corporis sui vale­
tudine durante, realiter exhibeat. Pos­
sibly these Armigeri of the Religious
(like the military Armour-bearers)
might be their Retinue of the better
rank, who carried their Banners in any
publick procession, and attended in
some other of the more gentil offices.
As our Bedelli Armigeri, Esquire Bedels.

ARRERAGIUM.