



A Table of the words of art, vsed in the effecting these
base villanies.
Wherein is discouered the nature of euery terme, beeing
proper to none but to the professors therof.



1. High Law. Robbing by the high way side.

2. Sacking Law, Lechery.

3. Cheting Law. Play at false Dice.

4. Cros-biting Law. Coosenage by whores.

5. Conny-catching Law. Coosenage by Cardes.

6. Versing Law. Coosenage by false gold.

7. Figging Law. Cutting of purses,
and picking of pockets.

8. Barnards Law.  A drunken coosenage by cards.





These are the eyght Lawes of villanie leading the high way
to infamie.



In high Law.

The Theefe is called a High Lawyer.
He that setteth the Watch, a Scripper.
He that standeth to watch, an Oake.
He that is robd, the Martin,
When he yeeldeth, Stouping.


In Sacking Law.

The Bawde if it be a woman, a Pandar.
The Bawde if a man, an Apple-squire.
The Whore, a Commodity.
The Whoorehouse, a Trugging place.


In Cheting Law.

Pardon mee Gentlemen, for although no man could
better then my selfe discouer this Law & his tearmes,
and the name of their Cheates, Bard-dice, Flattes,
Forgers, Langrets, Gourds, Demies, and many o­
thers, with theyr nature, and the crosses and contra­
ries to them vppon aduantage, yet for some speciall
reasons, heerein I will be silent.


In Cros-biting Law. 

The Whore, the Traffique,
The man that is brought in, the Simpler.
The villaines that take them, the Cros-biters,


In Conny-catching
Law.

The party that taketh vp the Conny, the Setter,
He that playeth the game, the Verser,
He that is coosened, the Conny,
He that comes in to them, the Barnackle,
The money that is wonne, Purchase.


In Versing Law. 

He that bringeth him in, the Verser,
The poore Countrey man, the Coosin,
And the drunkard that comes in, the Suffler.


In Figging Law.

The Cutte purse, a Nippe,
He that is halfe with him, the Snappe,
The knife, a Cuttle boung,
The picke pocket, a Foist,
He that faceth the man, the Stale,
Taking the Purse, Drawing,
Spying of him, Smoaking,
The purse, the Bong,
The money, the Shelles,
The act doing, Striking.


In Barnards Law.

He that fetcheth in the man, the Taker,
He that is taken, the Coosin,
The landed man, the Verser,
The drunken man, the Barnard,
And he that makes the Fray, the Rutter.




Cum multis alijs quæ nunc præscribere longum est.




These quaint tearmes do these base arts vse to shadow
their villanie withall. for, Multa latent quæ non patent, ob­
scuring their filthie craftes with these faire colours, that
the ignorant may not espie what their subtiltie is: but
their end will be like their beginning, hatcht with Cain,
and consumed with Iudas: and so bidding them adue to 
the deuill, and you farewell to God, I end. And nowe to 
the arte of Cros-biting.


