



Dictionarium Rusticum;

OR, THE

INTERPRETATIONS

AND

SIGNIFICATIONS

OF SEVERAL

RUSTICK TERMS,

Used in several Places of ENGLAND;

AND ALSO

The Names of several Instruments and Materials, used
in this Mystery of AGRICULTURE,
and other intricate Expressions dispersed in our

Rural Authors.

London, Printed in the Year 1668.






TO THE

READER.


THis Dictionary, above any other part of this Book, may be
thought superfluous, because it being intended onely for the use
of Husbandmen, they above all other best understand the
Terms, and their several significations, so that herein we seem to in­
struct those that are best able to teach us, which might be true if they all
spoke the same language, but there is such a Babel of confusion as well
in their Terms and Names of things, as there is in the practice of the Art
of Agriculture it self, that remove a Husbandman but sixty, or an
hundred Miles from the place where he hath constantly exercised his
Husbandry, to another, and he shall not onely admire their Method and
Order in Tilling the Land, but also at their strange and uncouth Lan­
guage and Terms, by which they name their several Utensils, Instru­
ments, or Materials they use; Also our several Authors that have writ­
ten of this Subject, very much differ in the Appellation of several things,
they generally speaking in their Writings, the Language of the Place
and Age they lived in, that their Books read in another part of the
Countrey, or in succeeding Times, seem either fabulous or intricate;
wherefore that our Authors, and this present Tract, may be the better
understood, and also that one Countrey-man may understand what an­
other means in a remote place, I have here given you the Interpretation,
and Signification of such Words and Terms that I remember I have
either read or heard, which I hope may satisfie, and supply that defect
of such a Dictionary that hath been so long complained of. If any Terms
are wanting, or not rightly interpreted, I desire you to consider the place
you live in, where perhaps may be some Terms used, or so interpreted,
that are not so in any other place of England, which may I hope suffi­
ciently excuse my ignorance of them; Or else they may be Terms so uni­
versally understood that they need no interpretation, as Wheat, Rye,
Cart, Waggon, &c.






DICTIONARIUM RUSTICUM;

OR,

The Interpretations and Significations of several
Rustick Terms, &c.


A

AAnes, or Awnes, the Spires or Beards of Barley, or other
Bearded Grain.

Ablactation is one of the ways of Grafting, that is, weaning
the Cion by degrees from its Mother, being not wholly to be
cut there-from, till it be firmly united to the Stock, on which
it is grafted.

Ablaqueation is the taking away the Earth, or uncovering the
Roots of Trees.

An Acre is one hundred and sixty square Lug, or Perch of Land, at
sixteen foot and a half to the Perch; but of Coppice Wood
eighteen foot to the Perch is the usual Allowance.

An Adds is a sharp Tool made different from an Ax, and more con­
venient for the cutting of the hollow side of any Board or
Timber, such as the Coopers generally make use of.

Agriculture, the Tilling or Improving of Land.

Alveary, a Hive of Bees.

Apiary, a Place or Court where Bees are kept.

An Aquaduct, a Water-course, or Carriage for Water.

Aquaticks, Plants delighting in the Water.

Arders, Fallowings, or Ploughings of Ground.

Aromaticks, Plants odoriferous, or having a Spicy smell.

Avenues, Ways or Passages, or Rows or Walks of Trees.

Aviary, a place where Birds are kept, or do resort unto.

Axletree, or Axis, that which the Wheel of a Cart, or such like,
moveth on.


B

BAg, the Udder of a Cow, in some places is called the Cows
Bag.

No OED entry, but two 18th-century citations under other headwords.



Balks, Ridges, or Banks.

Barth, a warm Place or Pasture for Calves, or Lambs, &c.

Barrow, is of two sorts, either a Hand-barrow, or a Wheel-barrow.




Barton, a Back-side.

The headword "barton" predates earliest OED citation of this sense (1674).



Baven, Brush-faggots, made with the Brush at length.

Beestings, the first Milk from the Cow after Calving.

Beetle, or Boytle, a Wooden Instrument wherewith they drive
Wedges, Piles, Stakes, &c.

Beverage, Drink, or mingled Drink.

A Bill, is an Edge-tool at the end of a stale or handle; if short,
then it is called a Hand-bill; if long, then a Hedging-bill.

A Binn, a place made of Boards to put Corn in.

Blast, Corn is said to be blasted when it is poor and thin in the Ear,
with little Flower in it.

OED does not have "blast" as a separate form for "blasted" in this sense.



Blight. See Mildew.

Blith, Yielding Milk.

Bole, or Boale, the main body of a Tree.

Boot, necessary Timber or Wood for necessary uses, as Plough-boot,
House-boot, Fire-boot, &c.

OED has no entry for "house-boot" in this sense. It offers "worn in the house, as house-boot" under "boot, n.1."



Boreas, the North-east Winde.

Bow, and Ox-bow, or Yoak.

Bragget, a Drink made with Honey and Spice, much used in
Wales.

Brake, Fern.

Brank, Buck, or French-wheat, a Summer Grain, delighting in warm
Land.

A Breast-plough, a sort of Plough driven by main force with ones
breast, commonly used in paring the Turf in burn-baiting.

Predates earliest OED citation for "breast-plough" (1725).



A Breck, or Brack, a Gap in a Hedge.

Brimme, a Sow is said to go to Brimme when she goes to the Boar.

To Brite, or bright, Hops are said to Brite when they are over-ripe,
and shatter.

Earliest OED citation.



Browse, or brouce, the Tops of the Branches of Trees that Cattel
usually feed on.

To Burn-bait, or burn the Bait. Vide Denshire.

Earliest OED citation.



Bulchin, a Calf.

Bullimony, a Mixture of several sorts of Grain.

Bushel, in some places it is taken for two Strike, or two Bushels.


C

A Cartwright, one that makes Carts, Waggon, &c.

To Cave, or Chave, is with a large Rake, or such like Instru­
ment, to divide the greater from the lesser, as the larger Chaff
from the Corn, or smaller Chaff; Also larger Coals from the
lesser.

Ceres, the Goddess of Corn, Seeds, and Tillage; Also the Title of
one of the Books of Mr. Rea, treating of Seeds.

Chaff, the Refuse or Dust in winnowing of Corn.

Champion Lands not inclosed, or large Fields, Down, or Places
without Woods or Hedges.

Cheese-lip, the Bag wherein Housewifes prepare and keep their
Runnet, or Rennet for their Cheese.



Chitting, the Seed is said to chit when it shoots first its small Root
in the Earth.

The noun predates the earliest OED citation, 1727.



A Ciderist, One that deals in Cider, or an affector of Cider.

Clogs, Pieces of Wood, or such like, fastened about the necks, or to
the legs of Beasts, they they run not away.

A Cock, is of Hay or Corn laid on heaps to preserve it against the
extremities of the weather.

Codware, Such Seed or Grain that is contained in Cods, as Pease,
Beans, &c.

A Colefire, Is a parcel of Fire-wood set up for sale or use, contain­
ing when it is burnt a Load of Coals.

The only instance for this sense in the OED entry.



Collers about the Cattels Necks, by the strength whereof they 
draw.

Come, The small fibres, or tayls of Malt.

Compas, or Compost, Soyl for Land, Trees, &c.

Coniferous Trees, are such that bears Cones or Clogs, as the Fir,
Pine, &c.

A Conservatory, A place to keep Plants, Fruits, &c. in.

A Coome, Four Bushels.

Coppice, Copise, or Copse, The smaller sort of Wood, or Under-wood.

A Cord of Wood is set out as the Colefire, and contains by measure
four foot in breadth, four foot in height, and eight foot in
length.

Covert, A shady place for Beasts.

A Cradle, Is a Frame of Wood fixed to a Sythe for the mowing of
Corn, and causes it to be laid the better in Swarth, and it is
then called a Cradle-Sythe.

First citation for the compound in the OED.



A Cratch, A Rack for Hay or Straw. Vide Rack.

A Croft, A small Enclosure.

Crones, Old Eaws.

A Crotch. The forked part of a Tree, useful in many cases of Hus­
bandry.

A Crow, or Crome of Iron, An Iron Bar with one end flat.

To Cultivate, To Till.

Culture, Tilling.

A Curry-Comb, An Iron Comb wherewith they kemb Horses.

A Cyon, A young Tree or Slip, springing from an old.


D

DAllops, A Term used in some places for Patches, or Corners
of Grass or Weeds among the Corn.

Darnel, Cockleweed, injurious to Corn.

To Denshire, is to cut off the Turf of Land, and when it is dry to
lay it on heaps and burn it.

To Delve, To Dig.

A Dibble, An Instrument wherewith they make holes for the set­
ting of Beans, &c.

A Dike, A Ditch.



Dredge, Oats and Barley mixed.

Drought, A long time of dry weather.

Dugg of a Cow, that is, the Cows Tet.

A Dung-fork is a Tool of three Tines or Pikes, for the better cast­
ing of Dung.


E

TO Ear or Are, To Plough or Fallow.

Earning, Runnet wherewith they convert Milk into Cheese.

Eddish, Eadish, Etch, or Eegrass, the latter Pasture or Grass that
comes after Mowing or Reaping.

To Edge, To harrow.

Edifice, Building.

Egistments, Cattel taken in to graze, or be fed by the week or
moneth.

First OED citation for the headword with this spelling.



Espaliers, Trees planted in a curious order against a Frame for the
bounding of Walks, Borders, &c.

Exoticks, Foreign Plants, not growing naturally in our English
Soyl.


F

TO Fallow, To prepare Land by ploughing, long before it be
ploughed for Seed. Thus may you fallow, twifallow, and
trifallow, that is, once, twice, or thrice plough it before
the Seed-time.

A Fann, is an Instrument that by its motion artificially causeth
Winde, useful in the winnowing of Corn.

A Farding Land, or Farundale of Land, is the fourth part of an
Acre.

A Fathome of Wood, is a parcel of Wood set out, six whereof
make a Colefire.

To Faulter, Thrashers are said to faulter, when they thrash or beat
over the Corn again.

To Ferment, that is, to cause Beer, Cider, or other Drinks to
work, that the Dregs or Impurities may be separated upwards
or downwards.

Fermentation, such working.

Fertile, Fruitful.

Fertility, Fruitfulness.

Fetters are usually made of Iron, and hanged about the legs of Cat­
tel, that they leap not, or run away.

Fewel, Any combustible matter wherewith a fire is made.

Filly, A She-colt.

The term "she-colt" is not in the OED.



Fimble Hemp, that is the yellow early Hemp.

Flayl, A Thrashing Instrument.

Floating, or drowning, or watering of Meadows;  Also Floating of
a Cheese, is the separating the Whey from the Curd.

See OED "flote", v.1, for the separating of whey and cheese.





Flora, The Goddess of Flowers; also the Title of Mr. Rea his ex­
cellent Treatise of Flowers.

Fodder, Hay, Straw, or such like Food for Cattel.

Foison, Plenty of Riches.

Foisty, Musty.

Fork, There are several sorts of them, some of Wood, some of
Iron; some for Hay, others for Corn, &c.

To Foyl, That is to Fallow Land in the Summer, or Autumn.

Fragrant, Smelling pleasantly.

Frith, Underwood, or the shroud of Trees.

A Frower, An Edge-tool used in cleaving Lath.

Furrow, The low Fall, or Drain in Land, either left by the Plough,
or otherwise made.


G

A Gap, An open place in a Hedge, or such like.

A Garner, A Granary to put Corn in.

Georgicks, Belonging to Husbandry, or Tillage, as Virgils Geor­
gicks, his Books of Husbandry.

Germination, A budding forth.

Glandiferous, Bearing Mast.

To Glean, To pick up or gather the shattered Corn.

A Goad, A small Staff, or Rod with a sharp Iron-pin at the end
thereof, to quicken Horses or Oxen in their motion.

A Gooff, or Goffe, A Mowe or Reek of Corn.

To Gore, To make up such Mowes or Reeks.

Cf. OED "gore, v. 3", 3.



Goss, or Gorse, Furzes.

Groats, Oats after the Hulls are off, or great Oatmeal.

The phrase "great oatmeal" appears not to be in the OED.



Grubbage. See Mattock.


H

TO Hale, or Hawl, To draw.

Harneys, Ropes, Collers, and other Accroutrements fitted to
Horses or other Beasts, for their drawing.

Hatches, Flood-gates placed in the Water to obstruct its Cur­
rent.

Haws, The Fruit of the White-thorn.

Hawm. The stalks of Pease, Beans, or such like.

Head-land, That which is ploughed overthwart at the ends of the
other Lands.

Heckle, An Instrument used in the trimming and perfecting of
Hemp and Flax for the Spinner, by dividing the Tow or
Hurds from the Tare.

Helm, is Wheat or Rye straw unbruised by thrashing or otherwise,
and bound in bundles for thatching.

Hips, The Fruit of the Black-thorn.

Herbage, The Feeding, Grazing, or Mowing of Land.



Hide-bound, A Disease whereunto Trees as well as Cattel are
subject.

A Hinde, A Servant in Husbandry.

Hillock, A little Hill, as a Hop-hill, &c.

Hogs, In some places Swine are so called, in some places young
Weathers.

Hook, Land tilled and sown every year.

Sense not found in OED.



Hopper, Wherein they carry their Seed-Corn at the time of sow­
ing; Also the Vessel that contains the Corn at the top of
the Mill.

How, An Instrument made like a Coopers Adds, for the cutting
up of Weeds in Garden, Fields, &c. and between Beanes,
Pease, &c.

Hovel, A mean building or hole for any ordinary use.

Hoven, Cheese that is raised or swelled up.

Hull, or Hulls, the Chaff of Corn.

Hurds of Flax or Hemp, are the worser parts separated from the
Tare in the Heckling of it, whereby may be made Linnen
Cloath.

See OED "flax", 8a ("flax-hurd"), not a headword on its own.



Hutch, A Vessel or Place to lay Grain, or such like thing in; Also
a Trap made hollow for the taking of Weasels, or such like
Vermine alive.

Hut, A small Hovel, or Cottage.


I

A Jack, A term sometimes used for a Horse whereon they sawe
Wood.

Iles, or Oiles. Vide Aanes.

An Imp, a young Tree.

Infertile, Barren.

Inoculation, The Grafting or placing of the Bud of one Tree, into
the Stock or Branch of another.

Irrigation, Watering of a Meadow, Garden, &c.

Irroration, A bedewing or besprinkling of a Plant.

Junames, That is Land sown with the same Grain it was sown with
the precedent year.

"Junames" is not found in the OED.



Juter, A term by some used, for the fertile coagulating saltish na­
ture of the Earth.

OED speculates that "nitre" is meant.




K

KArle Hemp, That is, the latter green Hemp.

Kell, or Kiln, whereon they dry Malt or Hops.


L

LActary, A Dairy-house.

Laire, Layer, or Lieare, Places where Cattel usually repose



themselves under some shelter, the Ground being enriched
by their Soyl.

A Lath, A Barn.

OED "lathe", n.2



Laund, or Lawne in a Park, plain and untilled Ground.

To Lease, or Leaze. Vide to Glean.

Lentils, A sort of Grain less than Fitches.

Litter, Straw, or such like stuff for Cattel to lodge on.

To Lock, is a term used by Drivers in moving the Fore-wheels of
a Waggon to and fro.

Predates earliest OED citation at "lock" v.1, 6b (1694).



Log, A term used in some places for a Cleft of Wood, in some
places for a long Piece or Pole, by some for a small Wand or
Switch.

To Lop, To cut off the head branches of a Tree.

A Lug. Vide Perch.

Lynchet, A certain line of Green-sword or Bounds, dividing Ar­
rable Land in Common Fields.

Predates first citation by OED (Ray; 1674).




M

MAdds, A Disease in Sheep.

See OED "mad" n. 1, 1



Manger, The place wherein Beasts eat Corn, or other short
Meat.

A Mash, or Mesh, Ground Corn, or such like, boyled in water for
Cattel to eat.

Mast, The Fruits of wilde Trees, as of Oaks, Beech, &c.

Mattock, A Tool wherewith they grub Roots of Trees, Weeds, &c.
by some called a Grub-axe, or Rooting-axe.

Mature, Ripe.

A Mayn-Comb, wherewith they komb Horses Mayns.

Not in OED.



A Meak, wherewith they mow or hack Pease, or Brake, &c.

Mere, The same as Lynchet.

See OED "mere" n. 2, 1b (1674)



Mildew A certain Dew, falling in the moneths of June and July,
which being of a viscous nature, much impedes the growth or
maturation of Wheat, Hops, &c. unless a shower of Rain wash
it off; It is also very sweet, as appears by the Bees so mightily
enriching their stores thereby.

Mislen, or Maslen, Corn mixed, as Wheat with Rye, &c.

Mogshade, The shadows of Trees, or such like.

Mold, Earth.

Mounds, Banks, or Bounds.

Muck, Dung, or Soyl.

Must, The new Liquor or Pressure of Fruits, before fermentation.


N

NEat, A Heifer, or any of the kinde of Beeves.

A Neat-herd, A Keeper of Neat, Beeves, or Cows.

A Nursery, A Place set apart for the raising of young Trees, or
Stocks.




O

OLlet, Fewel.

The term "olet" ("oilet"?) in this sense is not found in OED.



Olitory, An Olitory Garden is a Kitchen Garden, or a Garden
of Herbs, Roots, &c. for food.

Ost, Oost, or Eest, the same as Kell, or Kiln.


P

A Paddle staff, A long Staff with an Iron Bit at the end thereof,
like a small Spade, much used by Mole-catchers.

A Payl, The same as a Bucket.

Pallisade, A sort of slight open Pale or Fence, set to beautifie a
Place, or Walk.

Palms, The white Excrescencies of Buds of Sallyes or Withy, co­
ming before the Leaf.

Pannage, The feeding of Swine or other Cattel on the Mast, or o­
ther Herbage, in Forrests, Woods, &c.

A Pannel, Pad, or Pack-saddle, Kindes of Saddles whereon they carry
Burthens on horse-back.

The term "pad" as used ehre predates OED "pad," n. 2, 2b (1795).



Parterre, or Partir, A name proper to a Garden divided into Beds,
Walks, and Borders, for curious Flowers, Herbs, &c.

Pease-bolt, Pease-hawm, or Straw.

Pedware, Pulse.

Penstocks. See Hatches.

A Perch, or Lug, is sixteen foot and a half Land-measure, but is
usually eighteen foot to measure Coppice Woods withal.

A Pike, A Fork or Prong of Iron.

A Pile, A parcel of Wood, two whereof make one Colefire.

A Piscary, A Liberty of Fishing, or a place where Fishes are con­
fined.

A Pitch-fork, or Pick-fork, the same with Pike.

A Plough, A Term used in the Western parts for a Team of Horse
or Oxen.

A Plough-wright, One that makes Ploughs.

Podds, The Cods or Shells of Cod-ware, or any other Seed.

Pollard, or Pollinger, An old Tree usually lopped.

To Polt, To beat or thrash.

Pomona, The Goddess of Fruits; Also the Title of several Treati­
ses of Fruit-trees.

Pregnant, Full as a Bud, or Seed, or Kernal, ready to sprout.

A Prong, The same as Pike.

To Propagate, To encrease or multiply any thing.

A Propagator, A Planter.

To Prune, To trim Trees, by cutting off the superfluous Branches
or Roots.

Puckets, Nests of Caterpillars, or such like Vermine.

First citation in OED.



A Puddock, or Purrock, A small Enclosure.




Q

QVincunx, Is an order of planting Trees or Plants, that may
be in order every way.


R

A Rack, A place made to contain Hay, or other Fodder, for
Beasts to feed on.

To Ree, or Ray, To handle Corn in a Sieve, so as the chaffy, or ligh­
ter part gather to one place.

Reed, is either the long Grass that grows in Fenns, or watery Pla­
ces, or Straw bound up for thatching, by some called Helm.
See Helm.

A Reek of Corn, a Mowe or Heap of Corn, so laid for its preserva­
tion, out of any Barn.

A Reek-staval, A Frame of Wood placed on stones, on which such
Mowe is raised.

Resinaceous, Rosenny, or yielding Rosin.

Rice, The Shrouds or Tops of Trees, or Fellings of Coppices.

A Ride of Hazel, or such like Wood, is a whole plump of Sprigs, or
Frith, growing out of the same Root.

See OED "ride", n. 3 (only citation).



The Ridge, The upper edge of a Bank, or other rising Land.

A Rock, An Instrument generally used in some parts for the spin­
ning of Flax or Hemp.

A Rodd. See Perch.

A Roller, wherewith they roll Barley, or other Grain.

A Rood, A fourth part of an Acre.

Rough, The Rough Coppice Wood, or Brushy Wood.

Rowen, Rough Pasture full of Stubble or Weeds.

Rudder, or Ridder, The widest sort of Sieves for the separating the
Corn from the Chaff.

Runnet, A certain sowre matter, made use of by Country House­
wives for the coming (or coagulation) of their Cheese.

Rural, Of, or belonging to the Countrey.

Rusticities, Countrey affairs.

Rustick, Countrey-like.


S

A Seed-lop, or Seed-lip, The Hopper, or Vessel wherein they
carry their Seed at the time of Sowing.

A Seminary, A place where you sow Seeds in for the raising of
Trees, or Plants.

To Sew, To drain Ponds, Ditches, &c.

Shake-time, The season of the year that Mast and such Fruits, fall
from Trees.



A Shedd, A place erected and covered over for shelter for Cattel,
or any other use, against a Wall, or other Edifice.

To Sheer, is used in the Northern parts for to Reap.

Shock, Several Sheaves of Corn set together.

A Shrape, or Scrape, A place baited with Chaff, or Corn, to entice
Birds.

To Shroud, To cut off the head branches of a Tree.

A Sickle, A toothed Reap-hook.

A Site, A principal Mannor, or Farm-house.

A Skepe, or Scuttel, A flat and broad Basket, made to carry Corn
withal.

A Skreyn is an Instrument made of Wyer on a Frame, for the divi­
ding of Corn from Dust, Cockle, Ray, &c. Also it is usually
made of Lath for the skreyning of Earth, Sand, Gravel, &c.

Slabb, The out-side sappy Plank or Board sawn off from the sides
Timber.

A Sledd, A thing without Wheels, whereon to lay a Plough, or
other ponderous thing, to be drawn.

A Sluce, A Vent, or Drain for Water.

Sneed, or Snead, The handle of a Sythe, or such like Tool.

Souse, The Offal of Swine.

Soutage, Course Cloath, or Bagging for Hops, or such like.

A Spade, or Spitter, wherewith they dig or delve; also a Cutting
Spade wherewith they cut Hay or Corn-Mowes.

Stack of Corn. See Reek.

Staddles, Standils, or Standards, Trees reserved at the Felling of
Woods, for growth for Timber.

Stail, The Handle of a Tool.

Stercoration, Dunging.

Sterile, Barren.

Stover, Straw.

A Strike of Flax so much as is Heckled at one handful; Also it
signifies an Instrument wherewith they strike Corn in the mea­
suring. Also it is used in the Northern parts for a Measure
containing about a Bushel.

Structures, Buildings.

A Sturk, A young Beeve, or Heifer.

A Sty, A place for fatting , or keeping Swine.

Surculation, A pruning of Trees.

Succulent, Juicy.

A Sull, A term used for a Plough in the Western parts.

A Sull-paddle, A small Spade-staff or Instrument to cleanse the
Plough from the clogging Earth.

To Summer-stir, To fallow Land in the Summer.

A Sussingle, A large Girt that Carriers use to binde or fasten their
Packs withal.

Sward, Ground is said to have a Sward, or to be swarded, when
it is well grown or coated over with Grass, or other Ve­
getables.



Swath, or Swarth, Grass, Corn, or such like, as it is laid by the
Mower from the Sythe.

Swill, Used in the Northern parts for shade, or shadow.

To Swingle Flax, a Term used by Flax-dressers,

A Swine-herd, A Keeper of Swine.

A Sythe, wherewith they mow Grass, or Corn.


T

TAre of Flax, the finest drest part thereof ready for the
Spinner.

Tares, A sort of Grain.

To Tedd, To turn or spread New mown Grass.

A Teem, or Team, A certain number of Horses, or other Beasts,
for the Draught.

Terrasse, A Walk on a Bank or Bulwark.

Tett, The Cows Dug by some is called the Tett.

A Thrave of Corn contains four Shocks, each Shock consisting of
six Sheaves.

A Tike, A small Bullock, or Heifer.

Tills, Lentils, a sort of Pulse.

Tylth, Soyl, or other Improvement of Land.

The Tine, or Grayn of a Fork.

Tits, Small Cattel.

A Trendle, A flat Vessel, by some called a Kiver.

A Trough, A Vessel to hold water, &c. to feed Cattel in, &c. or for
the beating of Apples for Cider, or the like.

A Trundle, A thing made and set on low Wheels to draw heavy
burdens on.

A Trunchion, a Piece of Wood cut short like a Quarter-staff.

A Tumbrel, A Dung-cart.


V

A Vat, A Vessel to contain Beer, Ale, Cider, or any other Li­
quor in its preparation.

Vindemiation, The gathering of Grapes, or reaping the Fruit of any
thing, as of Cherries, Apples, Bees, &c.

To Vindemiate, to gather the same Fruits.

Vinous, Winy.

Vnderwood, Coppice, or any other Wood that is not esteemed
Timber.

Vrry, The blew Clay that is digged out of the Coal-mines, and
lyes next the Coal, being crude and immature, and used for
soyling of Land.

First citation in OED.



Vtensils, Instruments used in any Art, especially Husbandry.




W

A Wantey. Vide Sussingle.

A Weanel, A young Beast newly weaned.

Whinnes, Furzes.

A Wind-row, Hay or Grass raked in Rows, in order to be set up in
Cocks.

To Winnow, To separate by Winde the Corn from the Chaff.

To Winter-rigg, To fallow Land in the Winter.

Wood-land, Places where much Woods are; or its generally taken
for Countreys enclosed.


Y

A Yate, or Yatt, A Gate.

A Yoak, is either an instrument for Oxen to draw by, or to
put on Swine or other unruly Creatures, to keep them from
running through Hedges.


Z

ZEphyrus, The West-winde.




