



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 2 3 6 2 4 . 7

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )




THE 
HVNTING
OF THE 
POX:
A PLEASANT DIS|
course betweene the Authour,
and Pild-Garlicke.

Wherein is declared the nature of the
Dissease, how it came, and how 
it may bee cured.

By J. T. Westminster.

LONDON,
Printed by I. W. for I. T. and are to be sold by Philip Birch at 
the signe of the Bible neere Guildhall-gate. 1619.


      



THE MEANING OF CER­
TAINE WORDS OR NAMES, 
which seemeth to some hard to vnder­
stand in this Booke.



CVrtezan, a Whore by licence.

Veneris, Lechery.

Superbus Publicus, a common noted proud man.

Morbus Gallicus, the French-Disease.

Acteon, a fable in Ouids Metamorphosis.

Gonorea gallica, the running of the Reynes in that Disease.

Caruncula,  Excrecense growing in the Yard of a man, by lying with 
vncleane women.

Bubo venerius, is a botch in the Groyn, which commeth by a sudden stopping 
the flux of the Reynes.

Amorons, are certaine fleshie excrecenses, at the beginning like Mulberries, 
and as they drie like Warts, and grow on the head of a mans Yard

"Amorons" not found in OED.



Glans, is the Acorne or head of a mans Yard.

Aloperia gallica, is meant the falling of the haire in this Disease.

Spanish-Buttons, Pustills, and Spanish Fleas, are drie Scabbes appearing 
in the head and forhead, and when they fall away, they leaue red stooles behinde, 
like Flea-bitings.

"Spanish-buttons" and "Spanish Fleas" not found in the OED.



Talpa, is a virulent Disease, and fouleth the vpper table of the Cranium or 
Scull, and raiseth vp the bone, as a Mole heaueth vp the earth before  him.

"Talpa" in this sense antedates the earliest OED citation (1684).



Tophi, are grosse humors and viscons lying vpon Cranium vnder Periosti­
on, and maketh one part of the head or forhead seeme bigger than the other part.

Periostion, is a skinne that couereth all the bones of the body of man, and
groweth to the same, and on that the flesh.

Fissuræ, are chappes or clifes sometime happening behinde the eares, the toes, 
the fundements.

Scorbutum, the Scuruie.

Canker, is a venemous eating vlcer, and may be sister to Noli me tangere, differing onely in the cure.



Nodus, are bunches on the brow or shin-bones, they differ from Tophi in this, 
that Tophi lyeth vnder the Periostion, and this lyeth vpon it, and therefore 
most painfullest.

Crust, is a Scabbe, which in this Disease runneth all the body ouer, like a le­
perous Scall.

Herpes and  Serpigoes, are Tetters and Ring-wormes, ingendred of salt 
flegme or tumor Erisipelas.

Formica, is a pricking or stinging in the skinne, as if a man were bitten with Ants.

Furfur, is a dust like vnto Branne, ingendred of vapoures breathing out of 
the body, and drying on the skinne, and after falleth off in scales.

"Furfur" antedates the earliest OED citation (1621).



Hemrods, are a painfull Disease, breaking out about the Fundement from 
the Hemrode veines.







