




AN INTRO­
DVCTION OF
THE
EYGHT
PARTES
OF
speche, and the Construction of
the same, complied and sette
forthe by the commaunde­
ment of our most gra­
cious souerayne
lorde the
king.
❧
ANNO. MDXLII.












HENRY THE. VIII. BY
THE GRACE OF GOD KYNG
of Englan, Fraunce, and Ireland, de­
fendour of the feithe, and of the church
of England, and also of Ireland, in
erth the supreme hed, to all schoolemai­
sters and teachers of grammer within this his realm
greetynge. Emong the manyfolde busines and moste
weyghty affayres, appertaynyng to our regall aucto­
ritee and offyce, we forgette not the tendre babes, and
the youth of our realme, whose good education and
godly bryngyng vp, is a greate furniture to the same
and cause of moche goodnesse. and to the intent that
hereafter they may the more readily and easily attein
the rudymentes of the latyne toung, without the greate
hynderaunce, which heretofore hath been, through the
diuersitie of grammers and teachynges: we will and
commaunde, and streightly charge al you schoolemaic­
sters and teachers of grammer within this our realme,
and other our dominions, as ye intend to auoyde our
displeasure, and haue our fauour to teache and learne
your scholars this englysshe introduction here ensu­
ing, and the latyne grammer annered to the same,
and none other, which we haue caused for your
ease, and your scholars spedy preferment
bryefely and playnely to be com­
pyled and set forth. Fayle
not to apply your scho
lars in lernynge
and dodly e­
ducation.












❧TO THE REDER▸ 
ALBEIT THIS Realme of
Englande hath iuste cause to thynke it
selfe moste bounden to the goodnes of
God, for manifolde and sundry bene­
fittes receyued of his inestimable boun
tifulnesse,yet if we wyl wey the iust va­
lu of thynges in an equall balance, as a  certayn wyse
Phylosopher dyd, whiche affirmed that realme to be
most happy, where as eyther a wise and a lerned man
had the rule, or the ruler a;;lyed hym selfe to wyse­
dom, and lernynge: we may perceyue vs englishmen,
in nothyng so fortunate, as in that we haue a kyng &
gouernour, both of excellente wysedome, lernyng and
vertu, and also of great study & diligence to encreace
the same, whose kyngly qualities, whan they shal here
after by such godly monumentes, as his maiesty shal
leaue behynd hym, appere so playnly to his posteritie,
as we now presently see thynges,many of them alredy
done, some indoing, and mo shal see, which his maiestie
by the grace of god, entendeth hereafter to do: out of
questyon al the haue gone before hym, may wel appere
but shadowes. And to leaue the large fieldes of his
pryncely actes, wherein the wysest & best lerned myght
walke tyll wyt and eloquence were both wery, what
constant iudgement, & what profound knowlege hasth
his maiesty shewed & declared to all the world, in thiy
varietie of iugementes and lerninges; and what pey­
nes study and trauayle doth he take, to bryng thyn­
ges farre out of square to a conformitie, and to take
good heede of Christis churche to lead his flock into











the folde of tru doctrine, the hurdels of the same so wel vn­
derpyghtthe the wolves shal not be able to ouerthrowe
them and as his maiesty purpseth to establyshe his people in one consent and harmony of pure andtru rely­
: so his tender goodnes toward the youthe and chyld
hode of his realme, entendeth to haue it brought vp vn­
der one absolute and univorme sorte of lernynge. (For here
tofore euery maister had his grammer, and euery schole
dyuers teachynges, and chaungyng of maisters and
scholes dyd many tymes vtterly dull and vndo good wyttes) hath appoynted certein lerned men mete for su­
che a purpose, to compilae onbryef, plaine, and vniforme
grammer, which onely (al other set a part) for the more
spedynesse. and lesse trouble of yong wittes, his hygh
ues hath commanded all sholemaysters and teachers
of grammer within this hs realme, and other his do­
minions, to teache their scholers. Nowe consider you
fathers inthis realme, howe moche ye be bound to suc
a gracious kyng, whose dare is not onely for you, but
for your posterity also, and your tender babes. And you
scholemaisters of England, to whome the cure and e­
ducation of tender youthe is commytted. with what
great study and dylygence ought you to folowe the ex­
ample of our most grations souerayne which among
the infinite busynes apperteinyng to his regall office,
to ernestly mindeth the wel bryngyng vp of youthe, in
lernying and vertue. Howe glad howe desirous ought
you to be, not only to do this his gracis commaundment










but also busylye to applye your selues, to trade and
bryng vp your scholers in good maners, in knowlege
of tonges and sciences. And somewhat to declare vnto
you the condition and qualitie of this grammer, ye shall
vnderstand, that the viii partes of speech and the Con­
struction of the same, be not here set forth in englysshe
at large, but compendyously and briefelyfor the weake
capacitie of yong and tender wyttes. And therefore if a­
ny thyng semeth here to want in this englishe Intro­
ductions, ye shall vnerstande, it was left out of pur­
pose, and shall be supplied in the latyn rules made for
the same inten, whiche chyldren shal be apte to lerne,
what tyme they shall haue competent vnderstandying
by these former rudimentes. You tender babes of En­
glande, shake of slouthfulnes, set wantonnes a parte,
apply your wyttes holy to lernyng and vertue, where­
by you maye doo youre duetye to god and your kyng,
make gladde your parentes, profytte your selues, and
moche auaunce the common weale of your countrey.
Let noble prynce Edwarde encourage your tender har­
tes, a prynce of greate towardnes, an prynce in whome
god hath powred his graces abundantly, a prince fra­
med of suche perfectnes of nature, that he is lyke by
the grace of god, to ensue the steppes of his fathers
wysedome, lerniyng, and vertue, and is nowe almost
in a redynesse, to rounne in the same rase of lernyng
with you. For whome ye hae great rause to praye that
he may be the soonne of a longe lyuyng father.
Lerne dylygently.
Loue God entierely.













AD PVBEMANGLICAM
HEXASTICON.
OTVA parue puer non parua est gloria, Rex est
Commoda qui studiis prospicit ampla tuis.
Rex magnus tibi parue puer, Rex porrigit ultro
Dulcia nectareæ pocula grammaticæ.
Accippe munifici dulcissima pocula regis,
Hæc hauri, hæc auidis faucibus ebibiro.

❧❧❧❧❧

❧GOD SAVE THE
KYNG▸













❧AN INTRODVCTION
of the eighte partes of speche.

IN speche be these, viii partes folovvyng.

Nowne declyned.
Pronowne declyned
Verbe declyned
Participle declyned

Aduerbe undeclyned
Coniunction undeclyned
Preposition undeclyned
Interecition undeclyned

❧ Of the novvne.

A NOVVNE IS the name
of a thyng that maye bee seen, felt,
heard or vnderstand. As the name
of my hand in latine is Manus.
The name of an howse, is Do­
mus. The name of goodnesse is
Bonitas.
Of nownes some be substantiues some be adiectiues.

¶ A nowne substantiue is, that standeth by hym self,
and requireth not an other woorde to be ioyned with
hym, as homo a manne, and it is declyned with one
article, as hic Magister, a maister, or with twoo, as hic & hec parens, a father or mother.

¶ A nowne adiectiue is, that can not stand by hym
selfe, but requireth to be ioyned with an other worde,
as Bonus good, Pulcher fayre. And it is declyned, ei­
ther with three termynations, as Bonus, bona, bonum,
 rels with three articles, as Hic hæc & hoc felix, happy,
hic & hæ leuis, æ hoc leue, lyght.


¶ A nowne substantiue either is proper to the thyng,
that it betokeneth, as Edoardus is my proper name,










Or it is common to mo, as Homo is a common name
to all menne.



Noumbers of novvnes.

¶ In nownes be two numbers, The syngular and
the plurall. The syngular numbre speketh of one as
lapis, a stone. The plurall noumber speaketh of moo
than one, as lapides, stones.



Cases of novvnes.

¶ Nownes be declyned with syxe cases syngularly
& plurally. The nominatyue, The Genityue, the Da­
tiue, the Accusatyue, the Vocatyue, and the Ablatiue.

¶ The nominatyue case commeth before the verbe,
and answereth to this question who or what, as Ma­
gister docer, the maister teacheth.

¶ The genitiue case is knowen by this token of, and
answereth to this question, whose or whereof, as Do­
ctrina magistri, the learnyng of the maister.

¶ The datyue case is knowen by this token to, and
answereth to tihs question, to whom, or to what, as
Do librum magistro. I gyke a boke to the maister.

¶ The accusatyue case foloweth the verbe, and aun­
swereth th this question, whom, or what, as Amo ma­
gistrum, I loue the mayster.

¶ The vocatyue case is knowen by callynge or spea­
kyng to, as O magister, O maister.

¶ The ablatyue case is commonly knowen by these
sygnes, in, with, through, for, from, by, and than, as
Cum magistro, with the mayster.



Artycles.

¶Articles be borowed of the pronowne, and be thus
declyned.









Sin. Nominatiuo hic, hec, hoc,
Sin. Genitiuo huius,
Sin. Datiuo huic,
Sin. Accusatiuo huc, hanc, hoc,
Sin. Vocatiuo ,
Sin. Ablatiuo,

Pl. Nominatiuo hi hæ hec,
Pl. Genitiuo horum harum horam,
Pl. Datiuo his,
Pl. Accusatiuo hos has hæ,
Pl. Vocatiuo caret.
Pl. Ablatiuo his.



Genders of novvnes.

¶ Genders of nownes be. vii. the Masculine, the fe­
minine, the neuter, the common of two, the common
of thre, the doubtfull, and the Epicene.
	The masculine gender, is declyned with this arty­
cle hic, as hic uir, a manne.
	The feminine gender is declyned with this artycle
hæ, as hæ mulier, a woman.
	The neuter is declyned with this article hoc, as
hocfaxum, as stone.
	The common of two is declyned with hic & hec, as
hic & hec parens.
	The common of three is declyned with hic hæc &
hoc, as hic hec & hoc felix.
	The doubtfull gender is declyned with hic or
hæc, as hic uel hec dies, a daye.
	The Epicene gendre is declyned with one artycle,
& vnder that one artycle, both kindes be signified, as
hic passer, a sparowe,  hæc aquila, an egle, both he & she.



The declensons of novvnes,

¶ There be fyue declensons of nownes.

	The first declension is, whan the genitiue and the datyue case
syngular ende in æ diphthong, the accusatyue in am,
the vocatiue lyke the nominatyue, the ablatyue in a,









The nominatiue plural in æ diphthong, the genitiue
in arum, the datiue in is,the accusatyue in as, the vo­
catiue like the nominatyue, the ablatyue in is, as
in example

Sing. Nominatiuo hec musa,
Sing. Genetiuo huius sæ,
Sing. Datiuo huic sæ,
Sing. Accusatiuo hanc sam,
Sing. Vocatiuo o musa,
Sing. Ablatiuo ab hac musa,

Pl. Nominatiuo hæ musæ,
Pl. Genetiuo harum musarum,
Pl. Datiuo his musis,
Pl. Accusatiuo has musas,
Pl. Vocatiuo o musæ,
Pl. Ablatiuo ab his musis.

¶ The seconde declension is, whan the genitiue case syngular
endeth in i, the datiue in o, the accusatyue in um, the
vocatiue for the most parte like the nomynatyue, the
ablatyue in o. The nominatiue plurall in i, the geni­
tive in orum, the dative in is, the accusatyue in os, the
vocatiue like the nominatiue, the ablatyue in is, as
in example.

Sin. Nominatiuo hic magister,
Sin. Genetiuo huius gistri,
Sin. Datiuo huic stro,
Sin. Accusatiuo hunc strum,
Sin. Vocatiuo o magister,
Sin. Ablatiuo  ab hoc stro,

Pl. Nominatiuo hi magistri,
Pl. Genetiuo horum strorum,
Pl. Datiuo his magistris,
Pl. Accusatiuo hos gistros,
Pl. Vocatiuo o magistri,
Pl. Ablatiuo ab his gistris.

¶ Here is to be noted, that whan the nomi­
natiue endethe in us, the vocatyue shall end in e, as
Nominatiuo hic dominus, uocatiuo o domine. Except Fi­
lius, that maketh o fili, and deus, that maketh o deus.
Whan the monimatiue endeth in ius, if it be a propre
name of a manne, the vocayue shall ende in i, as no­
minatiuo hic Georgius, uocatiuo o Georgi.









¶ NOTE ALSO that all nownes of the neuter gen­
der, of what declenson so euer they be, haue the nomi­
natyue, the accusatyue, and the vocatiue lyke in bothe
numbres. And in the plurall noumbre they ende all
in A, as in example.

Sing. Nominatiuo hoc regnum,
Sing. Genitiuohuius regni,
Sing. Datiuo huic gno,
Sing. Accusatiuo hoc regnum,
Sing. Vocatiuo o regum,
Sing. Ablatiuo ab hoc regno,

Plur. Nominatiuo hæc regna,
Plur. Genitiuo horumregnorum,
Plur. Datiuo his regnis,
Plur. Accusatiuo hæc regna,
Plur. Vocatiuo o regna,
Plur. Ablatiuo ab his regnis,

¶ Except ambo & duo, which make the neuter gen­
der in o, and be thus declyned.

Pluraliter. Nominatiuo ambo, amb&aelig, ambo,
Pluraliter Genitiuo orum, arum, orum,
Pluraliter Datiuo obus, abus, obus,
Pluraliter Accusatiuo bos, bas, bo,
Pluraliter Vocatiuo bo, be, bo,
Pluraliter Ablatiuo obus, abus, obus Lykewyse duo.

¶The thyrde declension is, whan the genitiue case singular en­
deth in is, the datyue in i, the accusatyue moste common­
ly in em, and sometyme in im, and somtyme in bothe
the vocatyue lyke the nominatiue, the ablatiue in i,
sometyme in e, sometyme in bothe. The nomynatiue
case pluralle in es, the genityue sometyme in um, and
sometyme in ium, the datiue in bus, the accusatyue in
es, the vocatiue like the nominatyue, the ablatyue in
bus, as in example,









Sing. Nominatiuohic lapis,
Sing. Genitiuohuius dis,
Sing. Datiuo huic di,
Sing. Accusatiuo hunc dem,
Sing. Vocatiuo o lapis,
Sing. Ablatiuo ab hoc de,

Pl. Nominatiuo hi lapides,
Pl. Genitiuo horum lapidum,
Pl. Datiuo his lapidibus,
Pl. Accusatiuo hos lapides,
Pl. Vocatiuo o lapides,
Pl. Abllatiuo ab his lapidibus.

Sin. N. ominatiuohic & hæc parens,
Sin. Genetiuo huius rentis,
Sin. Datiuo huic parenti,
Sin. Accusatiuo hunc & hanc tem,
Sin. Vocatiuo o parens,
Sin. Ablatiuo ab hoc &
hac parente,

Pl. Nominatiuo hi & hæ parentes,
Pl. Genitiuo horum & harum, tum,
Pl. Datiuo his parentibus,
Pl. Accusatiuo hos & has rentes
Pl. Vocatiuo o parentes
Pl. Ablatiuo ab his pa­
rentibus.

¶The fowerthdeclension is, whan the genitiue case syngular
endeth in us, the datiue in ui, the accusatiue in um, the
vocatiue lyke the nominatiue,the ablatiue in u. The
nominatiue plurall in us, the genitiue in uum, the da­
tyue in ibus, the accusatiue in us, the vocatiue lyke the
nominatiue, the ablatiue in ibus, as in example,

Sin. Nominatiuo hec manus,
Sin. Genitiuo huius, nus,
Sin. Datiuo huic ui,
Sin. Accusatiuo hanc num,
Sin. Vocatiuo o nus,
Sin. Ablatiuoab hac nu,

Plu. Nominatiuo hæ manus,
Plu. Genitiuo harum manuum,
Plu. Datiuo his manibus,
Plu. Accusatiuo has manus,
Plu. Vocatiuo o manus,
Plu. Ablatiuo ab his manibus.

¶ The fifthdeclension is whan the genitiue & the datyue case
syngular ende in ei, the accusatiue in em, the vocatiue
lyke the nominatiue, the ablatyue in e. The nomy­
natyue plurall in es, the genitiue in erum, the datyue
in ibus, the accusatiue in es, the vocatyue lyke the no­









minatiue the ablatiue in ebus, as in example.

Sin. Nominatiuo hic meridies,
Sin. Genitiuo huius ei,
Sin. datiuo huic ei,
Sin. Accusatiuo hunc em,
Sin. Vocatiuo o dies,
Sin. Ablatiuo ab hoc die,

Plur. Nominatiuo hi meridies,
Plur. Genitiuo horum meridierum,
Plur. Dativo his meridiebus,
Plur. Accusatiuo hos meridies,
Plur. Vocatiuo o meridies,
Plur. Ablatiuo ab his meridiebus.



The declinyng of adiectiues.

¶A nowne adiectiue of iii. terminatyons is thus declyned.

Sing. Nominatiuo bonus, nan num,
Sing. Genetiuo boni, næ, ni.
Sing. Datiuo bono, ę, o,,
Sing. Accusatiuo bonum, nam, num,
Sing. Vocatiuobone, na, num,
Sing. Ablatiuo bono, na, no,

Pl. Nominatiuo boni, nonæ, bona,
Pl. Genetiuo bonorum, arum, orum,
Pl. Datiuo bonis,
Pl. Accusatiuo bonos, bonas, bona,
Pl. Vocatiuo boni, nonæ, na,
Pl. Ablatiuo bonis.

¶There be besides these certayn nownes adiectiues
of an other maner of declynyng, whiche make the ge­
nitiue case syngular in ïus or ius, and the datyue in i 
which be these that folowe with theyr compoundes.

Sing. Nominatiuo unus, a um,
Sing. Genetiuo unius,
Sing. Datiuo uni,
Sing. Accusatiuo unum, nam, num
Sing. Vocatiuo une, na, num,
Sing. Ablatiuo uno, na, no,

Pl. Nominatiuo uni, un#281;, una,
Pl. Genetiuo unorum, arum, orum,
Pl. Datiuo unis,
Pl. Accusatiuo unos, nas, na,
Pl. Vocatiuo uni, unæ, una,
Pl. Ablatiuo unis.

¶In lyke maner be declyned totus, solus , and also
ullus, alias, alter, uter, & neuter, Excepte that these fyue
laste rehersed lacke the vocatiue case.









¶A nowne adiectiue of .iii. articles is thus declined.

Sing. Nominatiuo hic hæ& hoc
 felix,
Sing. Genitiuo huis
 felicis,
Sing. Datiiuo huic lici,
Sing. Accusatiuo un hunc hanc
 cem & hoc felix,
Sing. Vocatiuo o felix,
Sing. Ablatiuo ab hoc hac
 hoc ce uel ci,


Pl. Nominatiuo hi & h#281; ces,
 & hę cia,
Pl. Genitiuo horum harum
 & horum cium.
Pl. Datiuo his felicibus,
Pl. Accusatiuo hos & has ces
 & hec cia,
Pl.Vocatiuo o ces & cia
Pl. Ablatiuo aab his felici­
 bus

Sing. Nominatiuo hic h#281;c tristis
 & hoc te,
Sing. Genitiuo huius tri
 stis,
Sing. Datiuo huic sti
Sing. Accusatiuo hunc hanc tem,
 & hoc te,
Sing. Vocatiuo o stis & o ste,
Sing. Ablatiuo ab hoc hac &
 hoc tristi,


Pl. Nominatiuo hi & hæ tristes &
 hec tristia
Pl. Genetiuo horum harum & ho­
 rum tristium,
Pl.Datiuo his tristibus,
Pl.Accusatiuo hos & has
 stes & h.æc tia,
Pl. Vocatiuo o es & o tristia,
Pl. Ablatiuo ab his tristi­
 bus.



Comparisons of novvnes.

¶Adiectiues, whose sygnification maye encrease, or
be diminished, receyue comparison.

¶There be three degrees of comparisons.
The positiue
The comparatyue,
And the Superlatiue.

¶The Posityue betokeneth the thynge absolutely
without excess as duras, harde.









¶The comparatiue excedeth somewhat his positiue
in signification, as durior, harder: And it is fourmed,
of the firste case of his positiue, that endeth in i, by put­
tyng thereto or, and us, as of duri, hic & hæc durior &
hoc durius, of Tristi, hic & hæc tristior, & hoc tristius, of
Dulci, hic & hæc dulcior & hoc dulcius.

¶The superlatyue excedeth his positiue in the high­
est degree, as durissimus, hardest: And it is fourmed
of the fyrst case of his positiue that endeth in i, by put­
tyng thertos, and simus, as duri durissimus, tristi tristissi­
mus, dulci dulcissimus.

¶From these general rules be excepted these that fo­
lowe.

Bonus
Melior
Optimus.

Malus
Peior
Pessimus

Magnus
Maior
Maximus.

Paruus
Minor
Minimus

Multus plurimus
Multa plurima
Multum plus plurimumum

¶And if the positiue ende in r, the superlatiue is for­
med of the nominatiue case, by puttynge to rimus, as
pulcher pulcherrimus.

¶Also these nownes endyng in lis, , make the superla­
tyue by chaungyng is, into limus, as humilis humilli­
mus, similis simillimus, facilis facillimus, gracilis gracil­
limus, agilis agillimus, docilis docillimus,

¶All other nownes endyng in lis, do folwe the ge­
nerall rule afore goyng.











❧Of the Pronovvne.

A Pronowne is a parte of speche, muche
lyke a nowne, whiche is vsed in shewyng
or rehersyng.

¶There be .xv. Pronownes, Ego, tu, sui,
ille, ipse, iste, hic, is meus, tuus, suus, noster,
uester, nostras, uestras.

¶To these may be added their compoundes, as ego­
met, tute, idem and also Qui quę quod.

¶These .viii. pronownes, Ego, tu, sui, ille, ipse, iste,
hic, and is, be primitiues, so called for bycause they be
not deriued of other. And they be also called Demon­
stratiues, bycause they shewe a thyng not spoken of
before.

¶And these. vi. pronouns Hic, ille, iste, is, idem, and qui be rela­
tiues, because they reherse a thyng that was spoken of
before.

¶These. vii. pronounsMeus, tuus, suus, noster, uester, nostras,
and uestras, be deriuatiues, for they be deriued of their
primitiues, Mei, tui, sui, nostri, and uestri.

¶There belongeth to a pronowne, these. v. thynges,
Number, Case, and Gender, as are in a Nowne, De­
clenson, and Person, as here foloweth.



The declensons of pronovvnes.


¶There be foure declensons of pronownes. 

¶These. iii. pronouns Ego, Tu, Sui, be of the fyrste declenson,
and be this declyned.









Sin. Nominatiuo Ego,
Sin. Genitiuo mei,
Sin. Datiuo mihi,
Sin. Accusatiuo me,
Sin. Vocatiuo caret,
Sin. Ablatiuo a me

Plur. Nominatiuo nos,
Plur. Genitiuo nostrum uel nostri,
Plur. Datiuo nobis,
Plur. Accusatiuo nos,
Plur. Vocatiuo caret,
Plur. Ablatiuo a nobis.

Sing. Nominatiuo Tu,
Sing. Genitiuo tui,
Sing. Datiuo tibi,
Sing. Accusatiuo te
Sing. Vocatiuo o tu,
Sing. Ablativo a te,

Plu. Nominatiuo uos,
Plu. Genitiuo uestrum uel uestri,
Plu. Datiuo uobis,
Plu. Accusatiuo uos,
Plu. Vocatiuo o uos,
Plu. Ablatiuo a uobis.

Sing. Nominatiuo Caret,
Sing. Genetiuo sui,
Sing. Datiuo tibi,
Sing. Accusatiuo se,
Sing. Vocatiuo caret,
Sing. Ablatiuo a se,

Plur. Nominatiuo caret,
Plur. Genitiuo sui,
Plur. Datiuo sibi,
Plur. Accusatiuo se,
Plur. Vocatiuo caret,
Plur. Ablatiuo a se.

¶These, vi. pronounsIlle, ipse, iste, hic, is, and qui, be of the .ii.
declenson, and be thus declyned.

Sing. Nominatiuo iste ista istud,
Sing. Genitiuo istius,
Sing. Datiuo isti,
Sing. Accusatiuo istum istam istud,
Sing. Vocatiuo caret,
Sing. Ablativo isto ista isto,

Plu. Nominatiuo isti istę ista,
Plu. Genitiuo istorum istarum istorum,
Plu. Datiuo istis,
Plu. Accusatiuo istos istas ista,
Plu. Vocatiuo caret,
Plu. Ablatiuo istis.

¶Ille  is declyned lyke iste, and also ipse, excepte that
the neuter gendre in the nomymatyue case, and in the
accusatyue case syngular, maketh ipsum.

¶Nominatiuo hic, hę, hoc, Genitiuo huius, as afore in the nowne.









Sing. Nominatiuo is ea id,
Sing. Genitiuo eius,
Sing. Datiuo ei,
Sing. Accusatiuo eum eam id,
Sing. Vocatiuo caret,
Sing. Ablativo eo ea eo,

Pl. Nominatiuo ii eę ea,
Plu. Genitiuo eorūearū eorū,
Plu. Datiuo iis uel eis,
Plu. Accusatiuo eos eas ea,
Plu. Vocatiuo caret,
Plu. Ablatiuo iis uel eis.

Sing Nominatiuo qui quæ quod,
Sing Genitiuo cuius,
Sing Datiuo cui,
Sing Accusatiuo quem quam quod,
Sing Vocatiuo caret,
Sing Ablativo quo uel qui
	qua uel qui
	quo uel qui,

Plur. Nominatiuo qui quę quę,
Plur. Genitiuo quorum quarum quorum
Plur. Datiuo quibus uel queis,
Plur. Accusatiuo quos quas quæ,
Plur. Vocatiuo caret,
Plur. Ablatiuo quibus uel queis.

¶Lykewyse quis and quid, be declyned, whether they
be interrogatiues or indefinites.

¶Where note that quid, is alwayes a substantiue of
the neuter gender.

¶These .v. pronounsMeus, tuus, suus, noster, and uester, be of
the .iii.declenson, and be declyned as nownes adiec­
tiues of .iii. terminations, in this wyse.

Sin. Nominatiuo meus mea um,
Sin. Genitiuo mei meæ mei,
Sin. Datiuo meo meæ o,
Sin. Accusatiuo meum meam um,
Sin. Vocatiuo mei mea; ummea,
Sin. Ablativo meo a u,

Pl. Nominatiuo mei meæ mea,
Pl. Genitiuo meorum mearum orum,
Pl. Datiuo meis,
Pl. Accusatiuo meos meas mea,
Pl. Vocatiuo mei meæ mea,
Pl. Ablatiuo meis.









¶So is noster, declyned, and tuus, suus, uester, except
that these thre laste, do lacke the vocatyue case.

¶Nostras uestras and this nown cuias, be of the fourth
declenson, and be thus declyned.

Sin. Nominatiuo hic & haæ no­
	stras & hoc te,
Sin. Genitiuo huius tis,
Sin. Datiuo huic ti,
Sin. Accusatiuo hunc hanc
	tem & hoc te,
Sin. Vocatiuo o nostros & o te,
Sin. Ablativo ab hoc hac &
	hoc te uel ti,

Pl. Nominatiuo hi & hæ nostrates,
	& hæc nostratia,
Pl. Genitiuo horum haum horum tium,
Pl. Datiuo his nostratibus,
Pl. Accusatiuo nos & has strates,
	& hæc nostratia,
Pl. Vocatiuo o tes & o tia,
Pl. Ablatiuo ab his nostra­
tibus,

¶Here is to be noted, that nostras, uestras, and this
nowne cuias, be called Gentiles,  bycause they properly
betoken perteinyng to countreys or nations, to sectes
or factions.

¶A pronowne hath thre persons.

The fyrsteperson speaketh of hym selffe, as Ego, I, nos, we.

The seconde person is spoken to, as Tu, thou, uos, ye.
	And of this person is also euery vocatyue case.

The thyrd persone is spoken of, as Ille, he, illi, they.
	And therfore all nownes, pronownes, and partici­
	ples be of the thyrde person.



Of a Verbe.

A VERBE is a parte of speche, declyned
with mode and tense, betokenyng to do,
as Amor, I loue: to suffer, as Amor, I
am loued: or to be, as Sum, I am.

¶Of verbes such as haue persons be cal­
&amp









led personalles, as Ego amo, Tu amas. And suche as
haue no persons, be called impersonalles, as Tædet,
it yrketh, oporter, it behoueth.

¶Of verbes personalles there be .v. kyndes, Actyue
Passyue, Neuter, Deponent, and Common.

¶A verbe actyue endeth in o, as Amo, and by put­
tyng to r, may be a passiue as Amor.

¶A verbe passiue endeth in or, as Amor, and by put­
tyng away r, may be an actyue, as Amo.

¶A verbe neuter endeth in o, or m, and can not take r
to make hym a passiue, as Curo I renne, Sum I am.

¶A verbe deponent endeth in r, and yet in sygnifica­
tion is actyue, as Loquor uerbum, I speake a woorde,
or neuter, as Glorior, I boste.

¶A verbe common endeth in r, and in sygnification
is bothe actiue and passiue, as Osculor te, I kysse the,
Osculor a te, I am kyssed of the.



Modes


		¶There be .vi. Modes. The Indicatyue,
		the Imperatyue, the Optatyue, the Potencial, the
		Subiunctyue, and the Infinityue.

¶The Indycatyue mode sheweth a reason true or
false, as Ego amo, I love: orels asketh a question, as
Amas tu: Dooest thou loue.

¶The Imperatyue byddeth, or commaundeth, as
Ama, love thou.

¶The Optatyue wyssheth or desyreth, with these si­
gnes, would God, I praye God, or God graunt, as
Vtinam Amem, I praye God I loue.

¶The potencyall mode is knowen by these sygnes
may, can, myght, would, should, or ought, as amem,
I can or may loue.









¶the Subiuncytue ioyneth sentences togyther, as
Cum amarem erammiser, whanI loued I was a wretch.

¶The Infinityue signifieth dooyng, sufferyng, or
beyng, and hath neyther numbre, nor person,  nor no­
minatiue case before hym, and is knowen commonly
by this sygne to, as Amare, to loue. Also whan twoo
verbes, come togyther without any nomynatyue case
betwene theym, then the later shall be the Infinitiue
mode, as Cupio discere, I desyre to lerne.

¶There be moreouer belongynge to the infinityue
mode of verbes certayne voyces, called gerundes en­
dyng in di, do, and dum, and haue bothe the actiue and
passiue signification, as amandi, of louing, or of being
loued, amando, in louyng or in being loued, amandum,
to loue or to be loued.

¶There be also perteynyng vnto verbes two Supi­
nes, the one endyng in tum, whiche is called the firste
Supine because it hath the signification of the verbe
actyue, as Eo amatum, I goo to loue. And the other in
tu, whiche is called the later supine because it hath for
the moste parte the sygnification passiue, as Difficilis
amatu, Harde to be loued.



Tenses.


		¶There be. v. Tenses or tymes.  The presente
		tense, the preterpluperfect tense, the preterperfect,
		the preterplusperfect, and the future tense.

¶The present tense speaketh of the tyme that now is
as Amo, I loue.

¶The preterimperfecte tense speaketh of the tyme
not perfectly paste, as Amabam, I loued or dyd loue.

¶The preterperfect tense speketh of the time perfect









ly past, with this signe haue, as Amaui, I haue loued.

¶The preterplusperfecte tense speketh of the tyme
more than perfectly past, with this sygne hadde, as
Amaueram, I had loued.

¶The future tense speketh of the tyme to come with
this signe, shall or wyll, as Amabo, I shall or wyl loue.



Persons

¶There be also in verbes .iii. persons, in bothe num­
bres, as Sing. Ego amo I loue, tu amas thou louest, ille
amat he loueth. Plur. Nos amamus we loue,  uos amatis
ye loue, illi amantthey loue.



Coniugations.

¶Verbes haue .iiii. Coniugations, whiche be kno­
wen after this maner.

¶The fyrste coniugation hath a, long before re, and
ris, as Amare, amaris.

¶The seconde coniugation hath e, longe before re,
and ris, as Docere, Doceris.

¶The third coniugation hath e, shorte before re, and
ris, as Legere, legeris.

¶The fourth coniugation hath i, long before re, and
ris, as Audire, audiris.

		¶Verbes in o, of the fower Coniugations, be
		declyned after these exaumples.

¶Amo, as, amaui, amare, amandi, do, dum, amatum, tu,
amans,amaturus, to loue.

¶Doceo, doces, docui, cere, docendi, do, dum, doctum,
doctu, docens, docturus , to teache.

¶Lego, legis, legi, gere, legendi, do, dum, lectum, lectu,
legens, lecturus , to reade.

¶Audio, audis, audiui, audire, audiendi, do, dum, audi­
tum, auditu, audiens, auditurus , to here.









Indicatiue mode the present tense singular. 

		I love, Amo Doceo Lego Audio

		thou louest. as, es, is, is,

		he loueth. at, et, it, it,

		Pl.we loue, amamus	docemus legimus audimus

		Pl.ye loue, atis, etis, itis,	itis,

		Pl.they loue, itis, cent, gunt, diunt,

The preterimperfecte tense singular. 

		Amabam 	bas, bat. Plur. bamus, batis, bant. I loued or dyd loue.
		Docebam bas, bat. Plur. bamus, batis, bant. taught.
		Legebam bas, bat. Plur. bamus, batis, bant. read.
		Audiebam bas, bat. Plur. bamus, batis, bant. heard.

The preterperfectetense sing. 

		Amaui isti,it. Plu. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. I haue loued.
		Docui isti,	it. Plu. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. taught.
		Legi isti,	it. Plu. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. read.
		Audiui isti, it. Plu. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. heard.

The preterpluperfecte tense. Syngular. 

		Amaueram ras, rat. Plu. ramus, ratis, rant. I had loued.
		Docueram ras, rat. Plu. ramus, ratis, rant. taught.
		Legeram ras, rat. Plu. ramus, ratis, rant. read.
		Adiueram ras, rat. Plu. ramus, ratis, rant. heard.

The future tense syng. 

		Amabo bis, bit. Plur. bimus, bitis, bunt. I shall or wyll loue.
		Docebo bis, bit. Plur. bimus, bitis, bunt. teache.
		Legam es, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent. read.
		Adiam es, et. Plu. emus, etis, ent. heare.

Imperatiue mode the presente tense sing. 

		Love thou. Ama Amato

		Loue he, or	let hym loue, amet amato

		Love we, or let vs loue. amemus amemus

		Loue ye amate amatote

		Love they or let them loue. ament amanto

		Love thou. Doce Doceto

		Teache he or let hym teach, doceat doceto

		Teache we, or let vs teache doceamus doceamus

		Teache ye	 docete docetote

		Teache they, or let them teache.  

		 Lege Legito

		 legat, legito

		 Plura. legamus legamus

		 legite, legitote,

		 legant legunto








		 Audi Audito

		 audiat audito

		 Plura. audiamus audiamus

		 audite auditote

		 audiant audiunto
  																	


Page C.iv. verso to D.i. recto are missing from this document. Therefore, what is entered below is taken from the verson EEBO STC 59:06, image 13 / 38.
The multiple curly brackets in this entry use display to communicate syntactic information. We cannot interpret relationships based on multiple curly brackets because our encoding system is incapable of representing complex visual maps.
  									
		
						


Optatyue mode the present tens singu. vti. 

		Amem, es, et. Plur, utinam, amemus, ametis, ament. God graunt I loue.

		Doceam as, at.	Plur. utinam, amus, atis, ant. taught.
		Legam as, at.	Plur. utinam, amus, atis, ant. reade.
		Audiam as, at.	Plur. utinam, amus, atis, ant. heare.

Preterimperfectens sing. vtin. 

		Amarem res, ret. Plur. utinam remus, retis, rent. would god I loued.
		Docerem	res, ret. Plur. utinam remus, retis, rent. taught.
		Legerem	res, ret. Plur. utinam remus, retis, rent. read.
		Audirem	res, ret. Plur. utinam remus, retis, rent. heard.

Preterperfecte tense. singu. vti. 

		Amauerim ris, rit. Plu. utinam rimus, ritis, rint. I praye god I haue loued.
		Docuerimris, rit. Plu. utinam rimus, ritis, rint. taught.
		Legerimris, rit. Plu. utinam rimus, ritis, rint. read.
		Audiueremris, rit. Plu. utinam rimus, ritis, rint. hearde.

Preterpluperfect tense. singu. vti. 

		Amauissem	ses, set. Pluraliter utinam semus, setis, sent. would god I had loued.
		Docuissem	ses, set. Pluraliter utinam semus, setis, sent. taught.
		Legissem	ses, set. Pluraliter utinam semus, setis, sent. read.
		Audiuissem ses, set. Pluraliter utinam semus, setis, sent. heard.

Future tens Singu. vti. 

		Amauero ris, rit. Plur. utin, rimus, ritis, rint. God graunt I loue hereafter.
		Docuero ris, rit. Plur. utin, rimus, ritis, rint. taught.
		Legero ris, rit. Plur. utin, rimus, ritis, rint. reade.
		Audiuero ris, rit. Plur. utin, rimus, ritis, rint. heare.

Potential mode present tens. Singular. 

		Amem ames, amet. Plur. amemus, ametis, ament. I may or can loue.
		Doceam as at. Plu. amus, atis, ant. taught.
		Legam as at. Plu. amus, atis, ant. reade.
		Audiam as at. Plu. amus, atis, ant. heare.









Preterimperfect tens Singular. 

		Amarem res, ret. Plur. remus, retis rent. I myght or coulde loue.
		Docerem res, ret. Plur. remus, retis rent.. teache.
		Legerem res, ret. Plur. remus, retis rent.. reade.
		Audirem res, ret. Plur. remus, retis rent.. heare.

Preterperfecte tense Singular. 

		Amauerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. I myght, should or ought to haue loued.
		Docuerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint.. taught.
		Legerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint.. reade.
		Audiuerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint.. heard.

Preterpluperfecttens Singular. 

		Amauissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent. I myght, should or ought to had loued.
		Docuissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent.. taught.
		Legissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent.. read.
		audiuissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent.. heard.

Futuretens singu. 

		Amauero ris, rit. Plu rimus, ritis, rint. I may or can loue hereafter.
		Docuero ris, rit. Plu rimus, ritis, rint. teache.
		Legero ris, rit. Plu rimus, ritis, rint. reade.
		Audiuero ris, rit. Plu rimus, ritis, rint. heare.

Coniunctyue mode pres. singu. cum. 

		Amem, es et. Plur. amemus, ametis, ament. When I loue.
		Doceam as at. Plur, amus, atis, ant. teache.
		Legam as at. Plur, amus, atis, ant. reade.
		Audiam as at. Plur, amus, atis, ant. heare.

Preterimperfecte tens singu. cum. 

		Amarem res, ret. Plur. remus, retis, rent. Whan I loued or dyd loue.
		Docerem res, ret. Plur. remus, retis, rent. taught or dyd teache.
		Legerem res, ret. Plur. remus, retis, rent. reade or dyd reade.
		Audirem res, ret. Plur. remus, retis, rent. heard or dyd heare.

Preterperfecte tense singu. cum. 

		Amauerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. Whan I haue loued.
		Docuerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. taught.
		Legerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. read.
		Audiuerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. heard.

Preterpluperfect tens singu. cum. 

		Amauissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent Whan I had loued.
		Docuissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent taught.
		Legissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent read.
		Audiuissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent heard.





From here continues from version EEBO STC 1845.1a.









Futuretens singu. cum. 

		Amauero ris, rit.	Plur 	rimus, ritis, rint. Whan I shall or wyll loue.
		Docuero ris, rit.	Plur 	rimus, ritis, rint. teache.
		Legero ris, rit.	Plur 	rimus, ritis, rint. reade.
		Audiuero ris, rit.	Plur 	rimus, ritis, rint. heare. 

Infinitiue mode pres. & perterimperfect tens 

		Amare to loue.
		Docere teache.
		Legere reade.
		Audire heare.

Preterperfecte & preterpluperfecte tense. 

		Amauisse To haue or had loued.
		Docuisse to hav or had taught.
		Legisse to have or had read.
		Audiuisse to have or had heard.

future tens 

		Amaturum esse To loue hereafter.
		Docturum esse to teache hereafter.
		Lecturum esse to reade hereafter.
		Auditurum esse to heare in tyme to come.

Gerundes. 

		Amandi of louyng. Amando in louyng	Amandum to loue.
		Docendi of teaching Docendo in teachyng Docendum to teache.
		Legendi of readyng Legendo in readyng Legendum to reade.
		Audiendi of hearyng Audiendo in hearyng Auiendum to heare.

Supines. 

		 To loue.							Amatu To be loued.
		Doctum to teache.			Doctu to be taught.
		Lectum to reade.				Lectu to be read.
		Amatum to heare.				Auditu to be heard.

Participle present. 

		Amans Louyng.
		Docens Teachyng.
		Legens Readyng.
		Audiens Hearyng.

		

		





Participle future. 

		Amaturus To loue or about to loue.
		Docturus to teache or about to teache.
		Lecturus to reade or about to reade.
		Auditurus to heare or about to heard.

¶Here before we declyne any verbes in or, for sup­
plyeing of many tenses, lackynge in all suche
verbes, we muste lerne to declyne this
verbe Sum, in this wyse.

SVM, es, fui, esse, futurus.

Indicatiue mode present tense. Singular. 

			Sum I am, es, est. Plur. sumus, estis, sunt,

Preterimpf. sin. 

			Eram, I was, eras, erat. Plur. eramus, eratis, erant.

Preterperfecte tense 

			Fui, I have been, fuisti, fuit. Plur. fuimus, fuistis, fue­
			runt uel fuere.

Preterpluperfecttens Singular 

			Fueram, I had ben, fueras, fuerat. Plur. fueramus,
			fueratis, fuerant.

Futuretens singu. 

			Ero. I shall or wyll be, eris, erit. Plural. erimus, er­
			tis, erunt.

Imperatiue mode present tens Singular. 

  					 				Sis		be thou							Plur. Simus					sitis					sint
  																	Es						sit																											este					sunto.
  																	Esto					esto																										estote
  																	


The multiple curly brackets in this entry use display to communicate syntactic information. We cannot interpret relationships based on multiple curly brackets because our encoding system is incapable of representing complex visual maps.
  									
		
						


Optatyue mode pres. singu. vti. 

			Sim, I pray god I be, sis, sit. Plur, simus, sitis, sint

Preterimpf. sin. vti. 

			Essem, I would god I were, esses, esset. Plur. essemus,
			essetis, essent

Preterperfecte tense sing. vtin. 

			Fuerim, I pray god I haue ben, ris, rit. Plur. fuerimus,
			fueritis, fuerint.

Preterpluperfecte tens Sing. vti. 

			Fuissem, Wolde god I had bene, fuisses, ses, set. Plur. fuis­semus, fuissetis, fuissent.









Futuretens sing. vtin. 

			Fuero, God graunt I be hereafter, fueris, fuerit. Plur
			fuerimus, fueritis, fuerint.

Potential mode present tens sin 

			Sim, I may or can be, sis sit. Plu. simus, sitis sint,

Preterimperfecttens. Singular. 

			Essem, I myght or coulde be,  esses, esset. Plur. essemus,
			essitis, essent.

Preterperfecte tense. singu. vti. 

			Fuerim, I myght shulde or ought to haue ben, fueris,
			fuerit. Plur. fuerimus, fueritis, fuerint.

Preterpluperfect tense. sing. vtin. 

			Fuissem, I myght shude or ought to had bene, fuisses,
			fuisset. Plu. fuissemus, fuissetis, fuissent.

Future tens sing. vtin. 

			Fuero, I maye be hereafter, fueris, fuerit. Plura. fueri­
			mus, fueritis, fuerint.

Coniunctiuemode pres. sing. cum. 

			Sim, Whan I am,  sis sit, Plural, simus, sitis, sint.

Preterimpf. sin. cum. 

			Essem, Whan I was, ses, set.  Plur. semus, setis, sent.

Preterperfecte tense. singu. cum 

			Fuerim, Whan I haue ben,  fueris, fuerit. Plur. fuerimus. fueritis, fuerint.

Preterpluperfecte tense singu. cum. 
		
			Fuissem, Whan I had bene, fuisses, fuisset. Plura. fuisse­
			mus, fuissetis, fuissent.

Future tens singu. cum. 

			Fuero, Whan I shall or wyll be, fueris, fuerit, Plurali.
			fuerimus, fueritis, fuerint.

Infinitiue mode present & imperfect tense. 

			Esse, to be.

Preterperfect & preterpluperfect. 

			Fuisse. to haue or had ben.
																				


The multiple curly brackets in this entry use display to communicate syntactic information. We cannot interpret relationships based on multiple curly brackets because our encoding system is incapable of representing complex visual maps.
  									
		



future tense, 

		 Fore uel futurum esse, to be hereafter









		❧Verbes in or of the foure coniugations be
		declyned after these examples.

Amor, aris uel are, amatus sum uel fui, amari, amatus, amandus. 
Doceor, ris uel cere, doctus sum uel fui, doceri, doctus, docendus. 
Legor, geris uel gere, lectus sum uel fui, legi, lectus, legendus. 
Audior, ditis uel ire, auditus sum uel fui, audiri, ditus, audiendus. 

Indicatiue mode present tense. singular. 

		Amor aris, uel are, atur, Plu. mur, mini, tur. I am loued.
		Doceor, eris, uel ere, etur. Plu. mur, mini, tur. I am taught.
		Legor, eris, uel ere, itur, Plu. mur, mini, tur. I am read.
		Audior, iris, uel ire, itur. Plu. mur, mini, tur. I am heard.

The preterimperfecte tense. singular. 

		Amabar baris, uel bare, batur. Plu. bamur, mini, tur. I was loued.
		Docebar baris, uel bare, batur. Plu. bamur, mini, tur. taught.
		Legebar baris, uel bare, batur. Plu. bamur, mini, tur. read.
		Audibar baris, uel bare, batur. Plu. bamur, mini, tur. heard.

The preterperfecte tense sing. 

		Amatus sum uel rui, tus es uel fuisti, tus est uel fuit. Plur. ti sumus uel imus, ti estis uel istis, ti sunt fuerunt uel fuere. I have ben loued.
		Doctus sum uel rui, tus es uel fuisti, tus est uel fuit. Plur. ti sumus uel imus, ti estis uel istis, ti sunt fuerunt uel fuere. taught.
		Lectus sum uel rui, tus es uel fuisti, tus est uel fuit. Plur. ti sumus uel imus, ti estis uel istis, ti sunt fuerunt uel fuere. read.
		Auditus sum uel rui, tus es uel fuisti, tus est uel fuit. Plur. ti sumus uel imus, ti estis uel istis, ti sunt fuerunt uel fuere. heard.

The preterpluperfecte tense. Syngular. 

		Amatus	eram uel fueram, tus eras uelfueras, tuserat uel fuerat. Plu. ti eramus uel fueramus, ti eratis uelfueratis, ti erant uel fuerant I had ben loued.
		Doctus eram uel fueram, tus eras uelfueras, tuserat uel fuerat. Plu. ti eramus uel fueramus, ti eratis uelfueratis, ti erant uel fuerant taught.
		Lectus eram uel fueram, tus eras uelfueras, tuserat uel fuerat. Plu. ti eramus uel fueramus, ti eratis uelfueratis, ti erant uel fuerant read.
		>Auditus eram uel fueram, tus eras uelfueras, tuserat uel fuerat. Plu. ti eramus uel fueramus, ti eratis uelfueratis, ti erant uel fuerant heard.

The future tense. syng. 

		Amabor	beris uel ere, bitur, bimur, bimini, buntur. I shall or wyll be loued.
		Docebor	beris uel ere, bitur, bimur, bimini, buntur. 
		Legar	eris uel ere, etur. Plur. emur, emini, entur. read.
		Audiar eris uel ere, etur. Plur. emur, emini, entur. heard.









Imperatyue mode present tens Singular. 

		Be thou loued. Amare Amator Docere	Docetor	Legere	Legitor	Audire	Auditor

		let hym be loued. ametur	amator Doceatur Docetor	legatur	legitor	audiatur auditor

		let vs be loued. Plu. emur Plu. emur amur, Plur. amur amur, Plur. amur iamur, Plur. iamur

		be ye loued. amini	aminor	cemini	minor	gemini	minor	imini	iminor

		let them be loued. entur	antor	ceantur	centor gantur guntor antur untor
		 																	


The multiple curly brackets in this entry use display to communicate syntactic information. We cannot interpret relationships based on multiple curly brackets because our encoding system is incapable of representing complex visual maps.
  									
		



Optatyue mode the present tens singu. vti. 

		Amer, eris uel ere, etur. Plur. emur, emini, entur .God graunt I be loued.
		Docear aris, are, atur. Plu amur, amini, antur .taught.
		Legar aris, are, atur. Plu amur, amini, antur .read.
		Audiar aris, are, atur. Plu amur, amini, antur .heard.

Perterimperfectens Singular. 

		Amarer	eris uel ere, etur. Plu. remur, remini, rentur .Wolde god I were loued.
		Docerer eris uel ere, etur. Plu. remur, remini, rentur .taught.
		Legerer eris uel ere, etur. Plu. remur, remini, rentur .read.
		Audirer eris uel ere, etur. Plu. remur, remini, rentur .heard.

Preterperfecte tense. Singu. vti. 

		Amatus sim uel fuerim, sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti simus uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint .wolde god I haue ben loued.
		Doctus sim uel fuerim, sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti simus uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint .
		Lectus sim uel fuerim, sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti simus uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint .
		Auditus sim uel fuerim, sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti simus uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint .

Preterpluperfect tense. sing. vtin. 

		Amatus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Pl. ti essemus uel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti essent uel fuissent .wolde god I had ben loued.
		Doctus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Pl. ti essemus uel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti essent uel fuissent .
		Lectus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Pl. ti essemus uel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti essent uel fuissent .
		Auditus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Pl. ti essemus uel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti essent uel fuissent .

Future tens singu. vti. 

		Amatus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. God graunt I be loued hereafter.
		Doctus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 
		Lectus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 
		Auditus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 

		

		





Potentiall mode present fens sin 

		Amer, eris uel ere, etur. Plu. emur, emini, entur.	 I may or can be loued.
		Docear	aris, uel are, atur. Pl. amur, amini, anttur.	 taught
		Legar aris, uel are, atur. Pl. amur, amini, anttur.	 
		Audiar aris, uel are, atur. Pl. amur, amini, anttur.	 heard.

Preterimperfect tens singular. 

		Amarer	reris uel rere, retur. Pl. emur, emini, entur. I wolde should or ought to be loued.
		Docerer reris uel rere, retur. Pl. emur, emini, entur. taught.
		Legerer reris uel rere, retur. Pl. emur, emini, entur. read.
		Audirer reris uel rere, retur. Pl. emur, emini, entur. heard.

Preterperfecte tense Syngular. 

		Amatus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti sin us uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint.	 I wolde should or ought to haue ben loued.
		Doctus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti sin us uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint. 
		Lectus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti sin us uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint. 
		Auditus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti sin us uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint. 

Preterpluperfecte tense Singular. 

		Amatus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Plu. ti essemus nel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti esent uel fuissent. I wolde should or ought to had ben loued.
		Doctus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Plu. ti essemus nel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti esent uel fuissent. 
		Lectus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Plu. ti essemus nel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti esent uel fuissent. 
		Auditus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Plu. ti essemus nel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti esent uel fuissent. 

Futuretens Singular. 

		Amatus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. I may or can be loued hereafter.
		Doctus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 
		Lectus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 
		Auditus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 

Coniunctiue mode pres. sing. cum. 

		Amer, eris uel ere, etur. Plur. emur, emini, entur. whan I am loued.
		Docear  eris uel ere, etur. Plur. emur, emini, entur. taught.
		Legar  eris uel ere, etur. Plur. emur, emini, entur. read.
		Audiar  eris uel ere, etur. Plur. emur, emini, entur. heard.

Preterimperfect tens singu. cum. 

		Amarer reris uel rere, etur. Pl. emur, emini rentur. Whan I was loued.
		Docerer reris uel rere, etur. Pl. emur, emini rentur. taught.
		Legerer reris uel rere, etur. Pl. emur, emini rentur. read.
		Audirer reris uel rere, etur. Pl. emur, emini rentur. heard.





This copy of Lily is missing pages D4v and E1r.	These pages are taken from EEBO STC 59:06, image 17 / 38.









Preterperfecte tense. singu.cum. 

		Amatus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti sin us uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint. whan I haue ben loued.
		Doctus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti sin us uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint. 
		Lectus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti sin us uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint. 
		Auditus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plurali. ti sin us uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint. 

Preterpluperfect tens singu. cum. 

		Amatus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Plu. ti essemus uel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti essent uel fuissent. whan I had ben loued.
		Doctus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Plu. ti essemus uel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti essent uel fuissent. 
		Lectus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Plu. ti essemus uel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti essent uel fuissent. 
		Auditus essem uel fuissem, tus esses uel fuisses, tus esset uel fuisset. Plu. ti essemus uel fuissemus, ti essetis uel fuissetis, ti essent uel fuissent. 

Future tens singu.cum. 

		Amatus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. whan I shall or wyll be loued.
		Doctus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 
		Lectus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 
		Auditus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plur. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 

Infinitive mode pres. & preterimperfect tens 

		Amari to be loued.
		Doceri to be taught.
		Legi to be read.
		Audiri to be heard.

Preterperfecte & preterpluperfecte tense. 

		Amatum esse uel fuisse To haue or had ben loued.
		Doctum esse uel fuisse to haue or had ben taught.
		Lectum esse uel fuisse to haue or had ben read.
		Auditum esse uel fuisse to haue or had ben heard.

Futuretens 

		Amatum iri uel amandum esse to be loued hereafter.
		Doctum  iri uel docendum esse taught hereafter.
		Lectum  iri uel legendum esse read hereafter.
		Auditum  iri uel audiendum heard hereafter.

Participle preterit. 

		Amatus Loued.
		Doctus taught.
		Lectus read.
		Auditus heard.

Participle fut. 

		Amandus To be loued hereafter
		Docendus taught.
		Legendus read.
		Audiendus heard.









 

		Possum, potes, potui, potens to may or can
		Volo, uis, uolui, uelle, uolendi, do, dum, supinis caret, uolens to wyll.
		Nolo, nonuis, nolui, nolle, nolendi, do, dum, sup. caret, nolens to nyll.
		Malo, mauis, malui, malle, malendi, do, dum sup. caret, malens to haue lyeffer.
		Edo, es uel edis, edi, edere uel esse, edendi, do, dum esum, esu, edens, esurus to eate.
		Fio, fis, factus sum fieri, factus, faciendus to be made.
		Fero, fers tuli, ferre, ferendi, ferendo, ferendum, latum, latu, ferens laturus to beare or to suffer.
		Feror, ferris, latus sum uel fui, ferri, latus, ferendus to be borne or suffered.

Indicatiue mode present tens. Singular 

		Possum potes potest, 
		Volo. uis, uult, 
		nolo Nonuis, nonuult 
		Malo mauis mauult 
		Edo, edis ueles, edit 
		Fio, fis, fit,  	uelest, 
		Fero, fers, fert, 
		Feror, ferris, fertur 
		uel re fertur 

Indicatiue mode present tens.Plur. 

		possumus potestis possunt, 
		Volumus, uultis, uolunt. 
		Nolumus nonuultis nolunt. 
		Malumus mauultis malunt. 
		Edimus, editis uelestis, edunt. 
		Fimus, fitis, fiunt. 
		Ferius, fertis, ferunt. 
		Ferimur ferimini feruntur. 

Preterimperfect tens Singular. 

		Poteram as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. 
		Volebam as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. 
		Nolebam as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. 
		Malebam as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. 
		Edebam as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. 
		Fiebam as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. 
		Ferebam as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. 
		Ferebar aris uel bare batur. Pl. bamur, mini, tur. 






From here continues from version EEBO STC 1845.1a.









Preterperfecte tense. Singular. 

		Potui isti, it. Plur. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. 
		Volui isti, it. Plur. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. 
		Nolui isti, it. Plur. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. 
		Malui isti, it. Plur. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. 
		Edi isti, it. Plur. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. 
		Tuli isti, it. Plur. imus, istis, erunt uel ere. 

		Factus sum uel fui, tus es uel fuisti, tus est uel fuit. Plural. ti sumus uel fuimus, ti estis, uel fuistis, ti sunt fruerunt uel fuere. 
		Latus sum uel fui, tus es uel fuisti, tus est uel fuit. Plural. ti sumus uel fuimus, ti estis, uel fuistis, ti sunt fruerunt uel fuere. .

Preterpluperfect eens singu. 

		Potueram ras, rat. Plur. ramus, ratis rant. 
		Volueram ras, rat. Plur. ramus, ratis rant. 
		Nolueram ras, rat. Plur. ramus, ratis rant. 
		Malueram ras, rat. Plur. ramus, ratis rant. 
		Ederam ras, rat. Plur. ramus, ratis rant. 
		Tuleram ras, rat. Plur. ramus, ratis rant. 

		Factus eram uel fueram, tus eras uel fueras, tus erat uel fuerat Plur. ti eramus uel fueramus, ti eratis uel fueratis, ti erant uel fuerant. 
		Latuseram uel fueram, tus eras uel fueras, tus erat uel fuerat Plur. ti eramus uel fueramus, ti eratis uel fueratis, ti erant uel fuerant. 

Futuretens sing. 

		Potero, ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, runt. 
		Volam es. et. Plur. emus, etis, ent. 
		Nolam es. et. Plur. emus, etis, ent. 
		Malam es. et. Plur. emus, etis, ent. 
		Edam es. et. Plur. emus, etis, ent. 
		Fiam es. et. Plur. emus, etis, ent. 
		Feram es. et. Plur. emus, etis, ent 

Imperatyue mode 

		Possum haue none imperatiue mode.
		Volo  haue none imperatiue mode.
		Malo  haue none imperatiue mode.









Imperatyue modeSingular 

		Noli
		nolito
		Es esto 	edat
							esto
							edito
		ede edito	edat
							esto
							edito
		Fitotu, fiat
		Fito
		Fer 			Ferat
							ferto
		Ferto 		Ferat
							ferto
		Ferre 		Feratur
				 			fertor
		fertor		Feratur
							fertor

Imperatyue modePl. 

		edite este 				edant
											edunto
		edamus	estote		edant
											edunto
		editote						edant
											edunto
		fiamus Fite 			Fiant
											Fiunto
		Fitote						Fiant
											Fiunto
		feramus Ferte 	Ferant
																					Ferunto
		fertote																Ferant
																					Ferunto
		feramur Ferimini 	Ferantor
											Feruntor
		feriminor 				Ferantor
											Feruntor
 																	


The multiple curly brackets in this entry use display to communicate syntactic information. We cannot interpret relationships based on multiple curly brackets because our encoding system is incapable of representing complex visual maps.
  									
		
						



Optatyue mode the present tens sing. vtin. 

		Possim is, it. Plur. imus, itis. int. 
		Volim is, it. Plur. imus, itis. int. 
		Nolim is, it. Plur. imus, itis. int. 
		Malim is, it. Plur. imus, itis. int. 
		Edam as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. 
		Fiam as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. 
		Feram as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant.. 
		Ferar, feraris, uel ferare feratur. Pl. faramur, amini, āntur. 

Preterimperfecte tense. sin. vtin. 

		Possem er, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent, 
		Vellem Possem er, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent, 
		Nollem Possem er, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent, 
		Mallem Possem er, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent, 
		Ederem Possem er, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent, 
		uel Essem Possem er, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent, 
		Fierem Possem er, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent, 
		Ferrem Possem er, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent, 
		Ferrer reris uel rere retur. Plur. remur, remini, rentur. 

Preterperfecte tense. singu. 

		Potuerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Voluerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Noluerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Maluerm ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Ederim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Tulerim ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 

		

		





		Factus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plura. ti simus uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint. 
		Latus sim uel fuerim, tus sis uel fueris, tus sit uel fuerit. Plura. ti simus uel fuerimus, ti sitis uel fueritis, ti sint uel fuerint. 


Preterpluperfect tense singu. vti. 

		Potuissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent. 
		Voluissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent. 
		Noluissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent. 
		Maluisssem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent. 
		Edissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent. 
		Tulissem ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent. 

		Factus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plura. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 
		Latus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plura. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 

Futuretens Sing. vtin. 

		Potuero ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Volueroris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Nolueroris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Malueroris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Ederoris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 
		Tuleroris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. 


		Factus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plura. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 
		Latus ero uel fuero, tus eris uel fueris, tus erit uel fuerit. Plura. ti erimus uel fuerimus, ti eritis uel fueritis, ti erunt uel fuerint. 

¶ The Potencial and the subiunctiue mode be for­
med and coniugated or varied lyke the Optatiue.

Infinitiue mode pres. & preterimperfect tens 

		Posse 
		Velle 
		Nolle 
		Malle 
		Edere uel esse 
		Ferre 

Preterperfect and preterpluperfect. 

		Potuisse 
		Voluisse 
		Noluisse 
		Maluisse 
		Edisse 
		Tulisse 

Future. 

		Esurum 
		Laturum esse 
 																	


The multiple curly brackets in this entry use display to communicate syntactic information. We cannot interpret relationships based on multiple curly brackets because our encoding system is incapable of representing complex visual maps.
  									
		











Preterperfecte & preterpluperfect. 

		Fieri 
		Ferri 

Presente & preterimperfecte tense. 

		Factum esse uel fuisse. 
		Latum esse uel fuisse.  
																			


The multiple curly brackets in this entry use display to communicate syntactic information. We cannot interpret relationships based on multiple curly brackets because our encoding system is incapable of representing complex visual maps.
  									
		
						


Futuretens 

		Factum iri uel faciendum isse. 
		Latum iri uel ferendum esse. 

¶Eo and queo make ibam and quibam in the preterim­
perfect tense of the indicatiue mode: and ibo & quibo in the future tense, and in all other modes and tenses
are varied lyke verbes in o, of the fowerth coniuga­
tion, sauynge that they make the gerundes: Eundi, do , dum. Quendi, do, dum.

¶ Of the preterperfect tense of the Indicatyue mode 
be fourmed the preterpluperfect tens of the same mode.

The preterperfecte tense, the preterpluperfect tense,
and the future tense of the optatyue mode, the poten­
cial mode, and the Subiunctiue mode. The preterper­
fecte and pluperfect tense of the infinitiue mode, as of
Amaui,  are fourmed amaueram, amauerim, amauissem, ama­
uero, amauisse, ram, rim & ro, by chaugnynge i in to e,
sem, & se, kepyng i styll.

¶ Impersonals be declyned in the voyce of the third
person through out all modes and tenses. as Delectat,
delectabat. Decet, decebat, and haue commonly before
their englyshe this sygne it, as It deliteth me to rede,
Delectat me legere.











❧OF A PARTICIPLE▸


A PARTICIPLE is a parte of speche, de­
riued of a verbe, & taketh part of a nowne
as gendre & case, parte of a verbe, as tense
and signification: and parte of bothe, as
number and figure.

¶ A participle hath .iiii. tenses, the present, the pre­
ter, the future in rus, and the future in dus.

¶A participle of the present tense hath his englysshe
endyng in yng. as louyng, & his latine in ans, or ens,
as Amans, docens: And it is fourmed of the preterim­
perfect tense, by chaungyng bam, into ens, as Amabam,
amans, Audiebam audiens.

¶A pariciple of the future in rus, betokeneth to do
lyke the infinitiue mode of the actyue voyce, as Ama­
turus to loue or about to loue. And is fourmd of the
later supyne, by puttyng to rus, as Doctu, docturus.

¶A participle of the preter tense, hath his englysshe
endyng in d, t, or n, as loued, taught, slayne, and his
latyn endeth in tus, sus, xus,  as Amatus, uisus, nexus,
and one in uus, as mortuus. And is fourmed of the la­
ter supyne, by puttynge to s as Lectu lectus.

¶A participle of the future in dus,  betokeneth to suf­
fer lyke the infinitiue mode of the passyue voyce, as
Amandus to be loued. And it is fourmed of the geny­
tyue case of the participle of the present tense, by chan­
gyng tis, into dus as Legentis legendus. And it is al­
so found to haue the signification of the present tense,
as Legendis ueteribus proficis,  In readyng olde auc­
thours thou dooest profit.









¶Of a verbe actiue, and of a verbe neuter, whiche
hath the supines,  come .ii. participles, one of the pre­
sent tense, and an other of the future in rus, as of Amo
commeth amans, amaturus, of Curro, currens, cursurus.

¶Of a verbe passiue whose actiue hath the supines, 
come .ii. participles, one of the preter tense, & an other
of the future in dus,as of amor, commeth amatus, aman­
dus.

¶Of a verbe deponent commeth .iii. participles, one
of the present tense, one of the preter tense, & an o­
ther of the future in rus, as of Auxilior, auxilians, aux­
iliatus, auxiliaturus. And if the verbe deponent gouern
an accusatiue case after him, it may fourme also a par­
ticiple in dus, as of Loquor, loquendus.

¶Of a verbe common commeth .iiii. participles, as of
Largior, commeth largiens, largiturus, largitus, largiendus.

¶Participles of the present tense, be declyned lyke
nownes adiectiues with .iii. articles, as hic hęc & hoc
Amans.

¶Participles of other tenses be declyned lyke now­
nes adiectiues of .iii. dyuers endynges, as Amaturus,
Amas, Amandus, a, um.



❧OF AN ADVERBE▸

AN ADVERBE is a parte of speche,
ioyned to the verbes to declare his syg­
nification.

¶Aduerbes some be of tyme, as Hodie,
cras, olim, aliquando.

¶Some adverbs be of place, as Vbi, ibi, hic, istic, illic, intus, foris.









Some adverbs be of number, as Semel, bis, ter, quater.

Some adverbs be of order, as Inde, deinde, denique, postremo.

Some adverbs be of askynge or doubtyng, as Cur, quare, unde,
quorsum, num numquid.

Some adverbs be of callyng, as Heus, o, ehodum.

Some adverbs be of affirmyng, as Certe, næ profecto, sane, scili­
cet, licet, esto.

Some adverbs be of denying, as Non, haud, minime, nequaquam.

Some adverbs be of sweryng, as Pol, ædepol, hercle, medius fidius.

Some adverbs be of exhortyng, as Eia, age agedum.

Some adverbs be of flateryng, as Sodes, amábo.

Some adverbs be of forbyddyng, as Ne.

Some adverbs be of wysshyng, as Vtinam, si, osi, o.

Some adverbs be of gatheryng togither, as Simul, una, pariter,
non modo, non solum.

Some adverbs be of partyng, as Seorsim, sigillatim, uicatim.

Some adverbs be of choosyng, as Potius, imo.

Some adverbs be of a thyng not fynisshed, as Pene, ferè, uix, mo
do non.

Some adverbs be of shewyng, as En, ecce.

Some adverbs be of doubtyng, as Forsan, forsitan, fortassis, for­
tasse.

Some adverbs be of chaunce, as Forte, fortuito.

Some adverbs be of lykenesse, as Sic, sicut, quasi, ceu, tanquam, uelut,

Some adverbs be of quality, as Bene, malè, doctè, fortiter.

Some adverbs be of quantity, as Multum, parum, minimum, pau­
lulum.

Some adverbs be of comparison, as Tam, quam, magis, minus, max­
imé.

¶Certayne aduerbes be compared,as Docte, docti­
us, doctissime. fortiter, fortius, fortissime. Prope, pro­
pius, proxime.











❧OF A CONIVNCTION▸


A CONIVNCTION is a parte
of speche, that ioynethe woordes, and
sentences together.

¶Of coniunctions, some be copula­
tiues, as Et, que,quoque,atque, nec, neque.

¶Some conjunctions bedisiunctiues, as Aut, ue, uel,
seu, siue,

¶Some conjunctions be discretiues, as Sed, quidem, autem, uero, at, ast.

¶Some conjunctions be causales, as Nam, nanque,enim, etenim, quia,
ut, quod, quando, quum..

¶Some conjunctions be conditionalles, as Si, sin, modo, dum dum­
modo.

¶Some conjunctions be exceptiues, as Ni, nisi, quin, alioquin, preterquam.

¶Some conjunctions be interrogatyues, as Ne, an, uerum, necne,
anne, nonne.

Some conjunctions be illatiues, as Ergo ideo, igitur, quare, itaque, proin.

¶Some conjunctions be aduersatiues, as Etsi, quanquam, quanuis, licet.

¶Some conjunctions be redditiues to the same, as Tamen, attamen.

¶Some conjunctions be electiues, as Quam, ac, atque.

¶Some conjunctions be diminutiues, as Saltem, uel.



❧OF A PREPOSITION▸


A PREPOSITION is a parte of speche
moste commonly sette before other  partes
in apposition, as Ad patrem, or in compo­
sition, as Indoctus.

		These prepostions folowyng serue to
the accusatiue case.









		Ad to,
		Apud at,
		Ante before
		Aduersus agaynst
		Aduersum agaynst
		Cis on this side
		Citra on this side
		Circum about
		Circa about
		Contra agaynst
		Erga toward

		Extra without,
		Intra within,
		Inter betwene,
		Infra beneth
		Iuxta besyde or nygh to,
		Ob for
		Pone behynd
		Per by or through
		Prope nigh
		Propter for
		Secundum after

		Post after
		Trans on the ferther syde.
		Vltra beyond,
		Pr#281;ter besyde
		Supra aboue
		Circiter about
		Vsque untyl
		Secus by
		Versus toward
		Penes in the power.


¶Where note that uersus, is sette after his casuall
word, as Londinum uersus, Towarde London. And
lykewyse may penes be set also.

¶These prepositions folowynge, serue to the abla­
tiue case.

		A From or fro
		Ab From or fro
		Abs From or fro
		Cum with
		Coram before or in presence
		Clam priuily
		De of or fro
		E of or fro
		Ex of or fro

		Pro for
		Prę before or in comparison
		Palam openly
		Sine without
		Absque without
		Tenus vntyll or vnto


¶Where note that if the casuall woorde ioyned with
tenus, be the plurall number, it shal be putte in the ge­
nitiue case and be sette before tenus as Aurium tenus,
Up to the eares.









¶These prepositions folowyng serue to bothe cases,
as In, with this signe to, to the ablatyve case, as

		In urbem, into the city.
		In , without this sygne to, to the ablatuyem as
		in tespes est, my hope is in the.
		Sub noctem, a lyttell before nyght.
		Sub iudice lis est the matter is before the iudge.
		Super lapidem vpon a stone.
		Super uiridi fronde vpon grene leaues
		Subter terram vnder the earthe.
		Subter aqua vnder the water.



❧OF AN INTERIECTION▸


AN INTERIECTION is a parte of
speche, which betokeneth a passion of the
mynde, vnder an vnperfect voyce.

¶Some interjections are of myrth, as Euax, uah.
¶Some interjections are of of sorowe: as Jeu, hei.
¶Some interjections are of drede, as Atat.
¶Some interjections are of maruailyng, as Pape.
¶Some interjections are ofdisdeinyng, as Hem, uah.
¶Some interjections are of shunnyng, as Apage.
¶Some interjections are of praysyng, as Euge.
¶Some interjections are of scornyng, as Hui.
¶Some interjections are of exclamation, as Proh deum atque hominum
fidem. O..
¶Some interjections are of cursyng, as Vę, malum.
¶Some interjections are of layghyng, as Hah, ha, he.
¶Some interjections are of callyng, as Eho, oh, io.
¶Some interjections are of silence, as Au. And suche other.











