



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 4 0 7 5 . 5

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )



Briefe introductions, both naturall, pleasaunt, and also 
delectable vnto the Art of Chiromancy, or Manuell diuination, and 
Physiognomy: wyth circumstances vpon the faces of the Signes. 
Addyng newly therunto lyuely Pictures. Also certain canons or 
rules vpon diseases and sicknesse. Whereunto is also annexed 
aswel the artificiall, as naturall Astrologye, with the nature of the 
planettes. Written in the Latin tonge, by Ihon Indagine Prieste. ¶ 
Translated into Englyshe and perused over agayne by 
Fabian Withers.     Londini 1558.








THE auncient 
Grekes, who 
(as it may ap­
pere bi the long
and old vse of 
the word) dyd
vse thys sorte 
and kinde of 
Diuinatyon, 
whiche is ga­
thered by the beholding of mans hand, 
called it by this propre name of Chyro­
mancia. 

 
The hand therfore being extent or ope­




ned abroade, the playne within is called
the palme, in the middest whereof there 
is a certaine space called the concaue or 
holownesse, oute of the whiche the fiue 
fingers haue their originall and begin­
ning. Amongst the which, the first being 
the strongest and mooste grosse, is called 
the Thomb: the next is called the Index 
or forfinger, because in shewing or poin­
ting to any thing, we do commonly vse 
that finger. The next that foloweth and 
is in the middest of the fiue, is by the 
same name called the middle finger: next 
after this is the Ringe finger: so called, 
because it is commonly to weare a ring 
of golde vppon it, and speciallye that on 
the left hand, for because as learned men 
hold opinion, there doth passe a certaine 
small sinnowe from that Finger to the 
hearte of man: wherefore it semed good 
in times paste to the antiquitie, to wear 
a ringe as a crowne vppon that finger, 
or els as some do suppose, that goulde 
by nature doth comforte the heart. The 
laste finger and leaste of all, is called 
the eare finger, because it is commonlye 




vsed to make cleane the eares. 



And thus 
farre concernynge the fingers. More o­
uer, the hand beyng closed or shut wyth 
the fingers turned in, we call the fiste, 
the nether parte wherof (amongest such 
as vse this Arte,) is commonlye called 
the percussion or pomel of the hand Then 
the place where the hand is drawen and 
gathered in, & ioyned to the arme, is also 
called the wreast. Furthermore, euerye 
finger hath his proper rising or swelling 
of the fleshe, which dothe rise at the rote 
or nether parte of the saide fingers, and 
of some is called hilles, and are attribu­
ted vnto the names of the Planets. A­
mong the whiche is reckened the rising 
or hyll in the nether parte of the fist, cal­
led the percussion of the hand, so that in 
the hande are limitted and appoynted 
seuerall places vnto euerye of the Pla­
nettes, whereby iudgemente maye be 
gathered. 







FOr the better vnderstanding of Phisi­
ognomy of the heeres we wil first de­
clare their nature, The heres are nothing 
els but a vapor hot and dry in densat & 
made thick by thair which he is compas­
sed withal, by the which definicion it doth 
plainly appere that old satarnyn men to 
be bald & without heere thorowe the ex­
treme cold which is in their powers. 






A House is a certaine space in the fir­
mament deuided by certaine degrees, 
by the which the planets haue their mo­
cion, so Metaphorically called. For 
as in a house there be many mantiens: 
so euery planet hath his proper place in 
the heauen or firmament, by the whiche 
they do moue, and in the whiche they be 
resident and situate. And it is called the 
discription or diuision of the signs by .30 
degrees, for euerye house or signe hathe 
30. degrees. 






