





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 6 8 5 8 

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )



A GEOMETRICAL 
Practise, named PANTOMETRIA,
diuided into three Bookes, Longimetra,
Planimetra and Stereometriea, containing Rules manifolde
for mensuration of all lines, Superfices and Solides. With
sundry straunge conclusions both by instrument
and without, and also by Perspectiue glasses, to
set forth the true description or exact plat of
an whole Region: framed by Leonard
Digges Gentleman, lately finished
by Thomas Digges his
sonne.









Elementes of Geometrie,
or Diffinitions.



A Poynt I call whiche cannot be diuided, whose parte is
nothing.

A Lyne is a length without breadth or thicknesse, whose ex­
tremities are two poyntes.

THe shortest drawen between two Poyntes is a streight
line, the contrary are crooked lines.

A poincte A right line Crooked lines

A Superficies is that hath length and breadth onely, beeing
bounded or determined with lines.

A Playne Superficies is that whiche lieth equally and euen­
ly betweene his lines or boundes.

A superficies.

A Playne Angle is the inclination of two lines lying in one
playne Superficies, concurring or meeting in a poynt.






IF those lines that containe the Angle be straight, it is called
a right lined Angle, and those two lines his containing sides,
but if a third straight line be drawne crosse the former from 
one to the other, that shall be called the subtending side.

ABC the contayned angle
AB BC the contayninge
sides
AC the syde
subtendent.

OF straight lined angles there are three kindes, the Ortho­
gonall, the Obtuse and the Acute Angle.

WHen any right line falleth Perpendicularly vpon an o­
ther, that is to say, making the Angles on either side e­
quall, eche of those Angles is an Orthogonall or right Angle,
and that falling line a Perpendicular.

AB is the Perpendicular
DC the ground line.
A Perpendicular
A right angle

BAC the right angle contained of the Perpendicular, and one
part of the ground line equall to BAD the right angle contained
of the Perpendicular, and the other portion of the grounde line, and
therfore both Orthogonall.






Longimetra

The Brode or Obtuse Angle is greater than the Orthogonal.

Abroode

The Acute or sharpe, is lesser than the right angle.

a sharpe

A Figure is comprehended within limites and bounds, whe­
ther it be one or many.

A Circle is a plaine figure, determined with one line, which
is called a Circumference, in whose mids there is a point
named his Centre. From the which all right lines drawne to
the circumference are equall.

A circle. A circumferens.

A Semicircle or halfe Circle, doth conteine both the Dime­
tient and Centre of his circle, with the precise halfe of his
circumference.






A Right line drawne through the Centre vnto the Circum­
ference of both sides, is named his Diameter or Dimeti­
ent, the halfe of it is called his Demidiameter.

"Demidiameter" not found in OED.



An halfe circle 
Dimetient

ALl Straight lines besides the Diameter in any Circle
pulled from one part of the Circumference to the other, be
called cordes.

THe portion of the Circumference from that corde compre­
hended, is named an Arcke.

A Touch line is that toucheth a circle in a Pointe.


an arck
A corde
Diametre
A corde
A touche lyne

A triangle 

EMong Right-lined figures,
suche as haue onely three si­
des are Triangles, whereof
there be sundrie sortes bearing seuerall names, according to
the diuersitie of their sides and Angles.






IF the Triangles three sides be euery of them of like length,
it is called  an Equilater Triangle.

 ISoscheles is such a Triangle as hath onely two sides like,
the thirde being vnequall, and that is the Base. 

 Schalenum hath three vnequall sides.

"Schalenum" not found in OED.



A Rightangled Triangle is suche a one as hath one Righte
Angle. 

AN Obtuseangle Triangle hath one obtuse angle, and is
called Ambligonium. 

Oxigonium hath all acute or sharpe Angles. 

THere be also foure sided Figures called Quadrangles, 
whose Opposite sides and angles are equall, suche are na­
med Paralelogrammes, whereof there are but foure sortes.

IF all the sides be equall, and al the angles right, than is that
Paralelogramme called a square.






If one side containing the right Angle, be longer than the o­
ther containing side, then is that figure called a Rectangle.

If all the sides be equall, and no angle aright, then is it called 
Rhombus.

BUt if it haue only the Opposite sides equall, and the other
that containe an Angle vnequall, it shall be named  Rhom­
boides.

All other quadrangles are Trapezia.

"trapezia" antedates earliest OED quotation (1631).



POlygona, are such figures as haue moe than foure sides,
whose angles if they be all like and equall, they are termed
Equiangle Polygona.

A figure of 
manie sides

AL other plain Superficies, whether they be enuironed with
straight or crooked lines, shalbe named irregulare figures. 






Longimetra
 
WHen two right lines drawne in one plaine Superficies,
are so equedistantly placed, that though they were infi­
nitely extended on either side, yet would neuer meete nor con­
curre, they shall be called Paralleles.

Paralleles.

 A Quadrant is the fourth part of a Circle, included with two
Semidiameters commonly diuided in 90. portions, which
partes are named grades or degrees. 











The second kynde of Geome­
trie called Planimetra.


HAVING accomplished the first part called Longimetra, con­
tayning sundrie rules to measure lengthes, breadthes, heigths,
depthes, and distances: I thinke it meete now to proceede to
the seconde kynde named Planimetra, wherein ye shall haue
rules for the mensuration of all manner playne Figures, to 
know their contente superficiall. And forasmuch as there is no Superficies,
but is enuironed with lines either streight or curue. And all Figures com­
prehended with streight lines may be resolued into Triangles: It seemeth
most meete, first to teache the measuring of Triangles as followeth.


The fyrst Chapter.

Of Triangles.




AS there are three kind of Angles, so is there also three kind
of Triangles: the first is called Orthogonium, hauing one of
his angles a right: the other Ambligonium contayning one
obtuse angle: the third kinde is called Oxigonium, whose
three angles are all acute. Of right angled Triangles also
there are two kindes, for eyther it hath two equall sides, and then is it
called Isoscheles, or three vnequall, and that is Scalenum.

"Ambligonium" not a headword in the OED (but see quotation of 1570 under "obtuse-angled."












The thirde kynde of Geome­
trie named Stereometria.


IN THIS thirde booke ye shall receyue sundrie rules to mea­
sure the Superficies and Crassitude of solide bodies, whereof,
although an infinite sorte of differente kyndes might be ima­
gined, yet shall I only entreate of such as are both vsually re­
quisite to be moten, and also may sufficiently induce the inge­
nious to the mensuration of all other solides what forme or figure soeuer
they beare. And forasmuch as in setting foorth their seuerall kyndes, I haue
chosen to vse the accustomable and auncient names well knowen to any
trauelled in Geometrie, rather than to forge newe Englishe wordes which
can neither so breefly nor so aptly expresse the like effecte, least to the com­
mon sorte any obscuritie might growe, I thinke good to adioyne euery of
their diffinitions,


DIFFINITIONS.



1 A Solide body is that hath lengthe, breadth and thicknesse boun­
ded or limited with Superficies.

2 Lyke solides are such as are encompassed with superfices that are
lyke and of equall number.

3 A Prisma is a solide Figure comprehended of playne Superficies,
whereof two are equall, like, and Parallele, the reste Parallelogrammes.

"Prisma" not a headword in the OED.



4 A Pyramis is a solide Figure enclosed with many playne Superfi­
cies rysing from one, and concurring or meeting in a pointe.

5. A Sphere is a grosse or solide body comprehended of one coruex
Superficies. In the middes whereof there is a pointe from whence all
right lines to the same superficies extended, are equall.

6. That poincte is called his Center, and a streight line by that Cen­
tre passing throroughe this solide bounded on eyther side with the conuex
superficies is called the Diameter of that Sphere.






7 Also intellectually ye may thus conceyue a Sphere to be made.
Suppose a semicircle (his diameter remayning immouably fixed) to be
turned round about til it returne to the place whence it firste beganne to
moue, the figure so described, is a Sphere.

8 Likewise, if a right angled triangle (one of the contayning sides re­
mayning fixed) be turned circularly about the Figure so described, it is
called a Cone.

9 The right line that remayneth fixed is the Axis.

10 The circle described by the other contayning side is the Base.

11 The third line or Hypothenusa, is the side of the Cone.

12 If a right angled parallelogramme (the one of the sides conteyning
a right angle remayning immouable) be circularly turned, the Figure so
described, is a Cylinder, and the immouable side is his Axis.

13 The Bases are the Circles by reuolution of the two opposite Pa­
rallele sides described.

14 The altitude or heigth of any solide body, is a line perpendicular­
ly falling from the toppe or highest parte of the solide vppon the playne
whereon the body lyeth.

15 This perpendicular or line of altitude in directe solides falleth
within the body, and vppon the base, but in declyning solides, it falleth
without the bodies and bases.

16 As the concourse of lines maketh a playne angle, so the concurring
or meeting of many superficies in a pointe, maketh a solide angle.

17 In euery solide body a right line drawen from one solide angle to
one other is called a line Diagonall. But if it passe betweene opposite an­
gles, it is named the Diameter.










A Mathematical Discourse of Geometrical solides.

The Preface.

ALthough the Rules and Preceptes already geuen abun­
dantly may suffice for the exact mensuration of any man­
ner Solides or vessels that are vsually occupied, or may
be proponed to be moten, yet for the satisfaction also of
such as deliting in matters only new, rare and difficile,
seeke to reache aboue the common sorte, I haue thought
good to adioyne this Treatise of the 5 Platonicall bodies,
meaning not to discourse of their secrete or mysticall appliances to the
Elementall regions and frame of Celestiall Spheres, as things remote
and farre distant from the Methode, nature and certaintie of Geometrical
demonstration, only heere I intend Mathematically to conferre the Super­
ficiall and Solide capacities of these Regulare bodies with their Circum­
scribing or inscribed spheres or Solides, & Geometrically by Algebraycall
Calculations to search out the sides, Diameters, Axes, Altitudes, and lines
Diagonal, together with the Semidimetients of their Equiangle Bases,
containing or contained Circles, and as in the Problemes ye shal perceiue
by Preceptes and Examples, the quantities and proportions of all these
lines, Superficies and Crassitudes, with numbers Rationall and Radicall
expressed, so haue I by Theoremes sowne the seede of Rules innumerable,
wherin the studious may delite him selfe with infinite varietie: Finally I
shall in the last Chapiter by Diffinitions and Theoremes partly set forthe
the forme, nature and proportion of other fiue vniforme Geometricall So­
lides, created by the transformation of the fiue bodyes Regulare or Plato­
nicall: but not in so ample manner, as the noueltie or difficultie of the mat­
ter requireth, meaning as I see these the first frutes of my studies liked and
accepted, to bestowe time and trauaile vppon an other peculiare Volume,






which shall conteyne, not onely the demonstrations of these Theorems
of spherall solides, but also of Conoydall, Parabollical, Hyperbollical and
Ellepseycal circumscribed & inscribed bodies, & many mo lynes & solides
produced by the sections of these, and reuolution of their sections: but to re­
turne to this present Treatise, let no man muse the writing in the English
toung, I haue retayned the Latin or Greeke names of sundry lines and
figures, as cordes Pentagonall, lines Diagenall, Icosaedron, Dedocae­
dron, or such like, for as the Romanes and other Latin writers, not with­
standing the copiouse and abundante eloquence of their toung, haue
not shamed to borrow of the Gretians these and many other termes of
arte: so surely do I thinke it no reproche, either to the English toung,
or any English writer, where fitte words fayle to borrow of them both,
but rather should we seeme therby to do them great iniurie, these beeing
in deede certayne testimonies and memorials where such sciences firste
tooke their originall, and in what languages and countreys they chieflye
florished, which names or words how straunge soeuer they seeme at the
firste acquayntaunce, by vse will grow as familiar as these, a triangle, a
circle, or suche like, which by custome and continuance seeme meere En­
glish, yet to auoyde all obscuritie that may grow by the noueltie of them,
I haue adioyned euery of their diffinitions, and so proceded to Problems
and Theoremes with suche methode, as howe obscure or harde soeuer
they appeare at the firste, through the rarenesse of the matter: I 
doubt not but by orderly reading, the ingeniouse Student,
hauing any meane taste of cossicall numbers, shall
finde them playne and easie.  







Diffynitions.



PRoportion is a mutuall or enterchangeable relation of two
magnitudes, being of one kind, compared togither in respecte
of their quantities.

The second diffinition.
When the proportion of two magnitudes is such as may be expressed
with numbers, then is it certaine & apparant and here is called rational:
But when the proportion is such as cannot be expressed with numbers,
but with their rootes onely, then is that proportion certayne also, but
not apparante, and therfore here I name it surde or irrationall.

The thirde diffinition.
When there be three suche magnitudes or quantities that the first to
the second retayne the same proportion that the second doth to the third,
those quantities are saide to be proportionall, and the first to the thirde
retayneth double the proportion of the first to the second, and the seconde
is named meane proportionall betweene the first and the last.

The fourth Diffinition
When foure magnitudes are likewise in continual proportion, the
first & fourth are the extremes, and the second and thirde the meanes,
and the extreames are sayd to haue triple the proportion of the meanes.

The fifth diffinition.
 Any lyne or number is sayde to be diuided by extreame & meane pro­
portion, when the diuision or section is suche or so placed, that the whole
line or numer retayne the same proportion to the greater parte, that
the greater doth to the lesser.

The sixth diffinition.
 A lyne is sayde to be equall in power with two or moe lynes, when
his square is equall to all their squares.

The seuenth diffinition.
 A lyne is sayd to matche a superficies in power, when the square of
that line is equall to the superficies.

The eyght diffinition.
When any equiangle triangle, square, or Pentagonum is in suche
sorte described within a circle, that euery of their angles touche the cir­
cumference, their sides are called the trigonal, tetragonall and pentago­
nall Cordes of that circle.






The ninth diffinition.
About euery equilater triangle, square, or Pentagonum, a circle may
be described, precisely touching euery of those figures angles, and that
circle shall be called the circumscribing or contayning circle.

The tenth diffinition.
Also within euery of these equiangle figures a circle may be drawen,
not cutting but only touching euery of their sides, this is called the in­
scribed circle.

The eleuenth diffinition.
Any right line drawen from angle to angle in those equiangle figures
passing through the superficies, I name the line diagonall.

The twelfth diffinition.
A right line falling from any angle of these superficies perpendicu­
larly to the opposite side shalbe named that playnes perpendiculare.

The. 13. Diffinition.
TETRAEDRON is a body Geometricall
encompassed with fowre equall equiangle tri­
angles.

Tetraedron.

The fourtenth Diffinition.
HEXAEDRON or CVBVS is a solide fi­
gure, enclosed with sixe equall squares.

Cubus.

The fiftenth Diffinition.
OCTAEDRON is a body comprehended
of eight equall equiangle triangles.

Octahedron






The 16. Diffinition.
ICOSAEDRON is a solide Figure, vnder
twentye equall equiangle triangles conteyned.

Icosaedrum

The. 17. Diffinition.
 DODECAEDRON is a solide com­
prehended of twelue equall equiangle pentago­
nall Superficies.

The. 18. Diffinition.
These fiue bodies are called regular, and about euery of them a sphere
may be described, that shall with his concaue peripherie exactly touche e­
uery of their solide angles, and it shall be called their comprehending or
circumscribing sphere or globe, and these solides shalbe called the inscri­
bed or conteyned bodies of that sphere.

The. 19. Diffinition.
Also within euery of these regulare bodies a sphere may be described
that shall with his conuex superficies precisely touche all the centres of
those equiangle figuers wherewith these bodies are enuironed, and such
a one I terme their inscribed or conteyned sphere, and those bodies shall
be termed the circumscribing solides of that sphere.

The. 20. Diffinition.
The semidiameter of this inscribed sphere, forasmuche as it is the
very Axis or Kathetus of euery Pyramis, hauing his base one of the equi­






angle playnes, and concurring in the centre, of which Pyramides (intel­
lectually conceyued) these bodies seeme to be compounded, it shal be na­
med the Axis or Kathetus of that body.

The 21 diffinition.
Euery of these bodies side, I call any one of those equall righte lines
wherewith these equiangle Figures are enuironed that comprehende
and include these bodyes.

The 22 diffinition.
Any one of the Figures wherewith these solides be enuironed is cal­
led the base of that solide.

The 23 diffinition.
A line falling from any solide angle of these bodyes perpendicularlye
on the opposite playne or base, shall be named that solides Perpendi­
culare.

The 24 diffinition.
The power of any line gyuen is sayde to be diuided into lines re­
tayning extreame and meane proportion, when two suche lines are
found as both make their squares ioyned togither, equall to the square of
the line giuen, and also holde such proportion one to another as the two
partes of a line diuided by extreame and meane proportion.

The 25 diffinition.
One of these regulare solides is saide to be described within an other,
 when all the angles of the internall or inscribed body at once touche the
superficies of the comprehending or circumscribing regulare solide.











The. 25. Probleme.


A Metamorphosis or transformation of the fiue
regulare bodies.

HItherto haue I onely intreated of the fiue regulare bodies.
Theoretically and practically opening sundrie meanes to
search out the proportion and quantities of their sides,
diameters, axes, perpendiculares, altitudes, and contentes
both superficiall and solide, and that not onely in these so­
lides considered by them selues, but also conferred with other, aswell by
inscription as circumscription, both of themselues and their spheres: so
as I suppose hardely any question may be proponed concerning these bo­
dies, whiche by the formal problemes or theoremes may not be resol­
ued. Yet before I finishe this Treatise I thought good to adioyne one
Chapter of the transformation of these Solides into suche bodies (as
though they may not be tearmed regulare, for that Euclide hath demon­
strate onely fiue, and no mo possibly to be founde or imagined) yet haue
they such vniforme composition and conuenience with these solides, that
they are not onely enuironed with equilater and equiangle superficies
as they be, but also haue all their sides equall, and one comprehending
sphere exactly and at once touching all their solide angles, they are also
capable of the regulare bodies, and onely herein different, that whereas
the regulare solides be inuironed with one kinde of playnenes and re­
ceiue one internal sphere, and so consequently one axis. These Transfor­
med bodies are incompassed with seuerall kinde of playnesse, and haue se­
uerall axes and contayned spheres, of which their diuersitie aryseth ma­






nyfolde mo straunge, rare, and differente kinds of proportions, than may
in a very large volume (I will not saye be demonstrate, but onely by 
Theoremes) be declared. Transformed regulare solydes I call them,
both to auoyde the forging of newe names, which I should be inforced to
vse for distinction sake, and also bicause they seeme to be created by the
vnifourme section of the regulare bodies, and may by addition of certaine
proportionall equall Pyramides, be reduced to the regulare solides, and
are in sundry proportions and proprieties so agreable and resemblante
to those regulare solides, whose names they beare, that they seeme onely
to lose the fourme, and yet still to retayne the nature of them. I meane
not here in so ample maner as the noueltie of the matter requireth to in­
treate of them, but onely by diffinitions and Theoremes open so muche
as may be sufficient to explane the composition, fourme, nature, and pro­
portion of these, and also giue light to the ingeniouse infinitely to pro­
ceede for inuention of the like, whose vse and appliance may be manyfold
to conclusions no lesse straunge than necessarie: but thereof in due place
for the nature of these transfourmed solides peruse their seuerall diffini­
tions and Theoremes immediately ensuing.

Of Tetraedron transformed.

The firste Diffinition.
TEtraedron transformed is a solide incompassed with foure equall
equilater triangles, and foure equall equiangle playnes Heragonall,
hauing equall sides with the triangles.






Of the transfigured Cube.

The seconde Diffinition.
A Transfourmed Cube is a figure geometrical enuironed with 6 equi­
angle Octogonall and 8 equilater triangular playnes or bases, whose
sides are all equall.






Of Octaedron transformed.

The 3 Diffinition.
A Transfigured Octaedron is a Geometricall Figure incompassed
with 14 bases, whereof 8 are equall equiangle Hexagonall playnes,
and the other 6 are equall squares.






Of the transfigured Icosaedron.

The fourth Diffinition.
ICosaedron transfigured, is a solide bodye incompassed with 32 Equi­
angle and equilater bases, whereof 20 are Hexagonall, and the other
12 Pentagonall playnes.






Of Dodecaedron transformed.

The fifthe Diffinition.
A Transformed Dodecaedron is a massie or solide figure, comprehended
of 12 equiangle dexagonal, and 20 equilater triangular bases.

"dexagonal" not found in OED.









