 
 
 
 
A NEW 
DICTIONARY   
French and English,
With Another 
English and French; 
According to the 
Present USE, and Modern ORTHOGRAPHY 
of the FRENCH. 
INRICH'D 
With New WORDS, Choice PHRASES, and 
Apposite PROVERBS; 
DIGESTED 
Into a most Accurate METHOD; 
And CONTRIVED 
For the USE both of English and Foreiners. 
By GUY MIEGE, Gent. 
LONDON, 
Printed by Tho. Dawks, for Thomas Basset, at the 
George, near Cliffords-Inn, in Fleetstreet. 1677. 
  
  

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
AU 
Tres Illustre PRINCE 
Charles Leños, 
Duc de RICHEMONT, Comte de MARSH, 
Baron de SHEDRINGTON. 
 
MONSEIGNEUR, 
IE prens la liberté de Vous presenter cet Ou­
vrage, qui est un Racourci de deux Langues 
Vulgaires, le François & l'Anglois. J'ai 
crû que je ne pouvois pas dedier plus à propos 
un Ouvrage de cette nature qu'a Vous, MONSEI­
GNEUR, qui étes un Abbregé de tout ce qu'ily a de 
parfait en vôtre âge & dans la France & dans l'Angle­
terre. Hercule étoit Hercule dans le berceau, & les 
grandes Ames ont dans l'enfance mêmes je ne sai quel 
brillant, qui ravit d'abord le monde en admiration. C'est 
cela mêmes, MONSEIGNEUR, que l'on remar­
que dêja dans vôtre Personne. La Nature Vous a don­
né outre les graces du Corps un Esprit ravissant & capa­
ble de grandes choses, la Fortune Vous comble de Biens 
pour en venir à bout plus facilement, & la Renommée 
 
 
 
cette glorieuse Messagere des Heros s'impatiente de por­
ter le bruit de vos Vertus par tous les coins de la Terre. 
Ainsi, MONSEIGNEUR, je laisse à penser quelle 
presse il y aura à Vous rendre ses respects, & quelle gloi­
re à captiver vôtre bienveuillance. Pour moi, qui n'ai 
point de plus grande ambition que celle là, je Vous offre 
des à present avec un profond respect tout ce dont je suis 
capable. Et, parmi tant de Competiteurs qui travaille­
ront à gagner vos bonnes graces, aiez la bonté de vous 
souvenir, 
MONSEIGNEUR, 
De vôtre tres humble & tres 
obeïssant Serviteur, 
GUY MIEGE.

 


 
 
  
THE 
PREFACE 
TO 
The Reader, 
Shewing the Necessity, Substance, and Method 
of this Work. 
 

CHANGE, the common Fate of Sublunary things, is of all others 
That of living Languages, which sometimes are in a flourishing, and 
sometimes in a declining condition; there being always a sensible Al­
teration, which, as it is better or worse, doth either commend or 
discommend it to the World. As to the French, 'tis not very long 
since it was in a decaying condition, and wanted something to purge 
it from those ill humours it had contracted a great while. Therefore 
it was provided by Cardinal Richelieu, That an Academy of acute 
and judicious persons should be set up to correct and improve it. And accordingly there 
was an exact Inquiry made into such expressions as wanted amendments. Some impro­
per Words they put out, and introduced others in their stead. They changed many Phra­
ses, and fitted them better to the purpose and meaning of the matter. The French Or­
thography, formerly stuffed with so many superfluous letters, they brought as near the 
Pronunciation as could in reason be allowed. They lookt upon Transpositions and Paren­
theses in a continued Discourse as a stumbling block to the Reader, and made it their busi­
ness to bring the French Tongue into the plainest Method. In a word, they have so judicious­
ly corrected, refined, and improved it, that it is now become the darling Language of 
Europe. So sweet it is and pleasing to the ear, so very neat and curious in its expressions, 
so eloquent in its own genius and nature. Thus being brought to perfection by the said 
Academy, it is now left to their care to preserve it in its purity, and for the future to 
oppose the former rambling way and extravagant course of exploding, changing, intruding 
Words and Phrases. By all which contrivance and care it is now come to pass, that the 
French Tongue is in a manner grown Universal in Europe, but especially amongst the 
Gentile part of it. And of all Parts of Europe next to France, none is more fond of it than 
England, whose Language is so much made up of the French, that (according to Mr. 
Howell in his Epistle upon Cotgrave) an English-man had need to study French to speak 
 
 
 
good English. So that it is no wonder why the French Tongue should be so kindly received 
here among all Sorts of people. 
 
To which I confess Mr. Cotgraves Dictionary would have contributed a great deal more 
than it has, had it been any ways accommodated to our present Age. Which indeed is highly 
pretended to in the last Edition thereof, but so performed that the Title runs away with all 
the Credit of it. And indeed the Book is so far from being refined according to Cardinall 
Richelieu's Academy, as is pretended in the Title, that it swarms every where with Rank 
Words and Obsolete Phrases, favouring more of King Pharamonds Reign than that of Lewis 
XIV. So that I look upon Cotgrave as a good Help indeed for reading of old French 
Books (a thing which few people mind) but very insignificant either for reading of new 
ones, or speaking the Court-French, which is the Design of this Work. 
Therefore I have indeavoured to do it as near as I could according to the present Use and 
modern Orthography. And, that you may know before hand how the same is performed, I 
shall make in short a previous Reflexion, first upon Words, and then upon Phrases, and Pro­
verbs, and so proceed to the Method of this Book. There are two sorts of Words, Words 
in use, and Words not in use. The first are either Common, or High Words, or Terms of 
Art. Common Words are used by all people in generall that speak the same Language, 
High (or Choice) Words are most proper to Schollars and best educated persons, and Terms 
of Art are peculiar to those that profess or speak of any Art. The first two being the 
most current part of a Language, I have taken the more care not to omit any of them ei­
ther in my French or English, and particularly, to take notice of those that are lately come 
to Use. And, as for Terms of Art, but especially Law-Terms, you will find here as great a 
Supply of them as can in reason be expected in such a Volume. Words not in Use are either 
Obsolete, or New-forced Words. Of the first sort some are so obliterated, worn out, and 
decayed, that they may very well be called the Rubbish of any Language. So that, both for 
neatness and brevity sake, I have willingly and freely omitted them. Wherein I imitate such 
as raise up a Building from its Ruins. They remove all the Rubbish, and lay aside what­
ever they find cumbersom and unserviceable. And what are those Antiquated and Cramp't 
Words which make up a great part of Cotgrave, Words that offend the eyes and grate the 
ears, but the Rubbish of the French Tongue? 'Tis true that some obsolete Words are not so 
much out of date, but that they will pass sometimes; and, though not approved of by the 
generality, may be found nevertheless amongst some of our late Authors. These indeed, to­
gether with some New-coyned Words that in all probability will hardly come to Use, 
I have admitted here; but with a prefixed mark, to distinguish them thereby from current 
Words. But, because it is not enough for a compleat Dictionary to give an account of 
Words, unless one shews withall the use of them; therefore I have inriched this with great 
plenty of Phrases, according to the various acceptations of Words. So that there are few 
Property's of the French or English Tongue but you will find here, a Thing of great use both 
for the speaking and the reading part. Besides that, to season the naturall dulness of the 
Work, I have interwoven so many curious Descriptions and Observations, and inserted so 
many Proverbs both for diversion and use, that the Reading of it will be no less pleasing than 
usefull. And, because English Proverbs may probably take well both amongst English and 
Foreiners, therefore I was the more free of them in my second Part. Where you may 
meet here and there a parcell of too severe ones against the female Sex, which I was my 
self not a little surprized at. For, though there be much of that humour in Outlandish Pro­
verbs, yet I wondered to see them all outdone by a Nation where the Sex is so kindly used. 
Next to Proverbs, I am to give an account of my Method, whereby Derivatives are reduced 
to their Primitives. So that the Primitive go's as a Leading Word in Capitals, and its 
Derivatives that come after in smaller Characters. By which means one hath a curious 
and distinct Prospect of every Primitive, with all its Off-spring together. Which is certain­
 
 

ly a great Conveniency, and must needs be a singular Help to the Learner, who finding by 
this means the Etymology of Words lying all along before him will easily master the 
Language. But, that nothing might be wanting on the other side, I have taken care how­
ever to put in the Derivatives in their Alphabeticall Order, where they have a Star 
before them that leads you to the Primitive, which is to be found most times in the same 
page. 
 
The greatest Help I have had for this Piece of Work, as to the French part of it, is Fa­
ther Pomeys Dictionary Royall French and Latin, the newest and the best that is now extant 
in that way. But, as it is usuall in Things improvable of this kind, I have altered, added, 
and retrenched a great deal. And, as I differ from him besides in my Method, so I was re­
solved not to imitate him (as one might) by way of revenge in that ungentile Character he 
gives of Protestants, under the words Calviniste, Huguenot, &c. For, besides that a Dicti­
onary is a most improper Book to make Declamations in, I thought it very unworthy of 
Christians to be ever barking at one another. But F. Pomey, though otherwise a man of 
good parts, is of another temper; and cannot so much as name a Calvinist, or a Huguenot, 
but he must presently fly out, scold at him, and call him by the name of Haereticus, Impius, 
Sacrilegus, as if either Wit or good Manners could find no better Latin to describe a Prote­
stant. 
 
I Conclude with a Request in the Printers behalf and my own, That the Reader would be 
so courteous as to connive at some Oversights of ours that he may meet withall here and 
there in the perusing of this Book. It is but common Civility so to do, and there is but 
Reason enough, considering how hard it is either to compose or to print a Book without 
faults. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Imprimatur, 
Guliel. Wigan. 
Mart. 12. 1677. 
 
 
  

  
  

A NEW DICTIONARY French and English.
  


A
A The Preposition, at. 
Il est à la mai­
son, he is at home. 
Il est à soupé, he is at supper. 
A raison de six pour cent, at the rate of six per cent. 
A, to; as,
Aller à l'Eglise, to go to Church. 
Aller à la Guerre, to go to the War. 
A, on. 
Aller à cheval, to go on horse­
back. 
A, with. 
Un Miroir à bordures dorées, a looking glass with a gilt frame. 
Une Chaise à bras, a Chair with elbows. 
A, within. 
A un doit de terre, within an inch of the ground. 
A, off. 
Il est à dix miles d'ici, he is ten miles off. 
A, in. 
Il est fort à l'étroit, he is in great stress. 
A, like, after the manner, after the fashion, or way of. 
Il est habillé à l'Espagnole, he is clad after the Spanish fashion.
But sometimes it must be thus 
rendred; as,
A moi, mine;
A toi, thine;
A lui, his;
A elle, hers;
A nous, ours; 
A vous, yours;
A eux, and
à elles, theirs. 
A qui est cette maison? whose house is this?
Elle est à mon frere, it is my bro­
thers house.
Before a Noun it makes it some­
times admit of an Adverbial in­
terpretation; as,
A droit, rightfully.
A tort, wrongfully.
A l'impreveu, unawares.
A cause, because, or by reason of.
A l'etourdi, rashly, heedlessly.
A propos, fitly, pertinently.
Before the Infinitive Mood of a Verb, A, is commonly rendred to; as,
A dire ce que j'en pense, to tell you what I think of it. 
Il apprend à jouër du Lut, he learns to play upon the Lute. 
Je commence à parler, I begin to speak.  
Lastly it may be thus rendred; as,
C'est un discours qui n'est pas d'une longueur à vous ennuier, that discourse is not so long as to be tired with it. 
A, the third person singular of the Verb avoir. V. Avoir.  

AAGE,&c. V. Age.

  
A B
ABAISSER, &c.  V. Abba­
isser.  

ABANDON (m.) the quit­
ting or leaving of a thing, or the exposing of it to any bodies use. 
Laisser à l'abandon quêque chose, to leave a thing for any body to take it or use it. 
Laisser une personne à l'aban­
don, l'abandonner tout à fait, to leave one to the wide World, to forsake him altogether, to aban­
don him. 
Abandonner, to abandon, quit, forsake, to give over, to shake (or to cast) off, to lay open, to leave at random, to make com­
mon for others. 
Ils m'ont abondonné dans un tems auquel il n'y alloit pas moins que de ma vie, they have forsaken me even when my life was at stake. 
Abandonner un malade, deses­
perer de sa santé, to give over a sick body, to despair of his health. 
Abandonner sa liberté, to cast off his liberty. 
S'abandonner, se negliger, to neglect himself, to take no care of himself. 
S'abandonner, perdre courage, to despond, to be disheartned. 
Dans cette extremité il ne s'a­
bondonna pas, in that extremi­
ty he was not at all disheartned, he was not at all cast down. 
S'abandonner à la colere, to indulge his passion, to give way to his anger. 
S'abandonner aux pleurs, à la tristesse, to give way to melanco­
ly. 
S'abandonner aux plaisirs de la Vie, sensually to yeeld (or become a slave) unto pleasure, wholly to captivate (or devote) his thoughts to delights. 



Fille qui donne s'abandonne, a Maid that giveth yeeldeth. 
S'abandonner au vice, à la de­
bauche, to give up himself to vi­
ces and debauchery. 
S'abandonner au hazard, to commit himself to Fortune. 
Abandonner sa vie à la Justice, to yeeld up his life to Justice. 
Je vous abandonne à vôtre mauvais sens, I leave you to your obstinate will. 
S'abandonner à la course en quêque Plaine, to fall a running in a Plain. 
Abandonné, delaissé, aban­
doned, forsaken, quitted, given over, cast off, laid open, left at random, made common for others. 
Un enfant abandonné, exposé, a foundling. 
Une maison abandonnée, a house laid open to all chances. 
Un Champ abandonné, a field untilled and neglected. 
Une Ville abandonnée au pil­
lage, a Town left to be pillaged. 
Un malade abandonné, a sick person given over for dead. 
Une fille abandonnée, prosti­
tuée, debauchée, une coureuse, a prostitute, or a common whore. 
Abandonnement (m) an a­
bandoning, quitting, leaving off, giving over, laying open for.  

ABANLIEUE. V. Banlieuë. 

S'ABATARDIR, degene­
rer, to degenerate, to be spoiled, or grow worse.
Abâtardi, degenerate, spoiled, or made worse.  

ABATTRE, &c. V. Abbat­
tre.  

ABAYER. &c.  V. Abboyer.  

ABBAISSER, to bring down, to make low, to abate. 
S'abaisser, s'humilier, to hum­
ble himself, to submit, to cast him­
self down. 
Les Eaux s'abaissent, the Wa­
ters fall, the Waters decrease. 
Le vent s'abaisse, the Wind be­
gins to be laid, the wind is not so high as it was. 
Abbaissé, brought down, made lower, or abated. 
Abaissé, humilié, humbled, or cast down. 
Un vent abbaissé, a Wind that begins to be laid, that is not so high as it was. 
Abbaissement (m) a bringing down, or making low. 
Abbaissement, l'état d'une chose abbaissée, the state, or condition of a thing brought down, made low, or humbled.  

ABBATTRE, to beat (pull, or break) down, to fell, to over­
throw, or cast to the ground. 
Abbattre des fruits d'un arbre, to beat down the fruits of a tree. 
Abbattre sa robe, to make his gown hang down. 
Abbattre le courage à quêcun, to abate, to quell, to allay ones cou­
rage. 
Cela lui abbattra le courage, that will abate his courage. 
Je lui abbattrai le caquet, I shall make him hold his tongue. 
La pluie abbat la poussiere, the rain lays the dust. 
Abbattre quêcun, l'affliger, to cast one down, to grieve, to afflict him. 
Abbattre quêcun, le vaincre, to bring one down, to give him an o­
verthrow, to beat him. 
La chaleur s'abbat, the heat be­
gins to be allay'd. 
Abbattu, renversé, beaten (or broken) down, felled, overthrown, cast to the ground. 
Abbattu, comme une robe, that hangs down, as a gown. 
Un courage abbattu, ones cou­
rage quelled, or allay'd. 
Une chaleur abbattue, a heat allayd. 
Abbattu, affligé, cast down, dejected, grieved, afflicted. 
Abbattu, vaincu, brought down, overthrown, beaten. 
Abbattement, (m:) felling, beating, pulling, or breaking down. 
Abbattement de cœur, dejecti­
on. 
Abbatis (m.) a windfall. 
Le vent a fait un grand abbatis d'arbres & de fruits, there has been a great windfall both of trees and fruits. 
Abbattures, (f.) foulures (en termes de Venerie) the boughs, leaves, or sprigs which a Deer breaks and bears down in rushing through a ticket.  

ABBAYE (f.) an Abbey.
Abbé (m.) an Abbot. 
Face d'Abbé, jolly fat and red face, a fiery face. 
Pas d'Abbé, a leisurely walking, slow gate, Aldermans pace. 
Table d'Abbé, a plentiful and well furnisht table. 
Il jure comme un Abbé, he swears like an Abbot, that is ex­
treamly. 
Personne n'entend mieux la malice que l'Abbé qui a eté Moine, no man can play the knave better than an Abbot that has been a Monk. 
Abbesse, (f) an Abbess.  

ABBAYER, Abbecher, Ab­
bêtir, & leurs derivés. V. Ab­
boyer, Abecher, Abêtir.  

ABBOIS, Abbayement, (m.) barking, baying. 
Les Abbois du Cerf, l'ors qu'il est contraint d'arrêter tout court, & de soûfrir les Abbois des Chiens, the last shift of a Stag, when weary of running he turns upon the hounds, and holds them at (or puts them to) a bay. 
Il est aux abois, il rend les ab­
bois, il n'en peut plus, he is put to his last shifts, he is spent, he cannot hold out any longer. 
Abbois, agonie d'un homme mourant, the last gasp of a dying man, the last struglings he makes upon the very point of death. 
Etre aux abbois, étre à l'agonie de la mort, to breath his last, to be at his last gasp. 
Abboyer, to bark. 
Abboyer quêcun, ou contre quêcun, to bark at one.  

ABBREGER, racourcir une chose, to shorten, abridge, abstract, abbreviate, epitomise, curtail, or cut short. 
Abbreger un Livre, to reduce a Book into a lesser volume, to make a compendium of it, to make it lesser. 
Abbreger un Discours, to shorten a Discourse. 
Abbregé, raccourci, shortned, abridged, abstracted, abbreviated, epitomized, curtailed, or cut short. 
Un Abbregé, an abridgement, an abstract, an epitome, compen­
dium, or summary. 
Abbregé d'une Histoire, the Compendium of an History. 
Abbreviation, (f.) abbrevia­
tion. 
Abbreviation d'écriture, short-hand. 
Se servir d'abbreviation, to write short-hand.  

ABBREUVER le bétail, to water the cattel. 
Les Troupes des Enemis étoi­
ent si proches qu'elles abbreu­
voient en même eau, the Ene­
mies Forces were so very near,  



that they and we made use of the same water. 
Abbreuver une personne de quêque mauvaise opinion, to possess one (or to imbue him) with an ill opinion, to imprint it (to fix it) in his mind, to breed in his thoughts a false perswasion. 
Abbreuvé, watered. 
Nôtre Seigneur sut abbreuvé de vinaigre, our Lord and Savi­
our had vinegar given him to drink. 
Ils sont abbreuvés de cette opi­
nion, they are imbued (or posses­
sed) with that opinion, their thoughts are wholly possessed with it. 
Abbreuvement de bétail, (m.) the watering of cattel. 
Abbreuvoir (m.) a watering place. 
Mener le bétail à l'abbreuvoir, to lead the cattel to the watering place.  

ABBRUTIR quêcun, to be­
sot one, to make him beastly, or brutish. 
Le Vin vous abbrutira, Wine will make you like a beast. 
Abbruti, besotted, beastly, bru­
tish, or become brutish.  

ABDIQUER (en terme de droit), rejetter son fils, to ab­
dicate his son, to reject, or forsake him. 
Abdication, (f.) abdication. 
Faire abdication de son fils, to abdicate his son. 
Faire abdication d'une Charge, to resign an Office, to give it o­
ver.  

ABECE, (m.) an A, B, C, the alphabet, or orderly list of all the Letters, Cris-cross-row. 
Abecedaire (m. & f.) one that do's but begin to learn his a, b, c.  

ABECHER un petit oiseau, lui donner la bechée, to feed, as birds do their young. 
Abécher l'Oiseau neuf (en ter­
mes de Fauconnerie) to feed, as Faulconers do their Hawks. 
Si vouz n'abechez comme il faut l'Oiseau niais & le hagart, ils se laisseront mourir de faim, celui là par stupidité, & celui ci par dépit; if you do not feed well the young hawk and the ha­
gart, they shall starve themselves, that by his simplicity, and this meerly in spight.  

ABEILLE, (f.) mouche à miel, a bee, the little honey-bee. 
Petite abeille, a little bee. 
Essain d'abeilles, a swarm of bees. 
Ruche d'abeilles, a Bee-hive. 
Celui qui a soin des abeilles, He that keepeth bees. 
Bois marqueté de petits points roux, semblables à la fiante de l'abeille, a kind of spotted wood, as though bees had raied it and filled it with dung.  

ABETIR quêcun, le rendre hebeté, to besot one, to make him dull, or stupid. 
Abêti, rendu hebeté, besot­
ted, become dull, or stupid.  

ABHORRER, detester, to abhor, detest, hate, or loath ex­
treamly, to have in abomination. 
J'abhorre sa compagnie, I hate, I abhor his company.  

ABJET, méprisable, abject, base, vile, contemptible, despised, out-cast, or cast off. 
Abjection, (f.) abjection, or vileness.  

ABIME, &c. V. Abyme.  

ABJURER, to abjure, for­
swear, or deny with an oath. 
Abjurer une heresie, to abjure an heresy. 
Abjuré, abjured. 
Abjuration (f.) abjuration.  

ABLATIF, (m.) le cas abla­
tif, the ablative case.  

ABLE, (f.) petit poisson, a blay, or bleak fish.  

ABOIS, V. Abbois.  

ABOLIR, to abolish, abro­
gate, take off, annull, annihi­
late. 
Abolir une Loy, une Coûtume, to abrogate a Law, to take off a Custom. 
Abolir la memoire de quêque chose, to obliterate a thing, to put it out of our remembrance. 
S'abolir, to grow out of use, to decay. 
Aboli, hors d'usage, abolished, abrogated, taken off, annulled, an­
nihilated. 
Ces choses se sont abolies avec le tems, these things have been abolished by degrees. 
Abolissement d'une Loy, (m.) the abolishing of a Law. 
Abolition, (f.) abolishment. 
Abolition d'un Crime, a Par­
don. 
Lettres d'Abolition, Letters of Pardon.  

ABOMINABLE, abomina­
ble. 
Abominablement, abomina­
bly. 
Abomination, (f.) abominati­
on. 
Avoir en abomination quêque chose, to have in abomination, to detest, hate, or abhor something. 
Abomination, ou chose abomi­
nable, an abomination, a horrible (or execrable) thing.  

ABONDER, to abound, to have store of. 
Abonder en toutes choses, étre dans l'abondance, vivre dans l'abondance de toutes choses, n'avoir besoin de rien, to abound in every thing, to have plenty of all things, to want for nothing. 
Ce Terroir abonde en fruits, this ground produces a great store of fruits. 
Abondant, abundant, plentiful, copious, very full. 
Vie abondante en plaisirs, a life full of pleasures, a delightful life. 
Abondance, (f.) store, abun­
dance, copiousness, plenty. 
Abondance de vin & de blé, abundance both of wine and corn. 
Abondance de miel, de feuilles, & de fruits, abundance of honey, leaves, and fruits. 
Abondance de paroles, verbo­
sity. 
Abondance de toutes choses, a plenty of all things. 
La Corne d'Abondance, the Horn of Abundance. 
Abondamment, en grande a­
bondance, abundantly, fully, plen­
tifully.  

ABONNER (terme de Droit) evaluer à prix d'argent un Devoir personnel ou reel de son Vassal, to sell at a certain rate the personal or real Duty of his Vassal. 
Abonner un homme serf, lui donner sa liberté pour une somme d'argent, to manumit a Slave for a sum of money, to give him his liberty. 
Abonner un Chasseur, lui don­
ner droit de chasser dans ses Terres, to give a man the privi­
ledge of hunting in his grounds. 
Abonner, racheter de son Sei­
gneur les Droits & Devoirs qu'on est obligé de lui ren­
dre, to buy of the Lord of the Land such Rights as belong to him. 



Abonné, affranchi, manumit­
ted, that has got his liberty. 
Abonnage, Abonnement, a­
mortissement, vente de droit feudal, the selling of a Lordships Rights. 
Abonnage, achat de droits feu­
daux, the buying of such Rights. 
Abonnage, privilege, ou exen­
tion concedée a quêcun, a Pri­
vilege, or Exemption granted to some body.  

ABORD, (m.) entrée, access.
Un lieu de facile abord, où l'on peut entrer sans aucune peine, a place of an easy access, or easy to come to.
Un homme de facile abord, an affable, or courteous man, a man easie to be spoken with. 
Un homme de difficile abord, ou
qui n'est point affable, an un­
acostable, unsociable, or rustical man, a man whose company can­
not easily be had. 
D'abord, au premier abord, at first, at first sight. 
Ces paroles excitent d'abord de l'admiration, puis étant expli­
quées elles font rire le monde, those words cause at first some ad­
miration, but being explained they are apt to make one laugh. 
Il a quêque froideur à l'abord, he is something indifferent at first. 
D'abord, incontinent, presently, forthwith. 
D'abord je me mis en chemin, I presently set forth. 
La Citadelle fut prise d'abord, the Citadel (the Fort) was present­
ly taken. 
D'abord que, as soon as. 
D'abord qu'il me vid il se re­
tira, assoon as ever he saw me, he went away. 
Dabord que quêcun vous a re­
gardé il vous aime, every one loves you as soon as he sees your fair eyes. 
Abord, arrivée, arrival, ap­
proach. 
Abord, ou concours, concourse. 
Un lieu de grand abord, a Place much frequented. 
Abord, rencontre, meeting. 
A leur premier abord, à leur premiere entreveuë, ils s'aime­
rent, at their first meeting they loved one another. 
Aborder, mettre à bord, prendre terre, to land at, to ar­
rive. 
Où aborderai je? where shall I land? 
Aborder quêcun, l'accoster, to come (or draw near) to one, to ac­
cost him. 
Ses occupations m'empêchent de l'aborder, he is so busy that I durst not come to speak to him. 
Abordage, (m.) an arriving, or a coming to.  

ABOUCHER quêcun, s'a­
boucher avec quêcun, to speak to one, or to confer with him by word of mouth, to speak to him face to face. 
Si je pouvois l'aboucher, je le ga­
gnerois aisément, if I could get to speak to him, I should easily gain his affection. 
Abouchement, (m.) conferen­
ce, a conference.  

ABOUQUER du sel (en termes de Salines) to add new salt to the old heap, to heap (or pile) up salt. 
Abouquement de sel (m.) a heaping up of new made salt.  

ABOUTIR, se terminer en pointe, to end sharp or pointed, to grow smaller and smaller towards the top, head, or end. 
Aboutir, ou se rencontrer, to abut, to meet at the end, to confine (or be near) unto. 
Les lignes du Cercle aboutis­
sent au'centre, the lines of a Cir­
cle meet in the center. 
Cette Province aboutit à ces Montagnes, this Province con­
fines upon these Hills. 
Je ne say pas où aboutira tout ceci, I know not what will be the end of all this. 
Voyons où aboutira son dis­
cours, let us see what he aims at by his discourse. 
Abouti, terminé en pointe, ended sharp, or pointed. 
Aboutissant, (m.) Les renans & les aboutissans d'un Champ, the utmost bounds or limits of a Field at both ends thereof. 
Les tenans & les aboutissans d'une affaire, the heads or points of a business. 
Je say tous les tenans & tous les aboutissans de cette affaire, I know the whole sum of that busi­
ness, all the circumstances there­
of. 
Aboutissement de plusieurs choses en un même lieu, (m) the meeting of several things at one and the same place. 
Les aboutissemens d'un fonds, the utmost bounds, limits, or ends of a plot of ground. 
C'est l'aboutissement de tous mes desirs, that is the end of all my desires.  

ABOYER, Aboyement. V. Abboyer.  

ABREGER, ABREUVER, & leurs derivés. V. Abbreger, Abbreuver.  

ABRI (m.) un lieu qui est à l'abri, a Sunny place sheltered from the wind. 
Un lieu qui est à l'abri des flots & des vents, a place where­
to neither wet nor wind can come. 
Etre à l'abri, to sit a sunning, to enjoy the sun in a corner. 
Etre à l'abri, ou en seurté, to be safe, to be secure. 
Se mettre à l'abri, to get into a sunny and sheltered place. 
Se mettre à l'abri contre la Tempête qui nous menace, to shelter (to secure) himself from a threatning Tempest. 
Les Oiseaux se plaisent à l'abri d'un beau jour, the Birds of the Air delight in a Sunny day.  

ABRICOT (m.) an apri­
cock. 
Abricotier, (m.) an apricock-tree.  

ABROGER, annuller, casser une Loi, to abrogate, abolish, dis­
annull, repeal a Law. 
Abrogé, abrogated, abolished, disanulled, repealed. 
Abrogation, (f.) abrogation, abolishment, repealing, disanul­
ling.  

ABRUTIR. V. Abbrutir.  

ABSCEZ, (m.) apostume, an impostume, botch, or swelling full of matter; a course of ill humours running out of their veins and na­
tural places into the empty place between muscles. 
Un abscez meur, a ripe impo­
stume, an impostume drawn to a head, a swelling ready to break out. 
L'abscez commence à s'enfler, the impostume draw's to a head.  

ABSENCE, (f.) absence. 
Je ne puis supporter la peine que me cause vôtre absence, I cannot bear your absence any lon­
ger. 



Absence d'esprit, egarement d'esprit, distraction, a wandering of ones mind. 
Absent, absent, missing, wan­
ting, out of the way. 
Etre absent, to be absent. 
Etre absent du Conseil, to be ab­
sent from the Counsel. 
Il y a quatre mois que je suis absent, I have been absent (or out of the way) these four months. 
S'Absenter, étre absent, to be absent, gone, or out of the way. 
S'absenter, s'en aller d'un lieu, to go away, to go from (or to leave) a place, to keep out of the way.  

ABSINTHE (m.) herbe a­
mere, worm-wood. 
Vin d'absinthe, worm-wood wine.  

ABSOLU, imperieux, abso­
lute. 
Un Prince absolu, un Prince dont le Gouvernement est abso­
lu, an absolute Prince. 
Une Volonté absolue, an abso­
lute Will. 
Il est absolu dans ses volontés, he is a man of a firm resolution, he is constant, persisting, stiff in his purpose. 
Vos Commandemens sont trop absolus, you domineer too much, you are too imperious. 
Un Ablatif absolu, cd. inde­
pendant du reste du discours, an Ablative absolute, an Ablative case put absolute. 
Absolument, souverainement, imperiously. 
Commander absolument, to have an absolute command. 
Absolument, sans condition, sans reserve, absolutely, without any condition, or reserve. 
Absolument, entierement, tout à fait, absolutely, wholly, intire­
ly. 
Je le veux absolument, I will have it absolutely. 
Un homme qui est absolument ignorant, a most ignorant man. 
Absoudre, pardonner, to ab­
solve, to forgive absolutely, to pardon wholly, to remit offences unto, to discharge, deliver, or quit from all punishment. 
Absoudre quêcun de larcin, to acquit, or discharge one from theft. 
Il vous absout par son suffrage, he do's absolve you by his vote. 
Absous, Absoute, absolved, pardoned, forgiven, clearly dis­
charged of (or delivered from) the danger of punishment. 
Il fut absous à pur & à plein, he was clearly discharged, or absol­
ved. 
Elle fut renvoiée absoute, she was sent back absolved, or pardo­
ned. 
Absolution (f.) an absolution, an abolition of wrongs, or offen­
ces. 
Il a receu l'absolution de ses pe­
chez, he has received the absolu­
tion of his sins. 
Le Prêtre lui a donné l'absolu­
tion, The Priest has given him the absolution. 
Absolutoire, Absolvatory.
 
S'ABSTENIR de quêque chose, to abstain, from a thing, to withhold from meddling with it, to forbear it.
S'abstenir du Vin & des Fem­
mes, to abstain from wine and wo­
men. 
Il ne pûr s'abstenir de la regar­
der, he could not forbear looking upon her. 
Abstenez vous de parler de cela, forbear speaking of that. 
Il faut le faire abstenir de boire du vin, you must make him forbear drinking of wine. 
Combien peu en trouvera-t-on qui s'abstiennent de mentir? how few will there be found that can forbear lying? 
Abstinent, abstinent, moderate, temperate, sober. 
Abstinence (f) abstinence, tem­
perance, refraining, forbearance. 
Abstinence au boire & au man­
ger, abstinence in meat and drink. 
Vivre avec abstinence, to live abstinently, temperately, moderate­
ly.  

ABSTERSIF, abstersive, clean­
sing, or wiping away, that hath a cleansing vertue. 
Un medicament abstersif, an ab­
stersive (or cleansing) medica­
ment.  

ABSTRUS, caché, abstruse, close, hidden, shut up, dark, se­
cret, wrapped up in obsecurity, hard to be known or under­
stood. 
Ces choses sont fort abstruses, these are things very abstruse. 
Abstrusement, closely, secret­
ly.  

ABSURDE, absurd, foolish, im­
pertinent. 
Un homme absurde, an absurd, foolish, or impertinent man. 
Absurdité (f.) absurdity, foolish­
ness, impertinency.  

ABSYNTHE. V. Absin­
the.  

ABUS, (m.) mauvais usage, abuse, or the misusing of a thing. 
Abus, erreur, an error, a mis­
take. 
C'est un abus, de croire qu'il veuille vous tromper, it is a mi­
stake, to think that he would cheat you. 
En cas d'abus, cd. en cas qu'on se trompe, in case there be a mis­
take. 
Abus, fraude, fallacy, fraud, gul­
lery, deceit. 
En cas d'abus, en cas qu'il y ait de la fraude, in case there be a fallacy. 
Abus, entreprise sur la Juri­
diction d'un autre, an usurpati­
on. 
En cas d'abus, cd. si l'on usurpe la Juridiction d'autrui, in case another mans right be usur­
ped. 
Appeller comme d'Abus, to ap­
peal to an higher Judge for the re­
covering of his own Right. 
Appel d'Abus, an appeal to an higher Judge. 
Abuser, mal user de quêque chose, to abuse, misuse, or mispend somthing. 
Jusques à quand abuserez vous de nôtre patience? how long will you abuse our patience? 
Abuser, tromper quêcun, to de­
ceive, disappoint, gull, cozen, or be­
guile one. 
Abuser quêcun, se moquer de lui, to make a fool of one. 
S'abuser, se tromper, étre dans l'erreur, to mistake, or be in an error. 
Abusé, abused, misused, mi­
spent. 
Abusé, trompé, deceived, disap­
pointed, gulled, cozened, begui­
led. 
Abuseur (m.) trompeur, a deceiver, an impostor, a begui­
ler. 
, (m.) tromperie, a deceiving, a disappointing, a be­
guiling. 
Abusement, moquerie, mocke­
ry.  



Abusif, qui trompe, ou don­
ne sujet de se tromper, abusive, deceitful, guilefull. 
Abusivement, par abus, avec abus, abusively.  

ABYME, (m.) a bottomless pit, or hole, a very great depth, a gulf. 
Ces Rochers sont environnés d'abymes, these rocks are surroun­
ded with bottomless pits. 
Abyme, ouverture fort profon­
de dans la terre, a very deep ga­
ping of the earth. 
La terre s'enfonçant, il se fit un abyme d'une profondeur prodi­
gieuse, the earth sunk, and there was made a terrible gaping in the earth. 
Abymer, engloutir, to swallow up. 
Abymer, jetter dans un abyme, to cast into a bottomless pit, to throw down from a great height unto the bottom. 
S'abymer, étre abymé dans les eaux, to be swallowed up by the waters. 
Abymer, perdre, détruire tout à coup, on a sudden to destroy, ruin, undo, overthrow. 
Abymé, englouti, swallowed up. 
Abymé, jetté dans un abyme, cast into a bottomless pit, thrown down from a great height unto the bottom. 
Abymé dans terre, swallowed up by the earth. 
Abymé, perdu, détruit tout à coup, destroyed, ruined, undone, overthrown on a sudden.

      
A C
ACADEMIE, (f) une Acade­
mie, où l'on apprend les belles Lettres, an Academy, or an Uni­
versity. 
Academie, où l'on apprend à monter à cheval, an Academy, where is taught the art of riding the great horse. 
Academicien, qui est d'une Academie de gens de Lettres, an University-man. 
Academiste, qui est d'une A­
cademie où l'on apprend à monter à cheval, one that learns in an Academy to ride the great horse. 
Academique, Academical, that belongs to an University or Aca­
demy.  

ACANTHE, (m.) sorte d'-herbe, the smooth thistle called brank-ursin, and bears-breech.  

†ACARIATRE. V. Têtu.  

ACATIQUE. V. Aquatiqué.  

ACCABLER, to oppress, to over-burden, overcharge, or over­
whelm, to bear down, to con­
found. 
Vous m'allez, je pense, accab­
ler sous ce grand fardeau, I think you mean to make me fail (or succomb) under so great a bur­
den. 
Accablé, oppressed, overburdened, overcharged, overwhelmed, born down, confounded. 
Accablé sous les ruines d'une maison, buried in the ruines of a house. 
Etre accablé d'affaires, to be pe­
stered (or imbarassed) with busi­
nesses.  

ACCARER (terme de Pa­
lais.) V. Confronter.  

ACCENT (m.) an accent. 
Il y a trois sortes d'accent, l'ai­
gu (´) le grave (&grave;) & le cir­
conflexe (ˆ) There are three sorts of Accents, the acute, the grave, and the circumflex. 
Accentuer une syllabe, y met­
tre un accent, to accent a sylla­
ble, to mark it with an accent. 
Accentuer, prononcer l'accent, to pronounce the accent.  

ACCEPTER, recevoir, agre­
er quêque chose, to accept a thing, to take it (or to receive it) in good part. 
Je l'accepte pour mon servi­
teur, I take him for my servant. 
Accepter une Loy, to receive a Law, to approve of it, to like it. 
Accepter laPaix aux conditions proposées, to subscribe to the terms of Peace. 
Accepter le Combat, to accept the Combat. 
Accepter la peine, to undergoe the punishment. 
Accepter une Charge, to under­
take an Imployment. 
Accepté, accepted, taken (or received) in good part. 
Acceptable, acceptable, pleasing, fit (or worthy) to be intertained. 
Acceptation (f.) acceptance. 
Acception de personnes, re­
spect (or distinction) of persons in Judgement. 
Il ne faut point avoir acception de personnes, we must not have any respect of persons, we must fa­
vour no body. 
Sans acception de personnes, without any respect of persons.  

ACCEZ, (m) abord, entrée, an access, entry, or passage unto. 
Donner accez à quêcun vers un autre, to introduce one to some body. 
Donner accez à quêcun, to give free access to one. 
J'ai accez aupres du Roy, I have free access to the King. 
Trouver accez dans l'esprit de quêcun, to insinuate (or to skrew) himself into ones favour. 
Un homme de facile accez, ou affable, an affable, familiar, cour­
teous man, a man of easy access. 
Un homme de difficile accez, qui n'est point affable, an un­
courteous, unsociable man, that is not easily spoken with. 
Nul ne peut avoir accez aupres de lui, no body can come at him, he gives audience to no body. 
Un lieu de facile, ou de difficile accez, an accessible, or inaccessible place. 
Accez de fievre, a fit of an A­
gue. 
Avoir l'accez de la fievre, to have a fit of an ague. 
Accessible, accessible, or easy to come unto. 
Accessoire (m.) an accession, or addition, increase, augmentation, overplus, or vantage over and be­
sides the due or principal. 
J'ajoûte cela comme l'accessoi­
re au principal, I only look upon that as an addition to the chief (or principal) matter. 
Accessoire, ou danger, danger, mischief, or trouble. 
Se voiant en cet accessoire, en cet état, seing himself in that con­
dition.  

ACCIDENT, entant qu'il est opposé à la substance, an Ac­
cident, as it stands in opposition to substance. 
Accident, ce qui arrive au corps, ou à l'esprit, an accident, or any thing that happens to the body or mind. 
Accident, cas fortuit, an acci­
dent, a chance, a casualty. 
Par accident, by accident, by chance. 
Accident, malheur, a misfortune, mis-hap, calamity, mischance. 
Je soûfrirai sans murmurer tous  



les accidens qui m'arriveront, I shall patiently bear all the mis­
chances that shall fall upon me. 
Si quêque accident lui arrivoit, if he should run into some mischief or other. 
Accident d'une chose, ce qui n'est pas de sa substance, the ac­
cident of a thing, that which is not of its substance. 
Les Accidens de quêque affai­
re, the circumstances, the accessi­
ons of a business. 
Les Accidens de la Grammaire, The Accidence of the Grammar. 
Accidentel, accidental, casu­
al. 
Accidentel, qui n'est pas essen­
tiel à la chose dont il s'agit, ac­
cidental, that is not essential to the matter in hand.  

ACCLAMATION, (f.) shou­
ting, acclamation.  

ACCOLLER, embrasser, to embrace, coll, or clip about the neck. 
Accollé, en terme de blazon, collared, in blazon. 
Accollade, Accollée, (f.) a colling, clipping, imbracing about the neck. 
Accollée qu'on donne au Che­
valier en lui donnant la Cheva­
lerie, the dubbing of a Knight, or the Ceremony used therein.  

ACCOMMODER, rendre commode, to fit, to furnish. 
Accommoder, ageancer, ranger, ajuster, to order, to fit, or set in order. 
Accommoder, adapter une cho­
se à une autre, to fit a thing to another. 
Accommoder, preparer, to pre­
pare, to make ready. 
Accommoder un differant, to compound (to reconcile) a diffe­
rence, to decide a controversie. 
S'accommoder à l'humeur de quêcun, to fit a mans humour, to humour him. 
Mais qu'y feroit on? il faut s'accommoder aux hommes? but what help is there for't? men must and will be humoured, 
S'accommoder à la capacité, à la portée des enfans, to fit him­
self to childrens capacity. 
S'accommoder au tems, s'ac­
commoder aux choses selon le tems, to serve the time, to follow the swinge (course, or fashion) of the present world, to do as others do. 
Nous nous accommodons aux affaires, we follow the course of things. 
Accomoder quêcun, l'équiper, to provide one with necessaries. 
Il sait s'accommoder, he knows how to provide for himself. 
Il s'accommode en incommo­
dant les autres, he do's not care how troublesom he is, so it be for his advantage. 
Accommoder, étre propre, ou utile, to fit one, to be of great use or benefit to him. 
Voici qui m'accommode bien, this fits me bravely. 
Accommoder une femme, jou­
ir d'une femme, to injoy a wo­
man. 
Accommoder quêcun, le bat­
tre, le froter, to beat one, to cud­
gel him, to use a knave in his kind. 
Je l'ai bien accommodé, je l'ai bien battu, I have ordered him sufficiently, I have cudgelled him to some purpose. 
Accommoder quêcun de quê­
que chose, la lui prêter, to lend one a thing, to accommodate him with it. 
S'accommoder de quêque cho­
se, to make use of something. 
S'accommoder du bien d'au­
trui, to make use of other peoples goods. 
Il s'accommode de tout, he con­
verts any thing to his own use. 
Un ambitieux ne sauroit s'ac­
commoder de la Solitude, a so­
litary place dos not fit an ambiti­
ous mans purpose. 
Je m'accommoderois mieux d'un grand parleur que d'un ta­
citurne, I could rather bear a great talker than a silent man. 
Je suis comme cela; si vous vous accommodez de moi, à la bonne heure; si non, adieu: That's my humour, if I please you, well and good, if not, farewell. 
Voulez vous m'en accommoder à prix raisonnable? will you let me have it at a reasonable rate? 
Accommodé, rendu commo­
de, fitted, furnished. 
Accommodé, agencé, rangé, a­
justé, ordered, fitted, set in order. 
Acoommodé, preparé, prepared, made ready. 
Un different accommodé, a dif­
ference compounded. 
Accommodé, equippé, provi­
ded with necessaries. 
Accommodé, battu, frotté, beat­
en, cudgelled. 
Accommodé de quêque chose, accommodated with a thing. 
Accommodé, riche, able, rich, or well to pass. 
Accommodable, capable d'-accommodement, that may be fitted. 
Accommodant, condescendant, a flexible (or complying) man, a man of a treatable temper. 
Accommodement (m) ajuste­
ment de quêque chose, the fit­
ting, or the ordering of a thing. 
Accommodement d'un Lieu, the accommodations of a place. 
Accommodement, ou conde­
scendance, à la volonté d'un autre, a condescension to another mans will. 
Accommodement, accord, agree­
ment, or composition. 
Il veut porter l'affaire à un ac­
commodement, he will bring the business to a composition. 
Accommodement, reconcilia­
tion, an agreement, or reconcilia­
tion.  

ACCOMPAGNER quêcun, to bear one company, to go (or come) along with him, or to accom­
pany him. 
Accompagner quêcun par hon­
neur, to wait upon one, to follow (to attend) him. 
Je vous accompagnerai par tout, I shall follow you, wait on you, or bear you company any where. 
Accompagnez moi, je vous prie, jusqu'a mon logis, pray, come a­
long with me to my house. 
S'accompagner de quêcun, to hold fellowship with one. 
Accompagner, servir d'orne­
ment à quêque chose, to be as an ornament to somthing. 
Accompagné, accompany'd, ha­
ving the company or fellowship of. 
Accompagné, par honneur, wai­
ted on, followed, or attended. 
Il est sorti accompagné de plu­
sieurs soldats, he went out follow'd by many Soldiers. 
Il est venu bien accompagné, he came with a great Retinue. 
Il vaut mieux étre seul que mal accompagné, it is better to be alone than with ill company. 
La Vertu est toûjours accom­
pagnée de la Gloire. Virtue is al­
wayes attended with Glory. 
Accompagnement (m.) com­
pany, or fellowship. 



Accompagnement par honneur, waiting, or attending. 
Ces choses sont l'accompagne­
ment de la Vertu, these things are the concomitants of Vir­
tue.  

ACCOMPLIR, achever un Ouvrage, to finish, to make an end of a Work in hand. 
Accomplir (tenir) sa promesse, to accomplish, to keep, to fulfil his promise. 
Accomplir les conditions d'un Accord, to fulfill the conditions of an Agreement. 
Accomplir un vœu, to fulfil a vow. 
Accomplir sa Charge, s'en ac­
quitter, to perform his Duty. 
Accompli, achevé, parfait, fi­
nished. 
Un Orateur accompli, an excel­
lent, a perfect, an accomplished O­
rator. 
Un jeune homme tres accompli, an accomplished young man. 
Il y a cent ans accomplis, it is full a hundred years since. 
Accomplissement (m.) acheve­
ment, a finishing, fulfilling, accom­
plishment. 
Avoir l'accomplissement de tous ses desirs, to have all his desires fulfilled.  

ACCOQUINER, rendre fai­
neant, to make lazy, idle, or sloth­
full like a beggar. 
S'accoquiner, étre paresseux, to become (or to be) lazy, idle, or slothfull.  

ACCORD de son, ou de voix (m.) accord, or concord in musick.
Accord, pacte, accord, agree­
ment, contract, composition.
Par accord, by agreement. 
Se tenir à l'accord, to stand to the agreement. 
Passer accord (faire accord) a­
vec quêcun, to agree (to make, or to pass an agreement) with one. 
Je passerai accord avec vous, sous quelque condition que ce soit, I will make an agreement with you upon any terms. 
Je suis compris dans l'Ac­
cord, I am included in the Agree­
ment. 
Accord, alliance, a league, a trea­
ty, an alliance. 
Accord, ou concorde, concorde, or union. 
Accord de sentimens, unity of sentiments. 
Accord de volontés, unanimity, concord of mind, consent of heart. 
D'un commun accord, with one accord. 
Cela se fit d'un commun accord, that was done with one accord. 
Tomber d'accord de quêque chose, to agree in a business. 
Tout le monde tombe d'accord de cela, it is the sense of all the World, there's no body that contra­
dicts it. 
Etre d'accord, s'accorder, to a­
gree. 
En cela je suis d'accord (ou je demeure d'accord) avec Caesar, In that I agree with Caesar. 
Je demeure d'accord avec lui, que vous avez failli, he and I are of opinion, that you have done a­
miss. 
Nous sommes d'accord, we are agreed. 
Ils sont d'accord du fait, they are agreed concerning the fact. 
Etre d'accord dans le Jeu pour tromper, s'entendre, to play boo­
ty together, to joyn together in a cheat. 
Mettre d'accord, accorder quê­
ques personnes, to bring some per­
sons to an agreement, to make them friends, to reconcile them toge­
ther. 
Un homme de bon accord, avec qui l'on s'accorde facilement, a man of a treatable temper, a flexi­
ble, an easy man. 
Accorder les instrumens, to tune Instruments of Musick, to put them into a right tune. 
Accorder un Lut, to tune a Lute. 
La premiere corde s'accorde a­
vec la huitiéme, the first string answers to the eigth. 
Accorder (mettre d'accord) quêques personnes, to reconcile parties in differences, to make them friends, to bring them to an agreement. 
Accorder un different, to com­
pound (or to reconcile) a differen­
ce. 
Il n'a pas voulu accorder à dix écus, he would not agree for ten crowns. 
Accorder quêque chose à quê­
cun, to grant a thing to some bo­
dy. 
Accordez moi cette faveur, do me that favour. 
Accordez leur cette grace pour l'amour de moi, do them that kindness for my sake. 
Accorder à quêcun sa fille en mariage, to give (or to betroth) his daughter to a man. 
S'accorder, s'accommoder en quêque affaire avec sa Partie, to agree in a business with his Ad­
versary. 
Je m'accorderai à tout ce que vous voudrez, I shall stand to your own terms. 
On est sur le point de s'accor­
der, they are about to agree, they are upon (or ready to make) an agreement. 
S'accorder, étre d'accord, to a­
gree, to accord, to consent, to be answerable to. 
Vos actions ne s'accordent pas avec vos paroles, your actions do not at all agree with your words. 
La fin de sa harangue ne s'ac­
corde pas avec le commence­
ment, n'y repond pas, the end of his speech do's not answer (or agree with) the beginning, is not answerable to it. 
Comment s'accorde ce que vous dites? how do's that which you say agree? 
Tu ne t'accordes avec personne, thou agreest with no body. 
Ils s'accordent bien, they agree well together. 
Nos humeurs & nos inclinati­
ons s'accordent parfaitement, our humours and inclinations a­
gree perfectly well. 
Ils ne s'accordent pas, they don't agree. 
Deux Chiens ne s'accordent point à un os, two cats and a mouse, two wives in one house, two dogs and a bone never agree in one. 
Je m'accorde à vôtre opinion, je suis de vôtre avis, I am of your opinion. 
Je m'y accorde, done, I agree with you, I stand to it. 
Il s'est accordé à ces conditions, he agreed upon these terms. 
Accordé, agreed. 
Il a eté accordé entr'eux, it was agreed betwixt them. 
Accordée, fiancée, promise, a woman that's handfast with (or betrothed unto) a man. 
Accordable, capable d'accord & de reconciliation, fit (or ea­
sie) to be agreed. 
La flute est accordable avec le  



tambour, the flute do's sound well with the drum.  

ACCORNÉ, en blazon, at­
tired, in blazon.

† ACCORT, affable, complying, courteous.  

ACCOSTER quêcun, s'ac­
coster de lui, to go to one, to draw near to him, to accost him. 
Accosté, accosted, drawn near unto. 
Accostable, de facile accez, accostable, fit (or easie) to be ac­
costed.  

ACCOUCHER, s'accou­
cher, to be brought to bed. 
Accoucher d'un enfant mâle, to be brought to bed of a boy. 
Je say qu'aucune femme ne s'est accouchée en ce lieu, I know that no woman was ever brought to bed in this place. 
Accoucher devant le terme, to bring forth before the time. 
Accoucher une femme, to do the office (or the part) of a midwife. 
Je ne t'accoucherai pas si facile­
ment que feroit une sage fem­
me, I shall be no very good mid­
wife to you, you must not expect so good an attendance from me as from a midwife. 
Une Accouchée, a woman brought to bed, a woman that lies in. 
Une Accoucheuse, une sage femme, a midwife. 
Accouchement (m.) l'accou­
chement d'une femme, a wo­
mans lying in, her being in child­
bed.

S'ACCOUDER, to lean on his elbow.
Accoudé, leaning on his el­
bow. 
Un Accoudoir (m.) any thing to lean upon with his elbow. 
Une Chaise à accoudoirs, un fauteuil, a Chair with elbows.  

ACCOUPLER, to couple, joyn, unite, to yoak together. 
Un chien s'accouple avec une chienne, a dog lines with a bitch. 
Accouplé, coupled, joyned, uni­
ted, or yoaked together. 
Une chienne accouplée avec son mâle, a bitch coupled with her male. 
Accouplement (m.) a coupling, or conjunction. 
Accouplement de chiens, a cou­
pling of dogs. 
Accouplement de beufs, a yoak­
ing of oxen.  

ACCOURCIR quêque chose, to shorten a thing, to cur­
tail, or cut it short. 
Accourci, shortned, curtailed, or cut short. 
Accourcissement (m.) a short­
ning, curtailing, or cutting short.  

ACCOURIR, to run to.  

ACCOUTRER, parer, to cloath, dress, apparel, attire, deck, or trim. 
Accoûtrer, façonner, ajuster, to set something properly together, to make it fit. 
Accoûtré, paré, cloathed, dres­
sed, apparelled, attired, decked, or trimmed. 
Accoûtré, façonné, ajusté, set properly together, or made fit. 
Accoûtrement, (m) a dressing, attiring, apparelling, decking, trim­
ming.  

ACCOUTUMER, to accu­
stom, to use, to inure. 
Accoûtumer un enfant au tra­
vail, to use a child to work. 
S'accoûtumer au travail, to use himself to work. 
Accoûtumez vouz à parler François, use your self to speak French. 
Nous avons accoûtumé de ré­
pondre ainsi, we are accustomed (or used) to give that answer, that's our usual answer. 
Accoûtumé, accustomed, used, wonted, inured. 
Je ne suis pas accoûtumé à re­
cevoir des affronts, I am not used to receive affronts. 
Accoûtumé, ordinaire, usual, or­
dinary. 
Une chose accoûtumée, usitée, an usual thing. 
A la maniere accoûtumée, in the usual manner. 
Les Ceremonies accoûtumées, the usual Ceremonies. 
Accoûtumance (f) custom, wont. 

† ACCRAVANTER, acca­
bler quêcun, to over-burden one.
Accravanté, over-burdened.  

ACCREDITER, autoriser quêque chose, to commend a thing, to praise, or set it forth. 
S'accrediter, to get into credit. 
Accredité, commended, prai­
sed, or set forth.

* Accreu. V. Accroitre.  

ACCROCHE, croc, (m.) a hook. 
Accroche, croc de Navire, the grapple of a ship. 
Accroche, empêchement, diffi­
culté, a let, or hinderance. 
Accrocher, prendre avec un croc, to catch (or draw to) with a hook, to grapple. 
Un Navire en accroche un au­
tre, one Ship grapples another. 
J'ai accroche (j'ai attrapé) un bon Benefice, I got at last a good Benefice. 
Accrocher, pendre à un croc, to hang upon a hook. 
S'accrocher à quêque chose, to stick to something. 
Accrocher, arrêter, to put a stop to something, to delay (or leave off) for a time the prosecution of it. 
Mon indisposition accroche tous mes desseins, my indisposition puts a stop to all my designs. 
Accrocher un Procez, to stay a Suit in Law from further pro­
ceeding. 
Accroché, pris avec un croc, caught with a hook. 
Accroché, pendu à un croc, hanged upon an hook. 
Accroché, arrêté, that has a stop put to. 
Un procez accroché, a Suit in Law stay'd from farther proceed­
ing. 
Accrochement, (m) a hooking, clasping, grappling. 
Accrochement, arrêt, empê­
chement, a let, stop, hinderance. 
Accrochement de procez, a staying, or delaying of a Suit.  

ACCROIRE, faire accroire (ce qui se dit toûjours pour des choses fausses, ou lors qu'on a dessein de tromper) to make one believe a thing which is not, to perswade him to it. 
Il veut nous faire accroire qu'il est habile homme, he would fain make us believe (or perswade us) that he is an able man. 
Il nous en fait bien accroire, he would make us believe strange things. 
On lui fait accroire ce qu'on veut, one may make him believe any thing. 
Il s'en fait beaucoup accroire, he thinks well, (he is well conceit­
ed) of himself, he takes very much upon him. 
Il veut se faire accroire qu'il est fort riche, he thinks to be very rich, he looks upon himself as a man of a great estate.  



ACCROITRE, augmenter quêque chose, to increase, or in­
large a thing, to add to it. 
Accroitre la gloire de sa Fa­
mille, to increase the glory of his Family. 
Accroitre les bornes de ses E­
tats, to inlarge his Dominions. 
S'accroitre, s'augmenter, to in­
crease, neut. to grow bigger and bigger. 
S'accroitre, empirer, to grow worse and worse. 
Accreu, augmenté, increased, or inlarged. 
Accroissement, augmentati­
on, increase, augmentation. 
Accroissement d'honneur & de biens, increase of honour and e­
state. 
Accroissement de courage, in­
crease of courage.
 
S'ACCROUPIR, to stoop, crouch, coop, bend, lean, or bow forward, to sit bending forward up­
on the tail or knees.
Accroupi, crouched, cooped, stooped, or set stooping, squat up­
on the tail. 
Accroupissement (m) a bend­
ing forward upon the tail or knees.  

ACCUEIL (m) the manner of receiving one. 
Faire bon accueil à quêcun, le caresser, to make much of one, to make him welcom, to receive and intertain him kindly. 
Il fait bon accueil à tous ceux qui viennent le vifiter, he makes much of all those who come to visit him. 
Faire mauvais accueil à quê­
cun, to receive (or intertain) one unkindly. 
Le Roi lui a fait un mauvais accueil, il n'a pas eté bien ac­
cueilli de Sa Majesté, the King did not receive him kindly, his Ma­
jesty did not look graciously upon him. 
Il lui a fait un accueil assez froid, he gave him but a cold en­
tertainment, he was not very kind to him. 
Il l'a accueilli avec des témoi­
gnages d'une affection extre­
mement tendre, he received him with all the demonstrations of kindness imaginable. 
Il s'est accueilli ce malheur par sa faute, he got that mischance by his fault. 
Vous vous accueillirez la haine tout le monde, you shall turn up­
on you the hatred of all the World. 
Accueilli, received, intertained. 
Il fut accueilli d'une fâcheuse maladie, he was taken with a sad disease, he got (or he fell into) a grievous distemper. 
Nous fumes accueillis d'une fu­
rieuse tempête, we had a furi­
ous storm.  

ACCUL (m) le fond des terriers de renard ou blereau, the bottom (end, or furthest part) of a foxes or badgers earth, where he defends himself, sitting upon his tail. 
Acculer l'Enemi, le reduire à l'étroit, to beset the enemy round, to bring him to a strait. 
Acculer son aversaire, le mettre (comme l'on dit) au rouët, to overthrow his adversary, to drive him to a non-plus. 
Acculer un soulier, to wear out the heel of his shooe. 
Acculé, beset round, brought unto a strait, overthrown, or at a non-plus.  

ACCUSER, to accuse, to complain of, to inform against, to charge with a crime, to impeach.
Accuser quêcun de larcin, to charge one with theft.
On l'accuse de cela, he is charged with that. 
Faire métier d'accuser autrui, to be alwayes informing against others, to make it his business, to be led with a mind to accuse. 
Accusé, celui qui est accusé en Jugement, the Defendant in a Process, he that is accused, or sued. 
Etre faussement accusé & in­
justement condamné, to be wrongfully accused and unjustly condemned. 
Accusateur (m) an accuser, plaintiff, or informer. 
Accusatrice (f) an accusa­
trix, or she-informer. 
Accusation (f.) an accusa­
tion (or complaint) made, an in­
formation brought against, an im­
putation cast on. 
Forger un accusation contre quêcun, to accuse one falsely, to bring a false information against him. 
Accusatif, le cas accusatif, the accusative, or the accusative case. 
Accusatoire, that appertain­
eth to accusation. 
Accusatoirement, with a mind to accuse, like an accuser.  

ACENSER, bailler à cense un fonds, to let to farm. 
Acenser, prendre à cense un fonds, to take to farm. 
Acensé, donné à ferme, let to farm. 
Acensé, pris à ferme, taken to farm. 
Acenseur, qui baille à ferme (m) a letter out to farm. 
Acenseur, qui prend à ferme, he that takes to farm, a farmer. 
Acensement, que l'on donne (m) a farming, or letting to farm. 
Acensement, que l'on prend, a taking to farm.  

ACERER du fer, bailler l'a­
cier, to temper iron (or strength­
en it) with steel. 
Acerer (affiler) une epée, to sharpen, or to set an edge on a sword. 
Aceré, tempered (or strength­
ned) with steel. 
Un coûteau bien aceré, the edge of a knife made very sharp.  

ACHALANDER, attirer des chalands, to draw custom, to get Customers, to allure chapmen. 
Achalandé, customed. 
Une boutique bien achalandée, a shop that is well customed.
 
* ACHAT. V. Achet.
 
S'ACHARNER, (en termes de Fauconnerie) s'appliquer à manger de la chair presentée par le Fauconnier, to be fed (or baited) with flesh.
Les oiseaux farouches demeu­
rent trois ou quatre jours à je­
un avant que de s'acharner, the wild fowls use to fast three or four together, before they will be fed (or baited) with flesh. 
S'acharner, s'affectionner au carnage, to be cruelly minded, to be of a barbarous disposition. 
S'acharner contre quêcun, to be felly minded, or cruelly bent a­
gainst one, to pursue him most hatefully, to prosecute him with­
out mercy, to use all cruel and bloudy courses against him. 
S'acharner, s'attacher à quêque chose avec passion, to persist ob­
stinately in somthing. 
Acharné, en termes de Fau­
connerie, fed (or baited) with flesh. 
Etre acharné l'un contre l'au­
tre, to be cruelly bent against one another, to pursue one another to death without mercy.  



ACHE (f) grand persil, smal­
lage, a sort of herb.  

ACHEE (f) ver de terre, a grub, or ground-worm.  

ACHEMINER, to bring, help, direct, or put in the way. 
Acheminer une chose à sa fin, to bring a thing to its end. 
Acheminer quêcun à la cono­
issance d'une chose, to help one to the knowledge of a thing. 
S'acheminer à quêque lieu, to take his way, to begin his journey to some place, to set forward. 
Acheminement (m) a way, passage, or means to compass a thing. 
Le travail est un acheminement au repos, working is the way to rest.  

ACHET, ou Achat (m) a buying, or purchasing. 
Acheter, to buy, to purchase. 
Acheter quêque chose de quê­
cun, to buy a thing of one. 
Acheter à bon conte, à bon marché, to buy cheap, or at a cheap rate. 
On achete à bon marché ce qui est necessaire, necessary things may be bought at a cheap rate. 
Acheter cherement, to buy dear, to buy at a dear rate. 
Je lui ferai acheter cherement cette grace, I shall sell him that favour dear enough. 
Acheter argent contant, to buy ready mony. 
Acheter à credit, to buy upon trust. 
Acheter à credit en donnant caution, to buy upon trust by gi­
ving security. 
Acheter à credit en donnant des gages, to buy upon trust and give pawns. 
Acheté, bought, purchased. 
Un Acheteur, a buyer, a pur­
chaser.  

ACHEVER, finir une chose, to end, to finish, to conclude, to go through stitch with a thing, to make an end of it. 
Acheve ce que tu as commencé, make an end of what you begun. 
Achever sa besongne, to make an end of his work. 
Achevé, finished, ended, con­
cluded. 
Ce Livre est presqu'achevé, this Book is almost finished. 
Aiant achevé son discours, ha­
ving finished his discourse. 
A demi-achevé, half done.  

ACHOPEMENT (m) une pierre d'achoppement, a stum­
bling block.  

ACIDE, aigre, sowr, eager, sharp, or tart. 
Acidité, aigreur, eagerness, sowrness, sharpness, tartness.  

ACIER (m) steel.
Fait d'acier, made of steel. 
Bailler l'acier à du fer, l'acerer, to temper iron (or strengthen it) with steel.  

ACLAMPER (terme de ma­
rine) to fasten boards or planks together.  

ACOLYTHE (m) un des quatre moindres Ordres, he that ministers to the Priest while he says Mass.  

ACONIT (m.) herbe veni­
meuse, a venimous herb of two principall kinds, viz. Libbards-bane, and Woolf-bane.  

ACQUERIR, to acquire, get, obtain, purchase, or compass. 
Acquerir des richesses, de la reputation, de l'honneur, to acquire riches, to get fame, or ho­
nour. 
Acquerir un Bien, to purchase an Estate. 
Acquerir du bien par des voies legitimes, to get an Estate by lawful means. 
Il fait tout son possible pour acquerir quêque vaine estime, he do's what he can to get some vain glory. 
Acquerir l'amitié de quêcun, to get ones friendship. 
Il s'est acquis la reputation d'un homme eloquent, he has got the repute of a well-spoken man. 
Acquis, acquired, get, obtain­
ed, purchased, compassed. 
Des richesses bien acquises, riches well gotten. 
Les biens mal acquis s'en vont comme ils sont venus, ill-gotten goods go away as they are come. 
Je vous suis tout acquis, I am your addicted Servant. 
Il nous est acquis, we are sure of him. 
Acquest (m.) Acquisition (f.) a purchase, or a thing purcha­
sed. 
Faire de grands acquests, to make great purchases. 
Faire acquisition de quêque chose, l'acheter, to purchase a thing, to buy it.  

ACQUIESCER, consentir à quêque chose, to yield, or a­
gree to, to acquiesce, to consent, or condescend to a thing. 
Acquiescer au jugement d'au­
trui, to submit himself to another mans judgment, to stand to it. 
Acquiescer à la Sentence des Juges, to approve (or submit himself to) the Judges sentence, to pursue no further appeal. 
Acquiescer à sa Partie, lui don­
ner gain de cause, to yeeld to his adversary, to acknowledge him to be in the right. 
J'acquiescerai au conseil que vous me donnerez, I shall stand to (I shall follow) the counsel you shall give me. 
Acquiescement (m.) con­
sentement, consent, condescen­
sion. 
Acquiescement (en termes de Palais) lors qu'on donne à ga­
gner à sa Partie, a yeelding (or coming) to an agreement with his adversary before judgment. 
Lettres d'Acquiescement, a Letter of Atturney, whereby a Client gives his Counsellor, Attor­
ney, or Sollicitor, authority to a­
gree with his Adversary.
 
* Acquis. V. Acquerir.  

ACQUIT (m) payement, the paying of that which one is bound to pay. 
Acquit de legats, a paying of legacy's. 
Acquit, quittance, a discharge, an acquittance, a quietus est. 
Par maniere d'acquit, slightly, carelessly, only for fashion, more of necessity (or for fear) than from the heart or in any good will. 
Il fait tout par maniere d'ac­
quit, he do's every thing more for fashion sake than from the heart. 
Acquitter, rendre quitte quê­
cun, le delivrer de ses dettes, to quit, to acquit, free, clear, dis­
charge, rid of, or deliver from. 
Acquitter ses dettes, les payer, to pay off his debts. 
Acquitter ses matchandises, to pay custom for his commodity's. 
Acquitter une Terre, to quit (or quiet) a piece of land, to rid it from suits, trouble, and contro­
versy, by recovering or delivering it from such as usurped it, to clear the title thereof. 
S'acquitter de sa promesse, ou de son serment, to perform (or to fulfill) his promise or his oath. 
S'acquitter de son devoir, to do (to perform) his duty.



Je m'acquitterai de mon devoir envers lui, I shall perform my duty to him. 
S'acquitter de ses affaires, to do his business, to do his part. 
Il s'en est fort bien acquitté, he has done his part very well. 
Vous ne pourrez pas vous ac­
quitter de cette Charge, you won't be able to go through with that Emploi. 
S'acquitter d'une Commission, d'un Vœu, to perform a Commis­
sion, to perform a vow. 
Acquitté, that has done, per­
formed, or fulfilled somthing. 
Acquitté de son vœu, that has performed his vow. 
Acquitté de son serment, that has fulfilled his oath. 
Il s'est parfaitement acquitté de sa Charge, he has acquitted him­
self very well of his Employ.  

ACRE, sorte d'arpent, an acre of land.  

ACRE, piquant, eager, sharp, sowr, tart. 
La moûtarde est acre, mustard is sharp and biting. 
Un homme acre en ses actions, a man that is eager (vehement, or earnest) in his actions. 
Acrimonie, (f.) acrimony. 
Acrimonie de saveur, sharpness that biteth the tongue. 
Acrimonie, en agissant, liveli­
ness of action. 
Acrimonie, aigreur, fâcherie, sharpness in speaking our mind.  

ACROSTICHE (m) an a­
crostick, a sort of Verses whereof the first Letters contain some name or sentence.  

ACROTERES (m,) les ex­
tremités de quoi que ce soit, the extream parts of any thing. 
Acroteres (ou Piedestals) en Architecture, Pillasters, or Pe­
destals for Statues in the fore-front of Buildings.
 
S'ACROUPIR,&c. V. S'ac­
croupir.  

ACTE (m.) an act, fact, or deed. 
Les Actes des S. Apôtres, the Acts of the holy Apostles. 
Acte de Tragedie, ou de Co­
medie, an Act in a Tragedy, or Comedy. 
Actes, écrits publics, Acts, or publick Writings. 
Les Actes du Parlement d'­
Angleterre, the Acts of the English Parliament. 
Actes, Regitres, Books of Entries, Acts, Orders, or Decrees. 
Cela est couché dans les Actes & Regitres Publics, that is re­
corded. 
Prendre acte d'un tort receu, to record an injury. 
Acteur (m.) an Actor, or Player in a Comedy. 
Actrice (f.) a woman Play­
er. 
Actif, promt, diligent, active, quick, stirring, nimble, busy, dili­
gent, laborious, ever-doing, never idle. 
Un homme actif & entrepre­
nant, a stirring man, a great un­
dertaker. 
Un Verbe Actif, an Active Verb. 
Dans un sens actif, actively. 
Activité, vitesse, promtitude, activity, quickness, nimbleness, readiness. 
Activité, vertu, force, strength, vertue, force. 
Action (f.) an action, act, or deed. 
Une bonne, ou méchante acti­
on, a good, or wicked action. 
Faire une action illustre, noble, glorieuse, to do a noble, or brave action. 
Tenir en action quêcun, to keep one a doing. 
Se mettre en action, en colere, to grow angry, to give way to his anger. 
Action de graces, thanksgi­
ving. 
Rendre à quêcun des actions de graces, to give one thanks, to return him thanks, to thank him. 
Action, geste, port, gesture, or countenance with moving of the body. 
L'action donne l'ame au dis­
cours, action gives life to a dis­
course. 
Avoir l'action libre, aisée, de­
gagée, to have a free and brisk way of delivering his speech. 
Action, procez, an action in Law, a plea, or right to plead. 
In tenter une action à quêcun, l'actionner, to bring an action a­
gainst one. 
Avoir action contre quêcun, to go to Law with one. 
Action personnelle, a personal action. 
Action reelle, a real action. 
Action criminelle, an action for crime. 
Actionner quêcun, lui inten­
ter action, to bring an action a­
gainst one. 
Actionné, against whom an a­
ction is brought. 
Actuel, reel, qui existe, re­
all. 
Une maladie actuelle, & non imaginaire, a real, and no feigned disease. 
Actuellement, indeed, for cer­
tain, for a truth.

      
A D
ADAPTER, to adapt, or to fit one thing to another. 
Adapté, adapted.  

ADDITION (f) an addition, augmentation, or access of more, a supply. 
Faire addition à quêque chose, to make an addition to something, to add somthing. 
Addition, chose ajoûtée, an ad­
dition, or thing added. 
Addition & diminution, additi­
on and diminution. 
Addition, en Arithmetique, the Rule of Addition, in Arithme­
tick.

S'ADDONNER à quêque chose, to give (addict, or apply) himself to somthing.
S'addonner à la vertu, to give himself to virtue. 
Addonné à quêque chose, gi­
ven, bent, addicted, inclined to somthing. 
Addonné à ses plaisirs, given to voluptuousness. 
Un homme tres addonné à ses sens, a man wedded to his own o­
pinion. 
Il est addonné à toute sorte de vices, he is given to all manner of vices.  

ADDOSSÉ, terme de bla­
zon, qui se dit des animaux qui se tournent le dos, des clefs, & autres pieces semblables, Indor­
sed, or set back to back, a term of blazon.  

ADDOUBER. V. Adouber.  

ADDOUCIR, to sweeten, or make sweet, to dulcify. 
Addoucir la voix, la rendre de­
licate, to sweeten the voice, to make it sweet, delicate, and smooth. 
Addoucir un tableau, to finish a picture, to give it the last strokes.  



Addoucir un bois, to polish a piece of wood, to smooth it, to make it smooth. 
Addoucir son humeur farouche, to temper, qualify, or soften his wild and savage humour. 
Addoucir la severité du com­
mandement par des paroles pleines de bonté, to temper a severe command with soft words. 
Le ris addoucit la tristesse, laughing takes away a mans me­
lancoly. 
Addoucir quêcun, to appease, or pacify one, to asswage his an­
ger. 
S'addoucir, s'appaiser, addou­
cir sa colere, to cool his an­
ger. 
Addoucissez vous, appaisez vô­
tre colere, be peaceable, mitigate your anger. 
Le tems s'addoucit, the weather grows mild. 
La douleur s'addoucit, my pain begins to leave me, or to grow les­
ser. 
Addouci, sweetned, softned, smoo­
thed, asswaged, mitigated, appea­
sed, qualify'd. 
Son natural s'est fort addouci, he is nothing near so fierce as he was, he is now of a much better tem­
per. 
Sa colere s'est addoucie, his an­
ger is over. 
Addoucissement (m.) a sweet­
ning, smoothing, asswaging, appea­
sing, pacifying. 
Addoucissement, en fait de peinture, the last strokes of a pi­
cture.  

ADDRESSE (f.) an address, or direction. 
Addresse des chemins, a directi­
on to find out the way to a place. 
Addresse d'une Lettre, the su­
perscription of a Letter. 
Faire (ou écrire) l'addresse d'une Lettre, to write the super­
scription of a Letter. 
Addresse, industrie, industry, cunning, dexterity, subtilty, wit. 
Il a bien de l'addresse, he is ve­
ry dexterous, cunning, witty, sub­
tle, industrious. 
Agir avec addresse, to do a thing dexterously, cunningly, wittily, in­
geniously. 
Addresse à faire quêque chose, an ingenious cunning way of do­
ing a thing, the knack of doing it. 
Addresser, to direct, to shew (or to tell) the way. 
Addresser un Voiageur, lui môntrer le chemin, to direct a Traveller, to direct him in the way, to put him in (to shew, or tell him) the right way. 
Addresser quêcun à un autre, to direct a man to another. 
Addresser quêcun, lui donner des instructions, to instruct one, to give him instructions. 
S'Addresser à quêcun, l'aller trouver, to resort, or go to one, to make towards him, to address him­
self to him. 
S'addresser à quêcun pour le consulter, to wait upon one for his advice, to make his addresses or applications to him in order to con­
sult him. 
Ce Discours s'addresse à vous seul, this discourse regards none but you, do's only concern you. 
Je lui addresse mes Lettres, I direct my Letters to him. 
Ce Paquet s'addressoit à lui, this packet was directed to him. 
Addressé, directed, adressed, in­
structed, set in the nearest and rea­
diest way. 
Adroit, ingenious, cunning, dex­
terous, witty, industrious. 
C'est un adroit, he is a notable man. 
Un homme adroit en quêque chose, qui la fait adroitement, ou avec addresse, a neat man in somthing, one that do's a thing neatly, compleatly, that has got the knack on't. 
Adroitement, ingeniously, dex­
terously, cunningly, wittily, neatly, compleatly.  

ADENT, en fait de mortai­
ses & tenons (m.) a notch, or in­
dented hole in wood. 
Adenter, enchasser une piece de bois dans une autre, to set a piece of wood within another. 
Adenté, set (or inchased) with­
in one another.  

ADHERER à quêcun, sui­
vre son party, to adhere, cleave, or stick fast to one, to side, or take part with him. 
Adherant, fauteur, he that adheres, cleaves, or sticks fast to one, that sides, or takes part with him.  

ADJACENT, adjacent, neigh­
bouring. 
Terres adjacentes, neighbouring Countries.  

ADIANTE, sorte d'herbe (f.) an herb called Venus (Mai­
dens, or our Lady's) hair.  

ADJECTIF (m.) un nom adjectif, an adjective, a Noun ad­
jective. 
Adjection (f.) adjection, addi­
tion.  

ADIEU, farewell, adieu, god-b'w'ye, or God be with you. 
Adieu, mon cher frere, farewell dear brother. 
Adieu, mes soeurs, farewell, Si­
sters. 
Dire adieu à quêcun, to take his leave of one, to bid him farewell. 
Il est parti sans me dire adieu, he went away without acquainting me with it, he went away and said not a word to me. 
Il m'a dit le dernier adieu, he has taken his last leave of me. 
Dire adieu aux Lettres, to bid the Muses farewell, te cease from studying. 
S'il sort une fois du College, a­
dieu ses études, if once he leaves the School, farewell his learn­
ing. 
Il a dit adieu à la Cour, he has left off the Court, he has bid the Court farewell. 
Il a dit adieu aux Vanités du Monde, he has renounced to the Vanities of this World. 
Si cela arrive, adieu l'amour, if such a thing happen, farewell love.  

ADJOINDRE, ADJOUR­
NER, ADJOUTER, & leurs derivés. V. Ajoindre, Ajourner, Ajoûter.  

ADJUGER, to adjudge, to give (pass, or appoint unto) by Judge­
ment. 
Adjuger quêque chose à quê­
cun, to grant a thing by Judge­
ment or sentence to one. 
Adjugé, adjudged, given, or appointed unto by Judgement.  

ADJURER, conjurer quê­
cun, to adjure, or conjure one.  

ADJUTANT. V. Aide de Camp.  

ADMETTRE, to admit, re­
ceive, intertain, bring (or let) in. 
Admettre quêcun, lui donner entrée chez soi, to receive one in­
to his house.
Admettre quêcun dans sa Cham­
bre, dans le Conseil, dans des Charges honorables, en quêque Corps, ou Compagnie, to re­
ceive  



one into his Chamber, into the Counsel, into some honourable Imploy, into some Society or Com­
pany. 
Admettre une condition, une loi, to admit of a condition, to re­
ceive a law. 
Admis, admitted, entertained, received, brought (or let) in. 
Admis (receu) en quêque Corps, received into some Socie­
ty. 
Admission (f.) admittance, ad­
mission.  

ADMINISTRER, to mini­
ster, to administer. 
Administrer la Republique, to rule (to govern) the Common wealth. 
Administrer les affaires de ses Amis, to manage (or to do) his friends business, to look to their concern. 
Administrer les affaires de sa maison, to rule, to govern his hou­
shold. 
Administrateur (m.) an ad­
ministrator, governor, or manager of affairs for another. 
Administration (f.) an ad­
ministration, government, or charge, a disposing (or mana­
ging) of affairs for another.  

ADMIRAL, & Admirauté. V. Amiral.  

ADMIRER, to admire, to won­
der (to marvel) at. 
Admirer quêque chose, to ad­
mire somthing, to wonder at it. 
Vous vous faites admirer, you make your self to be admired. 
C'est ce qui fait admirer (c'est ce qui fait qu'on admire) les bons Orateurs, that is it which makes good Orators to be so admi­
red. 
Admiré, admired, wondred at. 
Sa Vertu sut admirée, his Vir­
tue was admired. 
Admirable, wonderfull, ad­
mirable, marvellous, miracu­
lous, above custom, or expectati­
on. 
L'amour du mépris est admira­
ble, the love of contempt is a won­
derfull thing. 
Je ne trouve rien d'admirable en cela, I find nothing admirable in that. 
Admirablement, admirably, wonderfully, beyond expectation or wont, marvellously, miraculously, excellently well. 
Il étoit un admirablement hon­
nête homme, he was a wonderful honest man. 
Admirateur (m.) an admirer. 
Admiration (f.) admiration, wonder. 
Son eloquence me donne de l'admiration, me ravit en admi­
ration, I am taken up with ad­
miration when I hear his elo­
quence. 
Admiratif, apt to admire a thing, or to wonder at it.
 
* Admis, Admission. V. Ad­
mettre  

ADMODIER, & ses deri­
vés. V. Amodier.  

† ADMONETER quêcun. V. Avertir. 
Admonition (f.) admonition, exhortation.  

ADOLESCENCE, (f.) ado­
lescency, young (or youthful) age.  

ADOPTER, to adopt, to take (or chuse) for his Child one that in nature is not so. 
Il a adopté cet enfant pour fils & pour heritier, he has chosen that Child to make him both his Son and Heir. 
Adopté, adopted, appointed, or chosen to be another mans Child. 
Adoptif, adoptive, or chosen by adoption. 
Adoption (f.) adoption.  

ADORER, to adore, worship, reverence, or honour in the highest degree. 
Adorer la Divinité, to adore (or worship) God. 
Adoré, adored, worshipped, re­
verenced, or honoured in the high­
est degree. 
Adorable, adorable, fit (or wor­
thy) to be adored. 
Adorateur (m.) adorer, or wor­
shipper, one that prayeth to (or beareth himself towards) another with all reverence. 
Adoration (f.) adoration, wor­
ship, reverence in the highest de­
gree, a giving all honour unto.  

ADOSSÉ, Adoucir, &c. V. Addossé, Addoucir.  

ADOUBER un Vaisseau (terme de Marine) to repair a Ship. 
Adoubé, refitted, repaired.  

ADRESSE, Adresser, Adroit, Adroitement. V. Addresse.  

ADVENIR, &c. V. Avenir.  

ADVERBE (m.) an Adverb.  

ADVERSAIRE, enemi de quêcun, an adversary, an ene­
my. 
Vous étes un de mes plus grands Adversaires, you are one of my greatest Enemies, of my greatest Adversaries. 
Adversaire, emulateur, he that is in contention with another to have a thing, one that contends for excellency with another. 
Adverse (or rather) Averse; as,
La Partie averse, the adverse (or contrary) Party. 
Adversité, (f.) adversity, trou­
bles, affliction, misery. 
J'ai de grandes adversités, I am in great troubles. 
Au tems de l'adversité, in the time of Adversity.  

ADVERTIR, Adveu, Advis, & leurs derivés. V. Avertir, A­
veu, Avis.  

ADULTERE, crime d'adul­
tere (m.) an adultery, or the crime of Adultery.
Commettre un adultere, to com­
mit adultery. 
Adultere, celui (ou celle) qui est coûpable d'adultere, an a­
dulterer, or adulteress. 
Un enfant nay d'adultere, a child begotten in adultery.  

ADVOCAT. V. Avocat.  

ADUSTE, brûlé, adust. 
Adustion (f.) adustion.

      
A E
* Aërer, Aërien. V. Air.

      
A F
AFFABLE, affable, friendly, courteous, of easie access, willingly giving ear to others. 
Il étoit egalement grave & af­
fable, he was both grave and af­
fable. 
Affabilité, (f.) affability, a kind (or friendly) way of speaking to others. 
Affablement, affably, courte­
ously. 

† AFFADIR, rendre fade ou insipide, to make tastless or unsa­
voury. V. Fade.  

AFFAIRE, (f.) business, af­
fair, any thing to do.
Faire une affaire, conduire  



(traiter) une affaire, to handle, to manage a business.
Faire (expedier) une affaire, en venir à bout, to do, to com­
pass (or bring about) a busi­
ness. 
Monsieur le Marchand, si vous voulez faire affaire avec moi, il faudra que vous vous passiez de moins, Sir, if you will let me have it (if you will agree with me) you must not expect so much, you must take a great deal less. 
Faire ses affaires, pourvoir à ses affaires, to mind (to look to) his business. 
Faire les affaires d'un autre, to do another mans business. 
Un homme qui fait bien ses af­
faires, a man that hath a great conduct to manage his concerns, a thriving man. 
Un homme qui est negligent à faire ses affaires, a careless, un­
provident man, a man that do's not mind his business. 
Faire mal ses affaires, to go down the wind. 
Incommodé dans ses affaires, one whose business don't go well. 
Comment (comme quoi) vont vos affaires? how do's your busi­
ness go on? 
Mes affaires vont fort mal, my business goes on very ill. 
L'affaire va tres bien, the busi­
ness is very well. 
J'ai assez d'affaire à penser à moi, I have enough to do ('tis enough for me) to look to my self. 
Qu'avez vous affaire avec lui? what business have you (what have you to do) with him? 
J'ai quêque affaire avec lui, I have some business with him. 
Mèlez vous de vos affaires, med­
dle with your own business. 
Ce ne sont pas là vos affaires, these are none of your concerns. 
C'est vôtre affaire, c'est vôtre devoir, 'tis your business, tis your duty. 
Engager quêcun dans une af­
faire, to insnare a man in a bu­
siness. 
Faire des affaires à quêcun, lui susciter (lui donner) des affaires, l'embarasser, to bring one into troubles, to molest, to vex, or to perplex him. 
S'attirer des affaires, to bring himself into troubles. 
Sortir un homme d'affaires, to help one out of a scurvy business, to help him out of troubles. 
Sortir d'affaire, neut. to get out of troubles. 
Avoir une affaire en main, to have a business in hand. 
Avoir beaucoup d'affaires, étre occupé dans beaucoup d'affai­
res, to be taken up with a great many businesses. 
Etre accablé d'affaires, to be pestered, or imbarrassed with bu­
siness. 
N'avoir point d'affaires, ne se mêler d'aucune affaire, to have no business, not to meddle with any business. 
Un homme d'affaires, qui est toû jours occupé, a man of busi­
ness. 
Homme d'affaires, intelligent (ou versé) dans les affaires, a man of great conduct, a man that un­
derstands business. 
Une personne qui n'entend pas les affaires, an unskilful man, a raw man, one that is not fit for business. 
Un Oiseau de bonne affaire (en termes de Fauconnerie) un oiseau docile, traitable, &c. a gentle hawk, a hawk that is well manned. 
Un oiseau de mauvaise affaire, oiseau farouche, &c. an unta­
med hawk, a hawk that is not manned. 
Affaire, besoin, lack, need, or want. 
Je n'ai pas affaire de vôtre con­
seil, I don't lack your counsel, I have no need of it. 
Si je fais des depenses, qu'en avez vous affaire? if I make ex­
pences what's that to you? what have you to do with it? 
Affairé, busie, full of business, taken up with business.  

AFFAISSER quêque chose, to press or weigh down a thing. 
S'affaisser, to be overladen, to sink, to fall, or yield under a great burden. 
Le Theatre s'est affaissé, the Stage is fallen down. 
Affaissé, overladen, pressed, weighed (or fallen) down. 
Affaissement (m.) a sinking, weighing down, or yeelding under a great burden.  

AFFAITER, rendre poli, to dress, to make neat. 
Affaiter, façonner des peaux à la Tanerie, to dress leather.
Affaiter (en termes de Fau­
connerie) apprivoiser un Oise­
au, to man a hawk throughly. 
Affaité, dressed, or made neat. 
Oiseau affaité, dressé au de­
duit de la Chasse, a made hawk, a hawk that is throughly manned. 
Affaitage (m.) he through man­
ning of a hawk.  

AFFAMER, to famish, to starve.
Affamer une Ville, to famish a Town, to bring it to straits for want of provisions. 
Affamé, famished, starved. 
Ventre affamé n'a point d'ore­
illes, a starved belly has no ears. 
Affamé de gloire, a man greedy of glory, a proud ambitious man.  

AFFECTER, rechercher quêque chose avec trop de soin, to affect a thing, to fancy it, to be too curious of it, to seek too much after it, to imitate or take upon him that which do's not become him. 
Plusieurs affectent ce Vice, ma­
ny follow that vice, or fancy it. 
Affecter, assigner, attribuer, to assign, to give, to attribute. 
Affecté, affected, fancy'd, sought too much after. 
Un style affecté, an affected style. 
Des complimens affectés, affe­
cted compliments. 
Affecté, assigné, attribué, as­
signed, given, attributed. 
Affecté, mal sain, crazy, sickly, diseased. 
Affectateur, (m.) an affector, one that curiously imitates or takes upon him a thing which do's not befit him. 
Affectation, Affeterie (f.) af­
fectation, a foolish desire (or fol­
lowing) of a thing. 
Affeterie de complimens, an affected way of complimenting. 
Affeterie en ses habits, au geste du corps, en ses paroles, au lan­
gage, ones affectation, or exces­
sive curiousness in clothes, or in the carriage of his body, in his words, and style. 
Un Affeté, une Affetée, one who is over-curious. 
Affection, passion de l'ame (f) an affection of the mind, a pas­
sion. 
Affection, desir, affection, or desire. 
Affection, amour, affection, good will. love, kindness.
Avoir de l'affection pour quê­
que  



que chose, y mettre son affecti­
on, to fancy a thing, to be taken with it. 
Avoir de l'affection pour quê­
cun, ne penser qu'a son bien, ou qu'a lui rendre service, to love one intirely, to study nothing but his good, and how to do him a kindness. 
Gagner l'affection de quêcun, to get ones affection, to screw him­
self into ones favour. 
J'ai bien de l'affection pour vous, I have a great kindness for you. 
J'ai conu en ceci l'affection que vous avez pour moi, in this I know what love you bear to me. 
Témoigner de l'affection à quê­
cun, to make much of one, to shew him a great deal of kindness and affection. 
Avec affection, d'affection, ear­
nestly, readily, with diligence and affection. 
Affectionner quêcun, to love one, to cherish him, to be taken with him. 
Affectionner quêque chose, to fancy, desire, or covet a thing, to seek after it, to give his mind to it. 
Affectionné á quêcun, affecti­
onate, having an affection, bearing a good will to one. 
Je suis vôtre tres affectionné serviteur, I am your most affe­
ctionate servant. 
Mal affectionné envers quêcun, one that is out of love (or out of conceit) with another, that bear­
eth ill will to him. 
Affectionné à quêque chose, passionné pour une chose, gi­
ven, addicted to a thing, taken with it. 
Affectionné à sa Patrie, a lover of his Countrey. 
Affectionnément, affectionate­
ly, with great affection. 
Affectueux, affectionate, hear­
ty, loving, full of affection or good will. 
Affectueusement, affectionate­
ly, heartily, with a good will.  

AFFERMER, bailler à fer­
me, to farm, or let out unto farm. 
Affermer, prendre à ferme, to take to farm. 
Affermé, baillé à ferme, farm­
ed, or let out unto farm. 
Affermé, pris à ferme, taken to farm.  

AFFERMIR, to strengthen, fortifie, confirm, consolidate, com­
pact, harden, stiffen, close, fasten, or make firm. 
Affermir son pié, to set his foot upon sure ground. 
Affermir l'état de sa famille, to settle his houshold. 
Affermir son esprit contre les dangers, to put on a firm resoluti­
on against all dangers. 
Affermi, strengthned, fortify'd, confirmed, settled, compacted, hardned, stiffened, closed, fastned, or made firm. 
S'étant affermi en cette resolu­
tion, having taken up that resolu­
tion, being fully resolved upon it. 
Cette partie est beaucoup mi­
eux affermie, this part is much stronger. 
Une ame bien affermie dans la méchanceté, confirmée dans la malice, a mind that is hardned in wickedness. 
Affermissement (m.) a strength­
ning, compacting, consolidating, closing, setling, stiffening, hard­
ning.
 
* Affeté, Affeterie. V. Affe­
cter.  

AFFEURER, bailler le prix (ou le taux) en qualité de Sei­
gneur ou de Magistrat à une denrée, to rate a thing, to set a certain price on it, either as Ma­
gistrate, or as Lord of a Man­
nor. 
Affeurer, mettre le prix à ses denrées, où le Seigneur ne le met pas, to rate his own goods, to set a price on them. 
Affeurage (f.) a rating, or set­
ting of a price on things that are to be sold. 
Droit d'Affeurage, the Right of rating, or setting of a price on things that are to be sold.  

AFFICHE (f.) a bill set up, or fastned on a post, door, gate, &c. a Siquis. 
Publier par affiche la vente des biens de quêcun, to set up a bill for goods that are to be sold, to make an open sale of them. 
Publié par affiches, published in writing. 
Afficher, to set up a bill, to fa­
sten it on a post, door, gate, &c. 
Affiché, set up, or fastned on a post, door, gate, &c.  

AFFIDÉ, true, faithful, trusty. 
Il est mon affidé, he is my trusty friend.  

AFFIER (en fait d'Agricul­
ture) planter, provigner des Arbres en un Jardin, to set, or to plant Trees in a Garden.  

AFFILER, aiguiser, to whet, sharpen, or set an edge on. 
Affiler un rasoir, to set a ra­
sor. 
Affiler, aligner des arbres, to set trees in a line. 
Affilé, aiguisé, whetted, sharp­
ned, that hath an edge set on. 
Les ailes affilées d'un Bataillon, the Wings of a Battalion placed in a direct file.  

AFFINER, to fine, to re­
fine. 
Affiner de l'or, ou quêque au­
tre metal, to refine gold, or some other metal, to purifie, or to im­
prove it. 
Affiner, tromper quêcun, to cheat, to deceive one, to render him subtil by a continual experi­
ence. 
Affiné, refined. 
De l'or affiné, refined gold. 
Affineur, (m.) a finer, or refi­
ner. 
Affineur d'or, a refiner of gold. 
Affineur, trompeur, a deceiver, one that intends to benefit the deceived by teaching him experi­
ence. 
Affinement (m.) a refining, or purifying of a thing. 
Affinoire, creuset, a crucible, a little earthen pot, wherein Goldsmiths melt their silver and gold.  

AFFINITÉ(f.) affinity, near­
ness.  

AFFIQUETS de Dames, womens ornaments, cosmeticks.  

AFFIRMER, to affirm, or to assert.
Affirmer quêque chose, to affirm a thing, to assert it. 
Affirmé, affirmed, avouched, maintained. 
Affirmation, (f.) affirmation, assertion, asseveration. 
Affirmatif, affirmative. 
L'opinion affirmative, (or only) l'affirmative, the affirmative. 
Si vous tenez l'affirmative, je defendrai la negative, if you be for the affirmative, I shall stand for the negative. 
Affirmativement, avec affir­
mation, affirmatively.  

AFFLIGER, to afflict, trouble, molest, grieve, vex, or torment.
Cette affaire ne m'afflige pas  



moins que vous, this troubles me as much as it does you.
La mort de son Pere l'a fort af­
fligé, his fathers death has afflict­
ed him very much, has been a great trouble to him. 
S'affliger de quêque chose, to be troubled for something, to be vex­
ed about it. 
Affligé, afflicted, molested, grie­
ved, vexed, tormented. 
Affligé, abbatu, dejected, or cast down. 
Etre affligé, avoir de grandes af­
flictions, étre accablé de mise­
res, to be in great troubles. 
Je suis affligé de vôtre mal­
heur, I am sorry for your misfor­
tune. 
Affligeant, fâcheux, sad, grie­
vous. 
Affliction, (f) affliction. 
Affliction d'esprit, grief, trouble of mind. 
Affliction, in fortune, affliction, crosses, troubles, calamity. 
Je ressens vôtre affliction, I am sensible of your affliction, of your troubles.  

AFFLUENCE, (f) affluence, abundance, store, fulness, plenty, flowing. 
Grande affluence de monde, a great concourse of people. 
Affluence de paroles, much speak­
ing, verbosity, or talkativeness. 
Avec affluence, abundantly.  

AFFOIBLIR, to weaken, in­
feeble, make weak, feeble, or in­
firm, deprive of strength, take away the force or vigour of, to debili­
tate. 
La douleur m'affoiblit & m'em. pêche de parler, my pain weak­
ens me, and makes me that I can­
not speak. 
La Vieillesse affoiblit les person­
nes, old age makes people weak. 
S'affoiblir, to grow weak, feeble, or infirm, to decay in strength. 
Mes forces s'affoiblissent, my strength begins to decay. 
Affoibli, weakned, infeebled, de­
cay'd in strength. 
Affoiblissement, (m) a weak­
ning, infeebling, depriving of force, power, or strength.

† S'AFFOLER la main, ou autre partie du corps, to wound, bruise, or hurt sore his hand, or some other part of his body. 
S'Affoler, faire une fausse cou­
che, to miscarry, to bring forth be­
fore the time. 
Affolé, wounded, bruised, sore hurt in his hand, or some other part of his body. 
Affolure, blessure (f) a bruise, wound, or sore hurt. 
Affolure de femme enceinte, the miscarrying of a woman with child. 

† AFFOURRAGER, le be­
tail, lui donner fourrage, to fod­
der cattel.
Affourragé, foddered. 
Affourragement, (m) a fodde­
ring of cattel.  

AFFRANCHIR, delivrer quêcun d'escavage, de servi­
tude, to affranchise, or make one free, to give him his liberty, to de­
liver (or to discharge) him from bon­
dage, or from servitude. 
Affranchir, delivrer quêcun de quêques charges ou devoirs, to release (or rid) one from charge or annoyance. 
Affranchi, affranchised, freed, or made free. 
Affranchi de servitude, mis en liberté, franchised, made free, dis­
charged (released, delivered) from bondage. 
Affranchi de charges, freed from charge or annoyance. 
Un affranchi, a freed man, a man that is made free, or that has got his freedom. 
Une affranchie, a freed woman, a woman made free, or that has got her freedom. 
Le fils ou la fille d'un Affranchi, one that is born of him that was once bound & is now free. 
Affranchisseur, liberateur (m) an Affranchiser, or Freedom-gi­
ver. 
Affranchissement (m) an af­
franchising, or freeing. 
Affranchissement de servitude, a discharging of (or delivering from) servitude. 
Affranchissement, exention de quêque charge, a freeing of one from charge, an immunity.  

AFFREUX, Affreusement. V. Afreux.  

AFFRIANDER quêcun, to allure, or inveigle one, to intice, or toll him on by fair, sweet, or plausible means. 
Affriandé, allured, inveigled, inticed, or drawn on. 
Affriandement (m.) an allu­
ring, inveigling, inticing, or tolling on by plausible or fair means.  

AFFRONT (m.) an affront, wrong, or abuse offered to a mans face. 
Faire un affront à quêcun, to abuse, or affront one to his face. 
Recevoir un sanglant affront de quêcun, to receive a grievous af­
front. 
Affronter quêcun, chercher querelle avec lui, to contest, quar­
rel, or swagger with one, to pick a quarrel with him, to affront him. 
Affronter l'Enemi, l'attaquer de front, to incounter, assault, or set upon the Enemy. 
Affronter quêcun, le tromper, to cozen, gull, or deceive one im­
pudently, openly, or to his face. 
Affronté, affronted. 
Affronté, attaqué de front, in­
countred, assaulted, or set upon. 
Affronté, trompé, cozened, gulled, or impudently deceived. 
Affronteur (m.) an affronter, or abuser of people to their faces, a common swaggerer. 
Affronteur, trompeur, an open (or publick) deceiver, beguiler, cheater, or cogging mate.  

AFFRONTAILLES (f.) les confins de plusieurs fonds ab­
boutissans aux côtés d'un autre fonds, the ends or corners of seve­
ral grounds abutting upon another land.  

AFFUBLER, to muffle, or wrap up in something, to hide, or shrowd under clothes. 
S'Affubler de son manteau, to wrap up himself in his cloak. 
Affublé, muffled, or wrapped up, hid, or shrouded under clothes. 
Affublement, (m.) a muffling, or wrapping up of one, a hiding or shrouding under clothes.  

AFFUST (m.) the frame (or carriage) of a piece of Ordnance. 
Affuster un canon, to furnish a piece of Ordnance with a frame or carriage. 
Affusté, furnished (as a Canon) with a frame or carriage. 
Affûtage, Affutement, frames, carriages, or stocks for artillery.  

AFIN, afin que, that, to the end that. 
Je dis ceci afin que vous ne pen­
siez pas que j'ai trouvé un Tre­
sor, this I say, that you may not think I found out a Treasure. 
Il fait cela, afin que chacun s'en aille, he do's it, to the end that every one may be gone.



Afin de, to, in order to, that, or to the end that. 
Il ne fait son devoir qu'a fin d'étre loüé, he do's his duty but only to be praised.  

AFREUX, gastly, horrid, fear­
ful, terrible in look. 
Afreusement, gastly, terribly, horribly.  

AFRODILLE, ou ache roy­
ale, sorte d'herbe, the herb cal­
led affodil, or daffodil.

      
A G
† AGACER, provoquer quê­
cun, to urge, or provoke one to an­
ger, vex, or exasperate him. 
Agacer les dents, to set the teeth on edge. 
Agacer, émousser, to make dull or blunt. 
Le jus des fruits agace le tran­
chant du coûteau, the juice of fruits blunts the edge of a knife. 
Agacé, provoqué, urged, in­
censed, provoked, vexed, exaspe­
rated. 
Des dents agacées, teeth set on edge. 
Un coûteau agacé, a blunted knife. 
Agacement (m.) provocation, an urging, angring, provoking, ex­
asperating. 
Agacement des dents, a setting the teeth on edge.  

AGARIC (m.) racine, espe­
ce de drogue, Agarick, a root in Samaria, that helps digestion.  

† AGASSE. V. Pie.  

AGATHE, (f.) pierre preci­
euse, an agate, a sort of precious stone.  

AGE, (m.) age, years. 
Basâge, infancy, youth, tender years. 
Des mon bas âge, from my In­
fancy. 
Age de discretion, years of dis­
cretion. 
La fleur de l'âge, the prime of ones years. 
Il est en la fleur de son âge, he is in the very prime of his years. 
L'Age viril, the age of manhood, the viril age. 
L'âge de porter les armes, an age fit for military affairs. 
Il est hors d'âge de porter les armes, he is past bearing arms. 
Elle est hors d'âge d'avoir des enfans, she is past getting of chil­
dren. 
Age avancé, old age. 
Avancer en âge, to grow old. 
Avancé en âge, grown old. 
Etre sur l'âge, to be old. 
Age decrepit, a decrepit age. 
Etre en âge, to be of age. 
Etre en âge de se marier, to be marriageable, to be ripe for mar­
riage. 
Quel âge avez vous? how old are you? 
J'ai l'âge de trente ans, I am thirty years old, I am thirty. 
Un homme de cet âge doit étre rassis, a man of that age ought to be stayd. 
Les diverses sortes d'Ages sont l'Enfance, l'Enfance plus avan­
cée, l'Adolescence, la Jeunesse, l'Age viril, la Vieillesse, & De­
crepitude; the several sorts of A­
ges are the Infancy, Childhood, A­
dolescency, Youth (or young age) a mans Age, an old and decrepit Age. 
Age, siecle, an Age. 
Agé, aged, old. 
C'est un homme âgé, he is an old man. 
Il est plus âgé que lui, he is old­
er than he. 
Il est moins âgé que lui, he is not so old, he is younger than he. 
Agé d'un an, a twelve month old. 
Agé de deux, trois, quatre, cinq ans, two, three, four, five years old. 

AGENCER, to set in order, to place a thing finely. 
Agencer ses cheveux, to order his hair. 
Agencer un mort dans sa biere, to put a corps in a coffin. 
Agencé, set in order, finely placed. 
Agencement (m.) a setting in order, or placing of a thing fine­
ly.
 
S'AGENOUILLER, se met­
tre à genoux, to kneel, to kneel down, to fall upon his knees.
S'agenouiller devant quêcun, se mettre à genoux devant lui, humbly to intreat one upon his knees. 
Agenouillé, kneeling, on his knees.
 
* Agent. V. Agir.
 
S'AGGLUER à quêque chose, to stick fast to something, as if glued together, to cleave to it.
Agglué à quêque chose, that sticks fast to something, clea­
ving to it.  

AGGRANDIR, étendre, to inlarge, to make greater or big­
ger. 
Aggrandir sa maison, to make his house bigger. 
Aggrandir, exaggerer une fau­
te, to aggravate, or exaggerate a fault. 
Aggrandir quêcun, l'élever aux Charges, à des Honneurs, to make one great, to prefer, to ad­
vance him, to aggrandise him. 
Il s'est aggrandi, il s'est poussé & a vancé dans les hautes Char­
ges, he has got to be a great man, and to be preferred to great pla­
ces. 
Aggrandir quêcun, l'enrichir, to make one rich, to inrich one with lands and possessions. 
Aggrandi, étendu, inlarged, made greater or bigger. 
Aggrandi, elevé aux grandes Charges, aggrandised, preferred to the greatest imploys. 
Aggrandi, enrichi, inriched, or made rich. 
Aggrandisseur (m.) an inlar­
ger, preferrer, advancer. 
Aggrandissement (m.) an in­
larging, or making bigger. 
Aggrandissement, elevation aux Charges & aux Honneurs, pre­
ferment, advancement.  

AGGRAVER, exaggerer une faute, to aggravate a fault, to make it greater. 
Aggraver, rendre plus pesant, to make heavier. 
Aggravé, exaggeré, aggrava­
ted, made greater. 
Aggravé, rendu plus pesant, made heavier. 
Aggravation, (f.) aggravati­
on.  

AGGREGER quêcun à quê­
que Corps, to receive one into a Society. 
Aggregé, received into a Soci­
ety. 
Un Docteur aggregé, one of the College of Physitians. 
Aggregation (f.) a receiving of one into a Society.  

AGGRESSEUR (m.) an ag­
gressor, assailer, or assaulter, he that gives the onset, or first lay's hands on a weapon to do another hurt.   



Aggression (f.) an aggression, assault, or first setting on.  

AGIR, to act, to be in action, to be a doing. 
Agir courageusement, se por­
ter avec courage dans une affai­
re, to act vigorously, to prosecute a business with a great deal of vi­
gour. 
Un homme qui ne peut agir ni parler, a man that can neither act nor speak. 
Il est bon d'agir par conseil là où la force paroit inutile, it is good to act with prudence and counsel where a thing can't be done by force. 
Agir en Jugement, poursuivre quêcun en Justice, to sue one, to have a Law-sute against one. 
J'agis par voie de Justice, & non par voie de force, I act by way of Justice, and not by force. 
Il s'agit de vôtre vie, your life is at stake. 
Il ne s'agit pas de cela, il n'en est pas question, that is not our business. 
Agissant, actif, active, nimble, stirring. 
La Vertu est bien agissante, Vir­
tue is very active. 
Agent (m.) an Agent. 
Agile, agile, nimble, active, quick. 
Agilité, (f.) agility, nimble­
ness, activity, quickness. 
Agilement, nimbly, quickly, with agility.  

AGITER, ébranler, secou­
ër, to toss, to agitate. 
Agiter une question, to move a question. 
Il commença d'agiter en lui même ce qu'il devoit faire, he began to think in himself what he had best to do. 
Agité, tossed, agitated. 
Etre agité de la Tempête, to be tossed by the Tempest. 
Etre agité de diverses pensées, to be tossed with many cares, or trou­
blesom thoughts, to be uncertain what to do. 
Agitation (f.) agitation, mo­
tion. 
Il est dans une continuelle agi­
tation, he is in a continual moti­
on.  

AGNATION (f.) le lien de consanguinité entre les mâles descendans de même Pere, the bond of consanguinity betwixt males come of the same father.  

AGNEAU (m.) a lamb.
Chair d'agneau, lamb, or lambs flesh. 
Peau d'agneau, a lambs skin. 
Agnelet, petit agneau (m.) a lambkin, a little (or a young) lamb. 
Agnus Dei, cire sacrée, a lamb made of holy wax. 
Agnus castus, sorte d'arbrisse­
au, a kind of withy or willow, com­
monly called Agnus castus, in En­
glish Park-leaves, Abrams balm, chast or hemp-tree.  

AGONIE (f.) abbois, agony, the state of a dying man. 
Agoniser, étre à l'agonie, to be at the point of death. 
Agonisant, one being at the point of death.  

AGRAFE (f.) a clasp, a hook.
Un habit qui a des agrafes, a suit of clothes with clasps. 
Agrafer un habit, to make a sute with clasps. 
Agrafer queque chose, la pren­
dre avec un croc, to grapple, or take hold of a thing.  

AGREER, étre agreable à quêcun, to please one, to be plea­
sing to him. 
Agreer, approuver, to like, to approve of. 
J'agree vôtre dessein, I like your design, I do approve of it. 
J'agree vôtre excuse, je la trou­
ve bonne, I like your excuse. 
Agreez que je vous dise mon sentiment, suffer me (give me leave) to tell you my mind. 
Agreable, agreeable, pleasant, or pleasing, acceptable. 
Cela m'est agreable, it pleases me, I delight in it. 
J'aurai cela pour agreable, I shall like it (I shall take it) well. 
Cela le rend plus agreable, that makes it more pleasing. 
Il n'est rien de plus agreable à Dieu que la Charité, nothing is more acceptable to God than Cha­
rity. 
Agreablement, pleasantly. 
Agrément (m.) approbation, liking, approbation. 
Agrement d'un habit, some orna­
ment belonging to clothes.  

AGRENER un cheval, com­
mencer â lui faire manger du grain, to feed a horse with corn, to take up a horse or colt from grass, and inseam him with corn or pro­
vender. 
Agrené, fed with corn, or grain. 
Agrenement de cheval, the taking up of a horse or colt from grass to feed him with corn.

† AGRELIR, rendre grêle, to make thin, lean, small, or slen­
der.
Agrêli, grown thin, lean, small, or slender. 

† AGRESTE, rude, clownish, ru­
stical.
Ton humeur agreste me dé­
plait fort, I hate your rusticall hu­
mour.  

AGRICULTURE (f.) l'art de cultiver les Chams, husban­
dry, agriculture. 
Entendre bien l'agriculture, to understand husbandry, to have skill in it. 
Se plaire (s'addonner) à l'agri­
culture, to delight in husbandry, to be taken with it. 
Les anciens faisoient gloire de s'addonner à l'agriculture, our Fore-fathers made pride of the art of husbandry. 
De grands hommes ont écrit de l'Agriculture, there have been great men who did write of Agri­
culture. 
Agriculture, labourage, til­
lage.
 
S'AGRIFFER à quêque chose, to take hold of somthing with nails or claws.  

AGRIMOINE (f.) sorte d'herbe, the herb called agrimony or liver-wort.  

AGRIPAUME (f.) herbe champêtre, the herb called Mo­
ther-wort.  

AGUERRIR quêcun, to make one warlick, or fit him for the wars, to train him up in marti­
al discipline. 
Aguerri, made warlike, fitted for the wars, trained up in martial discipline.  

AGUET; as, étre aux aguets, se tenir sur ses gardes, to go wa­
rily to work, to look to himself, to be wary, cautious, and circum­
spect. 
Etre aux aguets, ou en embus­
cade, to watch, dog, ly in wait (or ambush) for. 
Aguetter. V. Epier.

      
A H
AH! an Interjection of grief, alas! oh!  


 
Ah! qu'avez vous fait? alas! what have you done?  
Ah! que je suis mari de vous a­
voir quitté, oh! how sorry I am that I left you. 
Ah! mon fils, que faites vous? oh! my Son, what do you? 
Ah! Dieu, que vois je? Oh! God, what do I see? 

S'AHEURTER à quêque chose, to be at a stand, to find a scruple in somthing.
Aheurtement (m.) doubtfulness, suspiciousness.

      
A I
AIDE, secours, aid, help, as­
sistance, succour, relief, or sup­
port. 
Demander aide à quêcun, to call to one for help. 
Un Aide, a helper, an assi­
stant. 
Aide de Camp, an Adjutant. 
Aide, Aide loyaux, Ottroy gra­
tuit (lequel a de puis passe en Ottroy d'obligation) que les Vasseaux donnoient jadis à leur Seigneur feudal en ces trois cas; 1. pour la rançon de sa personne, s'il avoit eté fait pri­
sonnier; 2. pour faire passer Chevalier son fils aîné; 3. pour marier sa fille aînée. A Sub­
sidy raised by the Tenants for their Landlord (if noble) in any of these three cases; 1. for his ransom, if he had been taken prisoner in war, 2. to make his eldest Son a Knight; 3. to make a portion for his eldest Daughter. 
Droit d'Aide, the Right that a noble Landlord has in some parts of France to exact such Subsidies of his Tenants upon the accounts a­
foresaid. 
Aide de Relief, the Fine paid by every Tenant unto his new mesne Landlord, presently after the death of the old one, and towards the re­
lief which he is to pay to the Lord Paramount. 
Aides, impots, tributes, subsidy-loan, custom, or tax. 
Cour des Aides, a Soveraign Court, wherein all Causes that con­
cern Subsidy's or Taxes are heard and determined. 
Aider quêcun, to help, aid, as­
sist one. 
La Fortune aide celui qui veut s'aider, Fortune help's him who's willing to help himself. 
S'aider l'un l'autre, s'entr'ai­
der, to help one another. 
Chacun s'aide comme il peut, e­
very one shifts for himself as well as he can. 
Aidez moi en cela, help me there­
in, lend me an helping hand. 
S'aider, so servir de quêque chose, to use (to make use of) a thing. 
Il s'aide de la main gauche aussi bien que de la droite, he uses his left as well as his right hand. 
Il ne peut pas s'aider de ses membres, he is impotent, he can­
not help himself. 
Aidé, aided, helped, assi­
sted. 
Aidé de vôtre faveur, held up by your favour. 
Je l'ai fait sans étre aidé de per­
sonne, I did it without any body's help. 
Aidant; as, Dieu aidant, by Gods help, by Gods assistance.  

AIGLE (f.) an Eagle. 
Aigle noirátre, la plus petite de de toutes, mais la plus vigou­
reuse, a kind of Eagle, called Sa­
ker. 
Aigle à la queuë blanche, a kind of eagle supposed of some to be a Faulcon of the second kind having a whitish tail. 
Aigle Royal, de mediocre cor­
sage, & de plumage roussâtre, a Royal eagle. 
Aigle de Mer, Orfraie, qui é­
prouve ses aiglons aux raions du Soleil, an Osprey, a Water (or Sea) eagle. 
Couleur d'Aigle, eagle-colour. 
Pierre d'Aigle, an Eagle-stone (found in the eagles nest) which being applied to the thigh of a wo­
man in labour hasteneth her deli­
very. 
Port Aigle, Port-enseigne, chez les Romains, the Standard-bear­
er among the Romans, who had in their Ensign the picture of an Ea­
gle. 
Aiglette, petite aigle (f.) a small eagle. 
Aiglon (m.) le petit d'une aigle, an Eaglet, or young Ea­
gle.  

AIGRE, eager, sharp, tart, bi­
ting, sowr. 
Etre aigre, to be eager, or sowr. 
Aigre doux, half sweet half sowr, that is between sweet and sowr. 
Des paroles aigres, sharp words. 
Du metal aigre, brittle metal, metal that cannot be drawn or beaten in thin pieces (as some will) with a hammer. 
Un esprit aigre & fâcheux, a rough and churlish man. 
Aigrelet, Aigret, un peu aigre, somwhat tart, sharp, or ea­
ger. 
Aigrement, eagerly, sharply, tartly, bitingly, sowrly, severe­
ly. 
Aigremoine (f.) forte d'her­
be, the herb called Agrimony, or E­
grimony, and by some Liver-wort, because it is good for a diseased li­
ver. 
Aigrette (f.) espece de heron blanc, ainsi appellée à cause de son cri aigre, a fowl very like a heron, but white; a criel (or dwarf) heron. 
Aigrette, panache d'aigrette, heron tops. 
Aigrette d'eau, jet d'eau, formé en aigrette, water spouting out in the form of a herons crest. 
Aigreur (f.) sharpness, tartness, eagerness, sowrness. 
Aigreur de paroles, sharpness of words. 
Aigrir, rendre aigre, to make eager, sharp, sowr, or tart. 
Aigrir quêcun, le fâcher, l'irri­
ter, le faire mettre en colere, to provoke one to anger, to exasperate him. 
Aigrir la douleur, to renew a sore or grief. 
S'aigrir, devenir aigre, to become eager, sowr, sharp, or tart. 
S'aigrir, se fâcher, to grow an­
gry. 
Le mal s'aigrit, the pain grows worse. 
Aigri, devenu aigre, that is grown eager, sharp, tart, or sowr.
Un esprit aigri, one that is in­
censed, provoked, exasperated.  

AIGU, pointu, keen, sharp, small topped, or pointed. 
Un esprit aigu, a piercing wit. 
Un son aigu, a shrill sound, pier­
cing ones ears. 
Une veuë aigue, a keen (or quick) sight. 
Aiguille (f.) a needle. 
La pointe d'une aiguille, the point of a needle. 
Le trou d'une aiguille, a needles cy.   



Un faiseur d'aiguilles, a needle-maker. 
Enfiler une aiguille, to thread a needle. 
Travailler de l'aiguille, to work needle-work. 
Aiguille de tête de femme, a pin (or bodkin) wherewith women trim up their hair. 
Aiguille de cadran, the stile (or gnomon) of a Dial, the shadow whereof pointeth out the hours. 
Aiguille d'horloge, the hand of a clock. 
Aiguille, obelisque, a pyramide, a spire, an obelisk. 
Aiguille de Clocher, a Spire-steeple. 
Aiguille, poisson, a fish long small and smooth on the back, coloured between green and blue, called Pi­
per-fish. Also a lesser kind of fish, whose back is long and sharp called by some Horn-back, or Horn­
fish. 
Aiguillée, (f.) a needlefull of thread. 
Employer son aiguillée, to work out a needlefull of thread. 
Aiguillier (m.) coussinet à tenir des aiguilles, a needle-case, or a pin-cushion. 
Aiguilletes, (f.) points, for hose. 
Fer d'aiguillete, the tag of a point. 
Aiguilletté ferrée, a tagged point. 
Nouër l'aiguillette à quêcun, to ty ones codpiece, to charm it so that he shall not be able to use his own wife, though he may use any other. Which impotency is supposed to come by the force of certain words uttered by the Charmer, while he ty's a knot, on the parties cod-piece point. 
Avoir l'aiguillette nouée, to be so bewitched as to be unable to use his wife, to want erection. 
Aiguilleter, to truss the points, or to ty with points. 
Aiguletier (m.) faiseur d'ai­
guillettes, a maker of points. 
Aiguillon (m) a goad, sting, spur, or sprick, any thing that stirs, urges, or spurs one for­
ward. 
Armé d'aiguillons, full of pricks. 
Planter l'aiguillon, to sting, to thrust in his sting. 
La Gloire est un Puissant ai­
guillon pour se porter à la Ver­
tue, honour is a mighty thing to spur one to Virtue. 
Aiguillonner un beuf, to prick an Ox to make him go for­
ward, to goad him, or prick him with a goad. 
Aiguillonner quêcun, l'inciter, to urge one, or to spur him on. 
Aiguillonné, pricked, urged, or spurred. 
Aiguillonneur (m.) a pricker, stinger, or urger. 
Aiguillonnement (m.) a pricking, stinging, urging. 
Aiguiser, to whet, make sharp, or set an edge on. 
Aiguiser un coûteau, to whet a knife. 
Aiguiser l'appetit, to whet the stomack. 
Le bon vin aiguise l'esprit, good wine whets the wit. 
Aiguisé, whetted, or made sharp, whereon a good edge is set. 
Aiguiseur (m.) he that whets, or makes a thing sharp. 
Aiguisement (m.) the whet­
ting, making sharp, or setting a good edge on somthing. 
Aiguisement de coûteau, the whetting of a knife.  

AIGUADE (f.) a watering, or taking in of fresh water for a Sea-Voiage. 
Aiguiere (f.) an ewer.  

AIL, (m) garlick.
Tête d'ail, a head of garlick. 
Fait d'ail, made of garlick. 
Pain froté d'ail, bread rubbed with garlick. 
Sentir l'ail, to smell of gar­
lick.  

AILE (f.) a wing. 
Avoir des ailes aux piés, to have wings at his feet. 
Rongner les ailes à quêcun, to weaken one, or to pull him down, to bring him under, to keep him low or short. 
Il ne bat plus que d'une aile, il est ruiné, he is gone, he is undone, he has but one string left to his bow. 
Il ne bat plus que d'une aile, c'est fait de lui, c'est un homme mort, he is a dead man, a dying man. 
Il en tirera pié ou aile, he will carry away either leg or wing, either more or less, one part or a­
nother of it. 
On ne peut pas voler sans ailes, one cannot fly without wings, it is impossible to compass great matters without means. 
Donner les Ailes (ou les Ailées) à un Cheval, to give a horse the head, that he may run the faster. 
Aile, coté, flanc d'une Armée, the Wing of an Army. 
L'Aile droite & l'Aile gauche, the right and left Wing. 
Ailé, winged, that hath wings. 
Aileron, (m.) bout d'aile, the end of a wing. 
Ailerons, Ailerettes de poisson, the fins of fishes.  

AILLEURS, elsewhere, some­
where else, otherwhere, in another place or matter. 
Je suis ailleurs, I am in another place. 
J'irai ailleurs, I shall go to another place. 
Je viens d'ailleurs, I come from another place. 
D'ailleurs, en outre, moreover, besides. 
Par ailleurs, through another place.  

AIMER, to love, to like well.
Aimer quêcun tendrement, to love one tenderly.
Aimer quêcun ardemment, é­
perdument, passionnement, to be passionate for one, to love him passionately. 
Je vous aime de tout mon coe­
ur, parfaitement, autant qu'il se peut, I love you with all my heart, I love you intirely. 
Je vous aime si fort, que je ne pense qu'a vous rendre service, qu'a vous faire du bien, I love you so well, that I am always con­
triving how to gratify you. 
Se faire aimer de quêcun, to get ones love and affection. 
C'est trop aimer quand on en meurt, they love too much who die for love. Whereas the English has it, Love me little and love me long. 
Aimer en lieu haut, cd. aimer une personne de haute conditi­
on, to love (or be in love with) a person of great quality. 
Il aime à voir danser, he loves to see dancing. 
Jamais mâtin n'aima levrier, That is, a Churl never cared for a Gentleman. 
Qui bien aime bien châtie, he throughly punishes that loves throughly. 
Le Paresseux aime bien la be­
songne faite, the sluggard loves things done to his hand. 
Qui m'aime aime mon Chien, love



me, and love my Dog. 
Aimer mieux, to have (or to chuse) rather. 
Aimer mieux l'honnête que le delectable, to chuse rather that which is good than that which is delightful. 
Je l'aime de vous, ou je vous ferai raison, I'le pledge you.
Aimé, loved, beloved. 
Bien aimé, well beloved. 
Bien aimé de ses Voisins, well be­
loved of all his Neighbours. 
On n'oublie pas aisément ce que l'on a aimé parfaitement, sound love is not soon forgotten. 
Le dernier venu est le mieux aimé, he is best thought of that comes last, a new friend makes the old forgotten, the last Suitor wins his Mistris. 
Aimable, lovely, amiable, to be loved. 
C'est une femme fort aimable, she is a most lovely woman. 
Etre d'un naturel doux & ai­
mable, to be of a sweet and kind nature. 
Aimablement, in a lovely man­
ner. 
Aimant (m.) pierre qui at­
tire le fer, a load-stone, a stone that hath the property to draw i­
ron unto it. 
Frotter une aiguille d'aimant, to rub a needle with a load-stone. 
Aimanté, frotté d'aimant, rub­
bed with a load-stone.
Amant (m.) a suitor, wooer, sweet heart, or gallant. 
Les piques des Amans sont un renouvellement d'amour, the falling out of Lovers is the renew­
ing of love. 
Amante (f.) a woman that is courted in order to marriage. 
Amateur (m.) qui aime quê­
que chose, a lover of somthing. 
Amateur de la sagesse, a lover of wisdom. 
Amateur des nouveautez, a lo­
ver of novelties.
 
Ami (m.) a friend.
Etre ami de quêcun, to be ones friend. 
Un vrai ami, un ami de cœur, a true, or a hearty friend. 
Un ancien ami, an old friend. 
C'est mon ancien ami, he is my good old friend. 
Vous étes le cher ami de mon cœur, you are my dearest and most intimate friend. 
Se faire ami de quêcun, to get a mans friendship, to get his love, to make him a friend to ones self. 
Il faut avoir mangé plusieurs muids de sel avec son ami a­
vant que d'en étre entierement asseuré, one needs have eaten ma­
ny measures of salt with his friend before he can be sure of him. 
Il n'est pas si aisé de faire un ami qu'il est aisé de le perdre, a friend is not so soon gotten as lost. 
Un ami veille pour l'autre, one friend ever watches (or cares) for another. 
Le decedé n'a point d'ami, & le malade n'en a qu'un demi, the dead have no friends, and the sick but faint ones. 
La longue absence fait qu'on change d'ami, long absent soon forgotten. 
On ne peut avoir trop d'A­
mis, one cannot have too many Friends. Which is true enough, if friends be faithful and discreet. 
Parens sans amis, Amis sans pouvoir, pouvoir sans vouloir, vouloir sans effet, effet sans pro­
fit, profit sans vertu, ne vaut pas un zest, Kindred without friends, friends without power, power without will, will without effect, effect without profit, pro­
fit without vertue, is not worth a straw. 
Qui prête à l'Ami perd au dou­
ble, he that lends his friend mony makes a double loss, for he loses both friend and mony. 
Il ne faut pas tenir pour bon Voisin un Ami de table & de vin, never count that man a good friend who loves you for your cheer. For when you have need of him, or when your Table grows needy, he will be sure to give you the slip. 
On conoit l'Ami au besoin, c'est au tems de l'adversité que l'on conoit les Amis, a Friend is never known till one have need. 
Je n'ai point de plus grand Ami au Monde que celui là, I have no greater Friend in the World than he. 
Servir quêcun en Ami, to do one a friendly office. 
Vivre en Ami avec quêcun, to live friendly with one. 
Je suis ami des hommes do­
ctes, I am a friend to learned men. 
En Ami, Friend-like, or like a friend. 
Etre dépourveu d'Amis, to be destitute of friends. 
Amie (f.) a she friend. 
Elle est ma bonne amie, she is my very good friend. 
M'amie, my dear heart. 
Amiable, amiable, lovely, friend­
ly. 
Amiablement, ou à l'amiable, friendly, lovingly. 
Composer à l'amiable, to make a friendly composition with one. 
Que ne vous mettez vous en état de terminer cette affaire à l'amiable, plutôt que de la porter ainsi dans l'aigreur & dans les extremités? Why do not you rather go about to make a friendly agreement, than to carry on the business with so much eager­
ness to the last extremity? 
Amitié (f.) amity, friendship, love, kindness, good will, affecti­
on. 
Contracter (faire, nouër) ami­
tié avec quêcun, to make friendship with one. 
Acquerir (gagner, s'insinuer en) l'amitié de quêcun, se le ren­
dre ami, to get, to compass ones friendship. 
Tâcher de gagner l'amitié de quêcun, to indeavour to get ones friendship. 
S'insinuer dans son amitié, to scrue himself into his favour. 
Entretenir une amitié, to culti­
vate (to keep, or improve) a friend­
ship. 
Rompre amitié, to break off friendship. 
Renouër amitié, se remettre en l'amitié de quêcun, to be re­
conciled together, to be friends again. 
Les avantages qui naissent de l'amitié sont fi grands que je ne saurois les expliquer, so great are the benefits arising from friendship, that I cannot express them. 
Amitié, plaisir, service, faveur, a kindness, or favour. 
Faites moi cette amitié, do me that kindness. 
Le Duc fit mille amitiés à cet homme, the Duke shew'd him an infinite deal of kindness.
 
Amour (m.) love, kindness, af­
fection.
L'Amour est un mouvement de l'appetit, par lequel l'ame s'u­
nit à ce qui lui semble bon ou beau, Love is a motion of the ap­
petite,  



whereby the soul unites it self to that which it thinks good or fair. 
L'Amour de la Pattie, the love one has for his Country. 
L'Amour qu'on a pour les femmes, the love one hath for women. 
Mon amour, mon cœur, my dear love, my dear (my sweet) heart. 
Il ne veut pas nous declarer ses Amours, he won't discover his Mistresses to us. 
Vous étes l'objet de mon a­
mour & de ma passion, you are the Object of my love and of my passion. 
Avoir de l'amour pour quêcun, to love one, to have a tender love for him. 
L'amour que je vous porte est si grand qu'il ne sauroit l'étre d'avantage, qu'aucun affront n'est capable de me le faire perdre, the love I have for you is so great that it cannot be great­
er, that no affront can make me lose it. 
Un esprit bien fait n'a de l'a­
mour que pour les choses hon­
nêtes, a well-bred man has no love but for honest things. 
Etre transporté d'amour, to be transported with love. 
S'il a quêque peu d'amour pour vous, if he has any love for you. 
Donner de l'amour, to cause (to beget) love. 
Faire l'amour, to make love. 
Il est coeffé de l'amour de cette femme, he is smitten by her. 
Amour reciproque, mutual (or reciprocal) love. 
Amour deshonnête, a dishonest love. 
Des Livres d'Amour, Love­
books. 
Amour de Putain feu d'étoupe, a Whores love is but like a straw fire. 
Amour & Seigneurie ne se tin­
rent jamais compagnie, Love and Lordliness never held compa­
ny together. Non bene conve­
niunt, nec in unâ sede morantur Majestas & Amor. 
Amour fait beaucoup, mais l'Ar­
gent fait tout, Love do's much, but Mony do's all. 
L'Amour, la Toux, & la Galle ne peuvent pas se cacher, Love, Cough, and Scab cannot be hid­
den. 
Vieilles Amours & vieux Ti­
sons s'allument en toute saison, old Love and Brands are kindled at any time. 
Il n'est rien de tel que les pre­
mieres Amours, there is no love to the first, the first love is the safest. 
Amour, Jeu d'Amour, an Itali­
an game, called the Play of Love, where one holds up his fingers, and the other turning away gives a ghess how many he holds up. 
Pour l'Amour; as, 
Faites cela pour l'amour de moi, do that for my sake. 
Je le ferai pour l'amour de lui, I'le do it for his sake. 
L'Amour, le Dieu de l'Amour, Cupid, the God of Love. 
S'Amouracher, devenir fol­
lement amoureux de quêque personne, to fall foolishly in love with one. 
Amouraché d'une fille, fallen in love with a maid. 
Amourachement (m.) a falling in love with one. 
Amourettes (f.) folles a­
mours, love tricks. 
Tu croyois que c'étoit quêque amourette, you took it to be some love-trick. 
Amoureux, plein d'affection, amorous, fond, full of love. 
Il a un naturel amoureux, he is of an amorous nature. 
Etre amoureux d'une femme, to be in love with a woman, to be smitten. 
J'en serois amoureux si elle n'étoit trop amoureuse de moi, I could love her if she were not al­
together so fond of me as she is. 
Etre amoureux de quêque chose, to be in love with a thing, to like it mighty well, to be fond of it. 
J'en suis tout à fait amoureux, I am quite in love with it. 
Amoureusement, lovingly, kindly, affectionately.  



AINE, (f.) partie du corps qui joint la cuisse au ventre, the groine, that part above the privy member of man or woman.  

AINÉ, eldest, first-born. 
L'ainé des deux, the elder of the two. 
Il est mon frere ainé, he is my elder brother. 
Elle est sa fille ainée, she is his eldest daughter. 
Ainesse (f.) eldership, the being eldest, or first born. 
Le droit d'Ainesse, the birth­
right.  

AINSI, de cette sorte, so, thus, after this manner. 
C'est ainsi qu'il faut le faire, just so it must be done. 
Est ce ainsi que vous étu­
diez? do you study no bet­
ter? 
Ainsi vous ne devez rien crain­
dre, so you need not fear any thing. 
Ce qu'étant ainsi, which being so, or which being thus. 
Posons que cela soit ainsi, sup­
pose it be so. 
Est ce ainsi tout de bon? is it so indeed? 
Ainsi soit il, so be it. 
Il est ainsi fait, c'est là son hu­
meur, that's his temper, his na­
ture, his humour. 
On est ainsi fait, such is the ge­
nius of this age. 
Ansi que, comme, as, even as. 
Ainsi que je le conçois, as I ap­
prehend it. 
Il est ainsi que vous dites, it is so as you say. 
Je fais ainsi que font les plus sages, I do as the wisest men do.  

AJOINDRE, to adjoyn, to put (or add) unto. 
Ajoint, (m.) compagnon d'office, an assistant, associate, fel­
low, companion in a place or of­
fice. 
Ajoint, en fait d'Information, he that informs with another, a fel­
low informer. 
Ajoint, circonstance, adjunct, or circumstance. 
Ajonction, addition, (f.) ad­
junction, addition, or joyning un­
to. 
Ajonction, en fait de procez, a partaking with an Accuser or plaintiff. 
Demander l'ajonction du Pro­
cureur du Roi en sa Cause, to demand the Kings Sollicitors ad­
junction (or assistance) in his Cause.  

AJOURNER quêcun, to warn one to appear, to cite (or summon) him. 
Ajourné, warned to appear at a certain day, cited, summoned. 
Ajournement (m.) a warning given one to appear at a certain day, the Summons or Precess where­
by a Party is so warned.  

AJOUTER, to add.  



Ajoûter une chose à une autre, to add one thing to another. 
On ne peut rien a joûter à son affection, nothing can be added to his affection. 
Ajoûter crime sur crime, to add crime upon crime. 
Ajoûter à la verité, to add to the truth. 
Ajoûter foi aux paroles de quê­
cun, to believe what one says, to give credit to it. 
Ajoûté, added.  

AIR, (m.) the Air. 
Les Oiseaux de l'Air, the birds of the Air. 
Donner entrée à l'air, to let in the air. 
Tirer un mousquet en l'air, to let off a gun into the air. 
Vouz tirez en l'air, vous tra­
vaillez en vain, you labour in vain. 
Faire des propositions en l'air, to propound foolish (or idle) things. 
L'Air de quêque lieu, the air of a place. 
Un air pur & subtil, pure air. 
Un air épais & grossier, a thick and gross air. 
Un bon air, un air doux, agrea­
ble, benin, a good, sweet, and wholsome air. 
L'air y est si doux & si temperé que toute l'année n'est qu'un continuel Printems, there the air is so sweet and so temperate that the whole year is a continual Spring. 
Un mauvais air, bad air. 
Cet air ne m'est pas bon, this air is not good for me, it do's not agree with me. 
Air, fraicheur, a cool (or fresh) air. 
Allons prendre de l'air aux chams, let us go and take some fresh air in the fields. 
Coucher la nuit dehors en plein air, to ly all night abroad in the open air. 
Air, maniere d'agir, a way, or manner of doing a thing. 
Il a éte elevé à l'air de la Cour, he was brought up after the Court way, he was bred a Courtier. 
Cela sent l'air de la Cour, that is Court-like, that smells of the Court. 
Elle avoit de l'air du Monde, she had a handsome (she had a gen­
tile) carriage. 
L'air dont il parle môntre as­
sez qu'il est fâché, il parle d'un air qui fait bien voir qu'il est fâche, he shews by his way of speak­
ing that he is really angry. 
Dire quêque chose d'un air libre & enjoué, to say a thing freely and in a facetious way. 
Faire les choses d'un bel air, to do things gallantly, honoura­
bly. 
Danser d'un bel air, to dance briskly, bravely. 
Danser d'un air degagé, to have a free way of dancing, to dance handsomly. 
S'habiller d'un bel air, to wear rich clothes. 
Air de visage, the air of ones face, his look, or his aspect. 
Il a un air fort modeste, he has a modest look with him. 
Un enfant qui a bon air, a pret­
ty child, a lovely child. 
Un air galant, libre, aisé, de­
gagé, a gallant look. 
Air de manege, a way of curvet­
ting a horse, in horsemanship. 
Air de bas manege, as when the horse bears down his head. 
Air de haut manege, as when a horse flyes up and is half in the air. 
Air de musique, a tune, or an air in musick. 
Un Air, une chanson, a song. 
L'air d'une chanson, the tune of a song. 
L'air que vous venez de chan­
ter est grave & melancolique, the tune that you sung just now is a grave and melancholy tune. 
Au contraire, c'est un air tout à fait gaillard, nay, tis a very mer­
ry tune. 
J'ai fait l'air, & lui les pa­
roles, I made the tune, and he the song. 
Aërer une Chambre infecte, to let the air into a noisome room. 
Aëre, airy, that has air enough let into it. 
Aërien, that belongs to the air.  

AIRAIN, (m.) brass. 
Mine d'airain, a brass mine. 
Ouvrier en airain, he that work­
eth in brass. 
Ouvrage d'airain, any thing that is made of brass. 
Ouvroir en airain, the place where brass is washed or fined. 
Rouille d'airain, the green rust of brass. 
Pierre calamine dont on tire l'airain, brass-ore, a stone out of which brass is tried.  

AIRE (f.) place pour bâtir, a plat of ground intended to be built upon. 
Aire, pour battre le blé, a thresh­
ing floor. 
Celut qui bat le blé dans l'aire, a thresher. 
Aire, nid d'oiseau de proie (en termes de Fauconnerie) a nest of hawks. 
Aire, cercle de lumiere parois­
sant autour de quêque Astre, a round circle about a Star. 
Aire, lis, rum de vent, oppositi­
on diametrale des huit princi­
paux vents, the Winds in a com­
pass opposite to one another. 
Aller en aire de vent, voguer en droit fil de vent, to sail with a good wind. 
Airer, nicher, to make a nest, or airy.  

AIRELLE, (f.) sorte d'ar­
brisseau, the Shrub that produ­
ces berries called whurtle-berries, or win-berries.  

AIS, (m.) a board.
Paver d'ais, to floor with boards.
Aisseau (m.) petite planche dont on couvre les toits, a lath. 

AISCEAU (m.) petite hache, a chip-axe, or one-handed plane axe, wherewith Carpenters hew their timber smooth.  

AISE, (m.) plaisir, ease, com­
fort, pleasure. 
Les aises de la vie, the comforts of this life. 
Chercher ses aises, to seek after (to mind, or to follow) his plea­
sures. 
Prendre ses aises, to take his pleasures. 
Etre à son aise, to be at ease. 
Vous étes à votre aise, vos af­
faires vont bien, you are well to live, or to pass, you are in a thri­
ving way. 
Vivre à son aise, to live comfort­
ably, to be warm, or well-lined, to have wherewithall to live con­
tentedly. 
A la veuë de la mort, & dans l'aise de la victoire, je pensois à vous, I even thought of you when my mind was taken up, both with the sight of death, and the joy of a victory. 
Je suis ravi d'aise (ravi de joie) lors que je vous vois, I am over­
joy'd whenever I see you.   



Vous le ferez à vôtre aise, you will do it easily, or with ease. 
Aise, adj. glad, or well-plea­
sed. 
Je suis bien aise de vous voir, I am very glad to see you. 
Aisé, facile, easy, facile. 
Il n'est rien de plus aisé, there's nothing more easy. 
Il est aisé de le dire, it is an ea­
sie thing to say. 
Mal aisé, difficult. 
L'Amitié doit étre plus aisée, ou plus libre, friendship ought to be freer. 
Aisé, qui vit à son aise, one that is well to live, a rich man, a man that has a good estate. 
Aisément, easily, with ease, or with facility. 
Mal-aisément, hardly.
 
* Aisseau. V. Ais.  

AISSELLE (f.) the arm­
hole.  

AISSIEU (m.) an axel-tree.  

AJUSTER, égaler une chose à une autre, to adjust, to fit, or match fitly, to dispose orderly seve­
ral things together. 
Ajuster ses cheveux, to put his hair in order. 
S'Ajuster, s'accorder, to agree. 
Vôtre humeur s'ajuste parfai­
tement bien avec la sienne, your humour and his agree mighty well. 
Vos paroles ne s'ajustent pas bien avec vos actions, your ex­
pressions do not agree very well with your actions. 
Ajusté, adjusted, fitted, fitly matched, orderly disposed. 
Des cheveux bien ajustés, hairs that stand in good order. 
Bien ajusté, bien vêtu, that wears good clothes. 
Un discours bien ajusté, a fine (or a neat) discourse, a well-trim­
med discourse. 
Ajustement (m.) an adjusting, fitting, or matching fitly, an or­
derly disposing of several things to­
gether. 
Ajustement, proportion, orne­
ment, featness, gallantness. 
Les Dames se trouverent à cette Solennité dans un ajustement magnifique, the Ladies came to that Solemnity in a most sumptu­
ous attire. 

      
A L
ALAIGRE, &c. V. Alle­
gre.  

ALAITER un enfant, lui donner la mammelle, to give a child suck. 
Alaité, that has suck given to. 
Alaitement (m.) a giving of suck.  

ALAMBIC (m.) an Alembick, or Still. 
Alambiquer des herbes ou des fleurs, to distill herbs and flowers through an alembick. 
S'alambiquer l'esprit & la cer­
velle, to trouble his mind about something, to puzzle himself a­
bout it. 
Alambiqué, distillé par un alambic, distilled through a lem­
bick. 

† S'ALANGOURIR, to lan­
guish, faint, grow feeble or weary, to fail in strength, to decay in vi­
gour.  

ALARME, (f.) cri aux armes, an alarm, an alarum. 
Sonner l'alarme, to sound the a­
larm. 
Crier alarme, donner l'alarme, to give an alarme. 
Une fausse alarme, a false a­
larm. 
Alarme, peur, frayeur, fear, trembling, consternation. 
Prendre l'alarme, s'alarmer, to be alarmed, or affrighted, to be in a great consternation or fear. 
Sur un faux bruit la Ville a pris l'alarme, a false rumour a­
larmed (frighted) the whole Town. 
Alarmer quêcun, lui donner l'alarme, to give one an alarm, to alarm, or affright him. 
S'Alarmer, to be alarmed, to be frighted. 
Alarmé, alarmed, frighted.  

ALBATRE, (f.) espece de marbre blanc, alabaster stone, a certain kind of hard marble, of a very clear colour, found especially about Thebes in Egypt.

† ALBERGE, & Albergier. V. Pavie.  

ALBREN (m.) petit canard sauvage, a little wild duck. 
Albrener, chasser aux albrens to go a ducking, or to hunt the wild duck. 
Albrené (terme de chasse) froissé, that hath his feathers broken.  

ALCAKENGI, sorte d'her­
be. V. Alquence.  

ALCHIMIE (f.) Alchymie, or Alcumy. 
Alchimiste (m.) Alchymist, or Alcumist.  

ALCORAN (m.) livre de la Loi de Mahomet, Alcoran, the Turks Law.  

ALCOVE (m.) an Alcove, or withdrawing place in a Chamber for a stately bed.  

ALCYON (m.) sorte d'oi­
seau, halcion, a Sea-bird, that lay's her eggs on the Sea-sands. She is a little bigger than a Spar­
row, her feathers of purple colour mixt with white, her neck long and small, her bill green, long, and slender. It is taken by some for the Kings-fisher. 
Jours de bonace, pendant les­
quels l. Alcyon couve ses oeufs, the Halcion dayes, quiet and calm times. For it is said, that when she layeth, be the Sea never so stormy, it becomes presently calm, until the young be hatched and brought up, which is the space of forty dayes.
 
* Alegresse. V. Allegresse, un­
der Allegre.  

ALEMBIC, &c. V. Alam­
bic.  

ALENE, (f.) Instrument de Cordonnier, an awl, a Shoo-ma­
kers awl. 
Alene, sorte d'herbe, nard, pep­
per-wort.  

ALENTIR, &c. V. Ralen­
tir.  

ALEU; as, franc aleu, un fonds franc de toute charge, a free-hold, or a free tenure which holds of no man, and for which no service nor fine is due to any. 
Alodial, free from rents, fines, or services.  

ALEXANDRE, ou persil d'Alexandre, herbe de Jardin, the herb called Alexanders, or Ali­
saunders.  

ALEZAN, roux, of a sorrel colour. 
Un Cheval alezan, a sorrel Horse.  

ALGARADE (f.) insulte, an insult, an outragious mocking or scorning, a reproaching in words.



Il m'a sait plusieurs algarades, he has made me many an insult, he has made many an attempt up­
on me.  

ALGEBRE (f.) the art of e­
quation, or of figurative numbers, an art consisting both of Arithme­
tick and Geometry.  

ALGUE (f.) herbe croissant dans l'eau, Sea-weed, an herb growing on the Sea-shore, or in the Sea, having leaves like let­
tuce.  

ALIBI (en termes de droit) absence alleguée pour se justifi­
er, the being in another place than was objected. 
Alleguer & prouver son alibi, to alledge and evidence for his ju­
stification his being elsewhere when the fact was committed. 
Alibi forein, excuse frivole en fait de procez, crafty shift, cunning evasion or appeal, used for the avoiding of an accusation, or delaying of an action.  

ALIENER un champ, le ven­
dre, to sell (put, make) away a field, to alienate it. 
Aliené, alienated, sold (made) away. 
Aliené, mal affectionné, offend­
ed, or angry with one. 
Pourquoi vous étes vous aliené de moi? pourquoi me voulez vous mal? Why are you turned against me? why are you so averse from me? 
Il est aliené de toute feintise, he is a stranger to all dissimulati­
on whatsoever. 
Alienation (f.) an alienation, a selling, putting, or making a­
way.  

ALIGNER quêque chose, to draw or square out by line, to set in a just line, or make straight as a line. 
Aligné, made straight as a line, set in a just and direct file, drawn or squared out by line and level. 
Des arbres alignés en echiqui­
er, trees set by the line, and in an equal distance from one ano­
ther. 
Alignement (m.) a making strait as a line, a setting in a just line, a drawing or squaring out by line and level. 
Prendre les alignemens d'une Forteresse qu'on veut bâtir, to make a draught of a Fort that is to be built.  

ALIMENT (m.) food, suste­
nance, nourishment. 
Quel aliment prenez vous pour vous bien porter? what nou­
rishment take you to keep your self in health? 
Alimenter. V. Nourir.  

ALISIER (m) sorte d'ar­
brisseau, the lote-tree, of the fruit whereof if a man do eat he pre­
sently forgets his own Countrey.  

ALLAITER. V. Alaiter. 

† ALLECHER quêcun, l'inci­
ter (ou l'attirer) à faire quêque chose, to allure, or inveigle one, to get, intice, tempt, draw him on to do something.
Allechement (m.) an allure­
ment, inveiglement, inticement, bait, temptation.
 
* Allée. V. Aller.
 
* Allegation. V. Alleguer.  

ALLEGER une charge, la rendre plus legere, to lighten a burden, to make it lighter. 
Alleger la douleur de quêcun, to lessen a mans pain, to allay it, to alleviate it, or to ease him of it. 
Allegé, lightened, or made light­
er, allay'd, eased, alleviated. 
Je me sens allegé lors que je m'entretiens avec vous, I feel my self much better when I have your company. 
Allegement (m) a lightning, disburdening, easing, allaying, com­
fort. 
Si vous desirez que ma peine soit allegée, c'est là mon plus grand allegement, if you desire that I should be eased, that's my greatest comfort.  

ALLEGORIE (f.) an allego­
ry, a dark speech. 
Allegorique, allegorical.  

ALLEGRE, cheerful, merry, joyful, brisk. 
Allegresse (f.) alacrity, cheer­
fulness, mirth, joyfulness of heart. 
Allegrement, cheerfully, glad­
ly, merrily.  

ALLEGUER, to allege, to pro­
duce an evidence or authority for the proof of a thing. 
Alleguer un Auteur, to produce an Author. 
Alleguer des Témoins, to pro­
duce Witnesses. 
Alleguer son Droit, to produce his Right. 
Alleguer faux, to bring false proofs. 
Allegué, alledged, brought in, produced. 
Une chose alleguée, a thing al­
ledged. 
Allegation (f.) an allegation.  

ALLER, marcher, to go, to march, to walk. 
Aller, marcher devant quêcun, to go, to walk before one. 
Allez devant, je vous suivrai, go before, I shall follow you. 
Laissez l'aller, let him go. 
Aller voir quêcun, to go to see one, to go to make him a visit. 
Aller le pas, to pace it, or go a foot pace. 
Aller d'un bon pas, to go fast, to walk apace. 
Aller son chemin, to go his way. 
Aller son grand chemin, aller rondement, to deal honestly, to have no by-wayes to cozen others. 
Aller à rebours, to go the wrong way. 
Aller contre le fil de l'eau, to go against the stream. 
Aller & venir, to go hither and thither, to go and come. 
Je ne ferai qu'aller & venir, I will not stay, I shall be back again presently. 
Il ne fait qu'aller & venir, il court toûjours, he does nothing but run up and down. 
Aller à pié, to go a foot. 
Aller à cheval, to go on horse­
back. 
Aller à cheval sur un bâton, to ride upon a stick, as if it were a horse. 
Aller par Mer & par Terre, to go by Sea and Land. 
Aller par eau, to go by water. 
Aller à travers chams, to wan­
der, to go wandring out of the road. 
Aller à glissades, to go flipping and sliding along. 
Aller d'un pas ferme, to go stea­
dily and surely, with fast footing. 
Aller en arriere, to go back­
ward. 
Aller à tâtons, to go groping a­
long. 
Aller bellement, & sans faire bruit, to go softly, to go gingerly. 
Aller vîte, to go fast, to make hast. 
Où allez vous si vîte? whether go you so fast? 
S'en aller, to go away, to depart, to be gone. 
S'en aller demeurer en un au­
tre lieu, to go to live in another place.  



S'en aller dormir, to go to sleep, to go to bed. 
S'en aller par terre, tomber, to be ready to fall. 
Il va sortir, he is just a going out. 
Il alloit rendre l'ame, he was ready to give up the ghost. 
Il s'en va étre le plus infortuné des hommes, he is going to be a most miserable man. 
Aller au devant de quêcun, to go to meet one. 
Je suis allé au devant de mon Pere, I went to meet my Father by the way. 
Aller au devant des desseins de ses Enemis, en prevenir l'effet ou l'execution, to prevent the designs of his Enemies. 
Comment vont vos affaires? how do your business go on? 
Nos affaires vont mal, our busi­
ness are in a sad case. 
L'affaire va de la sorte, so it is. 
Comment va la santé? com­
ment vous va? how is it with you? how is your health? how do you do? 
Ainfi va le Monde, so go's the World. 
Ces Souliers vont bien à mon pié, these shoo's fit my foot very well. 
Laisser tout aller comme il plait à Dieu, to leave all things to Gods will. 
Se laisser aller (s'abandonner) à ses passions, to indulge, to gra­
tify his affections. 
J'irai jusques à cent francs, mais non pas plus loin, I shall give you a hundred livers, and no more. 
Il y va de vôtre vie, & de vô­
tre honneur, your life and honour is at stake. 
Va te faire pendre, go and be hanged. 
Aller en pointe, to grow less and less, to lessen towards the top, as a spire, or pyramid. 
Aller de pair avec quêcun, to equal himself to another, to think himself as good as he, to go cheek by jowl with him. 
Aller is also taken substantive­
ly; as,
Au pis aller, at worst, let the worst come to the worst, or if the worst fall out. 
Allé, gone. 
Il s'en est allé, he is gone. 
Allée (f.) allée & venue, go­
ing and coming. 
Apres tant d'allées & de venues, after so much travelling. 
Une Allée, an Alley. 
Allée de Jardin, a Walk of a Garden. 
Allure (f.) pace, treading, or going.  

ALLIER, joindre diverses choses, to joyn (or knit) many things together. 
Allier des metaux, to allay me­
tals, to mingle gold or silver with other metals. 
La Raison & le Discours alli­
ent les hommes, Reason and discourse unite men together. 
S'Allier avec quêcun par con­
tract, to make an alliance with one, to enter into a Treaty with him. 
Allié, uni, joint, joined, united, (knit) together. 
Des metaux bien alliés, metals well allay'd. 
Allié, confederé, allied, or con­
federate with. 
Nos Alliez, nos Confederez, our Allies, our Confederates. 
Allié, parent, kinsman, relati­
on, one that is related to ano­
ther. 
Il étoit mon allié, he was my kinsman. 
Alliage de metaux (m.) the stiffening, allaying, or imbasing of gold or silver by mingling them with other metals. 
Alliance (f.) alliance, con­
federation, league of friendship. 
Faire Alliance avec quêcun, to make a League with one. 
Rompre (violer) une Alliance, un Traite, to break off a Trea­
ty. 
Alliance, Parenté, affinity, alli­
ance by marriage, relation. 
Je serai ravi d'avoir l'honneur de vôtre alliance, I shall be ve­
ry glad to have the honour of your alliance. 
Alloy, ou Aloy (m.) the allay of gold or silver coin, the mixed matter or metal whereof it is made. 
Alloyer la monnoie, lui donner l'alloi requis, to coin gold or sil­
ver with a due allay.  

ALLIGNER, &c. V. Ali­
gner.  

ALLITÉ, reduit par une maladie à tenir le lit, bedred, that is so sick as to keep his bed. 
Monnoie de bon alloy, money of good allay.  

ALLONGER, &c. V. A­
longer.  

ALLUMER, to light, to kin­
dle, to set on fire. 
Allumer une chandelle, to light a candle. 
Allumer le feu, to kindle a fire. 
Allumer une Guerre, to stir up a War. 
S'Allumer, to kindle, or to be­
gin to burn. 
Sa colere s'allume, his anger is kindled, he begins to be inflamed with anger, he grows wroth. 
La Guerre commence de s'alu­
mer, the War begins to break out. 
Allumé, lighted, kindled, set on fire. 
La Guerre est allumée par tout ce Païs, the War has broke out all over this Country. 
Allumette (f.) a match for tin­
der-boxes. 
Allumiere d'une Armée à feu, (f.) the touch-hole of a gun.
 
* Allure. V. Aller.  

ALLUSION (f.) an allu­
sion. 
Il fait allusion à cette fable, he makes allusion to that fable.  

ALMANAC (m.) an Alma­
nack. 
Faire des Almanacs, to make Al­
manacks. 
Un faiseur d'Almanacs, an Al­
manack maker.
 
* Alodial. V. Aleu.  

ALOE (m.) herbe & dro­
gue, the herb aloes; also, the bitter juice thereof congealed and used in purgations.  

ALONGER, to lengthen, to draw out in length, to stretch out. 
Alonger le bras, to stretch out ones arm. 
S'Alonger, to lengthen, to draw out in length, to stretch out, neut. In Faulconry it is also said of a Hawk that puts on his great Fea­
thers. 
Alongé, lengthned, drawn out in length, stretched out. 
Oiseau bien alongé, a hawk that has all his feathers. 
Alongement (m.) a length­
ning, a drawing out in length, a stretching out.  

ALOPECIE (f.) maladie qui fait tomber le poil, a dis­
ease causing the hair of the head or beard to fall off, which is the fo­
xes evil.  



ALORS, then, at that time.
Alors il commença à tressaillir de joie, then he begun to leap for joy. 
Quand je te cherche, c'est alors que tu te caches, when I look for thee, then thou hidest thy self. 
Ce fut alors qu'il commença de crier, then he began to cry out.  

ALOSE (f.) sorte de pois­
son, a shad-fish.  

ALOUETTE (f.) sorte d'oiseau, a lark.
 
* Aloy, &c. V. Allier.  

ALOYAU de beuf (m.) a short rib of beef, or the fleshy end of the rib divided from the rest and roasted, a little piece of roast beef having a bone in it.  

ALPHABET (m.) an Al­
phabet. 
Apprendre l'Alphabet, to learn the Alphabet.  

ALQUEMIE. V. Alcumie.  

ALQUENCE (f.) herbe de Jardin, the herb night-shade, al­
cakengie, or winter-cherries.  

ALTE, faire alte, to stop, stay, or make a stand.  

ALTERER, changer l'état de quêque chose, to alter a thing. 
Alterer, corrompre, to adulte­
rate, falsify, or sophisticate. 
Alterer, causer la soif, to make dry, or thirsty. 
S'Alterer, to alter, neut. 
S'Alterer, se fâcher, to be an­
gry. 
Ne vous alterez pas, ne vous sàchez pas, be not angry. 
Alteré, altered. 
Alteré, corrompu, adulterated, falsyfi'd, sophisticated. 
Alteré, qui a soif, dry, or thir­
sty. 
Alteration, changement, alte­
ration, or change. 
Alteration, corruption, adultera­
tion, sophistication.  

ALTERNATIF, alternative, interchangeable, succeeding in course, done by turns, or immediate­
ly one after another. 
Alternative (f.) an interchange, a succession by turns. 
Alternativement, interchange­
ably, by turns, one after ano­
ther. 

† ALTERQUER, & Alter­
cation. V. Contester,& Conte­
ste.  

ALTESSE (f.) Titre qu'on donne à certains Princes, High­
ness, a Title given to some Prin­
ces. 
Son Altesse Royale le Duc d'Yore, his Royal Highness the Duke of York.  

ALTIER, fier, proud, lofty, stately, disdainfull, haughty. 

† ALUMELLE [f.] lame d'e­
pée ou de coûteau, the blade of a sword or knife.  

ALUMER, &c. V. Allu­
mer.  

ALUM (m.) sorte de mineral, alum. 
Alumineux, abbreuvé (imbu) d'alun, that has passed through a vein of alum. 
Alumineux, composé d'alun, made of alum.

      
A M
† AMADOUER, &c. V. Ca­
resser, ou Flater.  

AMAIGRIR quêcun, to make one lean, thin, meager, to mace­
rate him. 
S'Amaigrir, devenir maigre, to grow lean, thin, or meager, to fall away. 
Amaigri, grown lean, thin, or meager, macerated. 
Amaigrissement (m.) a grow­
ing lean, thin, or meager, a falling away.  

AMANDE (f.) sorte de fruit, an almond. 
Huile d'amandes, almond oyl. 
Amandier (m.) l'arbre qui porte les amandes, an almond tree.  

AMANDE, peine. V. Amen­
de.

* Amant, Amante. V. Ai­
mer.  

AMARANTHE (f.) sorte de fleur, the flower gentle, the purple velvet flower.  

AMARELLE (f.) sorte de cerise, a sort of cherry.  

AMARRE (f.) corde de Na­
vire pour attacher l'ancre, a great anchor cable, or ground-tackle. 
Amarrer un Vaisseau, to make a Ship fast with cables or great ropes. 
Amarrage (m.) appareil de cordes de navire, the great tack­
ling of a ship.  

AMAS (m.) a heap, or pile, a great quantity, a great num­
ber. 
Un amas de bois, a wood-stack. 
Un amas de terre, a hill of earth. 
Amas de gens, a multitude, a great number of people. 
Faire un amas de gens de guer­
re, to gather (to get) souldiers. 
Faire amas d'argent, to heap up moneys. 
Amasser, faire un monceau de quêque chose, to heap together, to gather in heaps, to set heap to heap. 
Amasser du bien, to get an E­
state. 
Amasser de l'argent de tous cô­
tés, to get mony from all hands. 
J'ai amassé tout cet argent de la vente de mes biens, all this mo­
ney I got for my Estate. 
Il ne pense qu'a amasser, il ne respire que le lucre, he is always contriving how to grow rich, his mind and desires ever run upon lucre. 
Amasser par force, ou par finesse, to scrape up. 
On ne sait pour qui l'on amasse, men know not who shall spend what they get, God only knows who shall injoy it. 
Amasser, cueillir des fruits, to gather fruits. 
Il saut amasser les Olives à la main, olives must be gathered with the hand. 
Amasser une chose qui est tom­
bée, to take up a thing that is fal­
len. 
S'amasser en quêque lieu, to ga­
ther together in some place. 
Les humeurs s'amassent en une partie du Corps, the humours ga­
ther together in some part or other of the body. 
Amassé, heaped up, gathered in heaps or together. 
Amassé par force, ou par finesse, scraped up. 
Amasseur (m.) a heaper, a gathe­
rer. 
Amassement (m.) a heaping, or gathering together.
 
* Amateur. V. Aimer.  

AMATHYSTE (f.) the precious stone called an Ame­
thyst. 

† AMBAGES, ou Détours en paroles. V. Détours.  

AMBASSADE (f.) an Em­
bassage, or an Embassy.  



Envoier quêcun en Ambassade vers un Prince, to send one in the quality of Embassador to a forreign Prince. 
Deputer une Ambassade Extra­
ordinaire àquêcun, to appoint one as his Embassador Extraordina­
ry. 
Aller en Ambassade, to go Em­
bassador. 
Faire une Ambassade, to perform an Embassy. 
Proposer le Sujet de son Amba­
ssade, to propose the Subject of his Embassy. 
Rendre conte de son Ambas­
sade, to give an account of his Em­
bassy. 
Ambassadeur (m.) an Embassa­
dor. 
Un Ambassadeur ordinaire, an Embassador ordinary. 
Un Ambassadeur Extraordinai­
re, an Embassador Extraordi­
nary. 
Ambassadrice (f.) an Am­
bassadrice, or an Embassadors wife.  

AMBIGU, ambiguous, doubt­
ful, uncertain. 
Un terme ambigu, an ambiguous word, a word which may be taken in divers senses. 
Ambigu (subst.) sorte de Re­
pas d'un seul Service, où l'on sert toute sorte de viandes tout à la fois, a kind of Treat where all the variety of meat is brought up in one course. 
Ambiguité [f] ambiguity, doubt­
fulness, uncertainty. 
Ambiguement, ou avec ambi­
guité, ambiguously, doubtfully, un­
certainly.  

AMBITION [f.] ambition, a greedy desire of honour. 
Avoir bien de l'ambition, to be very ambitious. 
Ambitieux, ambitious, greedy of honours. 
Il est ambitieux, he is an ambiti­
ous man. 
Il n'est point ambitieux, he is not ambitious at all. 
Ambitieusement, ambitiou­
sly. 
Ambitionner quêque chose, ambitiously to seek after a thing.  

AMBLE, pas d'haquenée, am­
ble, or pace. 
Aller l'amble, to amble, to pace. 
Un Cheval qui va l'amble, a pa­
cing horse. 
A l'amble, with an ambling pace. 
Mettre un poulain aux ambles, ou à l'amble, to teach a horse to pace. 
Mettre quêcun aux ambles, le ranger à son devoir, to bind one to his good behaviour, to keep him un­
der.  

AMBLEE. V. Emblée.  

AMBRE [m] espece de suc, qui a la vertu d'attirer la paille, amber. 
Ambre crud, raw amber, amber as it grows before it be prepared, and made transparent by the fat of a sucking pig. 
Ambre blanc, white amber. 
Ambre jaune, yellow amber. 
Ambre gris, amber grease, or gray amber used in perfumes. It is the best kind of amber. 
Ambre noir, black amber, the worst kind of amber. 
Ambrette [f.] petite fleur dont l'od eur ressemble à celle de l'ambre gris, a little flower that smels like amber grease. 
Ambrosie [f.] ambrosia, the food of the Gods.  

AMBULATOIRE, ambula­
tory, removing from place to place. 
Parlement ambulatoire, a Par­
liament that has no constant Place to set in, that go's from place to place.  

AME (f.) the Soul, or spi­
rit. 
L'Ame vegetative, sensitive, & raisonnable, the vegetative, sensi­
tive and rational soul. 
Une Ame separée de son corps, a soul that is separated from the body. 
Les Ames des Trêpassez, the Souls of the Dead. 
Les Ames des Bienheureux, the souls of the blessed. 
Les Ames des Damnés, the souls of the damned. 
Une bonne Ame, une bonne per­
sonne, a good honest soul, a good man or woman. 
Je ne le dirai à ame vivante, à ame du monde, I shall tell no li­
ving soul of it. 
Je n'y ai veu ame vivante, I saw no body there, I saw not a living soul there. 
Ame du monde n'en sortira, no body shall stir out. 
Mon Ame, mon Cœur, my dear soul, my dear heart. 
Rendre l'ame, expirer, to give up the Ghost, to expire. 
Ame, vie, life. 
Cette parole me rendit l'ame, me donna du courage, that word gave me some life again, it heartned me. 
L'action donne l'ame au dis­
cours, action gives life to a dis­
course. 
Un discours sans ame, a dis­
course that has no life in it. 
L'Ame, la bouche d'un canon, the mouth of a canon. 
Ame, mot d'une devise, a word of a motto. 
Animal (m.) an animal, a living creature, a creature that hath life and spirit. 
Les Animaux, the brutes, those animals which are not capable of reason. 
Parmi les Animaux, les uns su­
cent la viande, des autres la brottent, d'autres l'avalent sans la mâcher, & des autres la mâ­
chent, of Brutes some there are which suck their food, some brouze upon it, others swallow it un­
chawd, others chaw it. 
Il y a des Animaux apprivoisés & domestiques, il y en a de sauvages, & il y en a de farou­
ches & de malfaisans. There are some tame and home-bred ani­
mals, some that are wild, and o­
thers that are fierce and dange­
rous. 
Il y a des Animaux qui sont couverts d'une forte peau, des autres revêtus de laine & de long poils, des autres herisses d'épines, Some beasts are cove­
red with hides, others with wooll and long hairs, and others are full of bristles. 
La Nature aiant courbé le corps de tous les Animaux vers la Terre, où ils devoient trou­
ver leur nourriture, a fait ce­
lui de l'homme seul droit & e­
levé, Nature having bent the body of all Beasts towards the ground, where they were to feed, made only that of man streight and upright.
Tous les Animaux ont une in­
clination naturelle de se con­
server, d'evitet tout ce qui peut les incommoder, & de cher­
cher tout ce qui est necessaire à la vie, all living Creatures have  



a natural disposition to preserve themselves, to shun whatever may be noisom to them, and to seek after their necessaries. 
Un Animal, un sot, une bête, a meer animal, a block-head. 
Animer, donner l'ame & la vie, to quicken or give life unto, to inspire breath, to infuse a spirit into. 
Animer quêcun, l'encourager, to incourage, hearten, animate one. 
Animer la Populace contre la Noblesse, to incense the People against the Nobility. 
Animé, quickned, inspired with life or breath. 
Animé, encouragé, animated, heartned, incouraged. 
Animé, irrite contre quêcun, in­
censed against one. 
Animation (f.) giving soul or life. 
Animosité (f.) inimitié, ai­
grear, animosity, hatred, ill-will, spite, grudge, or malice. 
Vous avez quêque animosité contre lui, you have a spite a­
gainst him. 
Par animosité, out of an ill-will, out of spite, out of malice. 

† AMELIORER quêque chose, to better a thing, to im­
prove it, to mend it.  

AMENDE (f.) penalty, fine, mulct, amercement, forfeit, or forfeiture. 
Condamner quêcun à l'amen­
de, le mettre à l'amende, lui im­
poser une amende, to fine, or amerce one, to put a mulct upon him. 
Encourir une amende, to incur a penalty. 
Payer l'amende, to pay the pe­
nalty, to pay the forfeit. 
Amende pecuniaire, a pecuni­
ary mulct. 
Une Amende honorable, a Pub­
lick shame, a most ignominious Pu­
nishment inflicted upon an ex­
tream Offendor. So that he must go through the Streets bare foot and bare-headed (with a burning link in his hand) unto the Seat of Justice, or some publick Place, where he is to confess his offence, and ask forgiveness of the Party he hath wronged. 
Amender, dedommager, to satisfy, recompense, or make a­
mends for. 
Amender une terre, la fumer, to dung a piece of ground. 
S'Amender, changer de vie, se convertir, to lead a new life, to mend, to be reformed or reclaim­
ed. 
Amendé, satisfy'd, recompen­
sed, or made amends for. Also dunged, and mended. 
Amendement (m.) mending, amendment, amends, recom­
pence.  

AMENER, to bring to. 
Amener par voiture, to bring by carriage. 
Amener les voiles, to strike sail, or to take in the sails. 
Amené, brought to. 
Amenage, Amenement (m) a bringing of a thing to one by car­
riage.  

AMENUISER quêque chose, la rendre mince & de­
liée, to lessen a thing, or to make it little. 
Amenuisé, lessened, or made little. 
Amenuisement (m.) a lessen­
ing, or making little.  

AMER, bitter. 
Rendre amer, to make bitter. 
Devenir amer, to become bit­
ter. 
Amertume (f.) bitterness. 
Amertume de cœur, anguish of mind. 
Amerement, bitterly. 
Pierre pleura amerement, Pe­
ter wept bitterly.  

AMETHYSTE. V. Ama­
thyste.  

AMEUBLEMENT (m.) moveables, house-hold stuff.  

AMEUTER des Chiens, to semble dogs in hunting, to hold them up close together. 
Ameuter des enfans pour les faire battre, to intice children to fight. 
S'ameuter, to run and hunt ve­
ry close together. 
Ameutement (m.) a keeping of dogs together in hunting.
 
* Ami, Amie, Amiable, Ami­
ablement. V. Aimer.  

AMICT de Prêtre (m.) A­
mict, or Amice, part of a massing Priests habit.  

AMIDON, starch made of wheat.  

† AMIGNOTER. V. Mignar­
der.  

AMIRAL (m.) an Admiral, he that hath the chief Command of a Fleet. 
L'Amiral, le premier Vaisseau d'une Flote, the Admiral, or first ship of a Fleet. 
Un Vice-Amiral, a Vice-Admi­
ral, he that commands a Fleet next to the high Admiral. 
Le Vice-Amiral, the Vice-Ad­
mirals Ship. 
Le Contre-Amiral, the Ship next in order to the Vice-Admiral. 
Amirauté (f.) Admiralty, the Office of an Admiral.

* Amitié. V. Aimer.  

AMMONIAC, sel fossile, Ammoniack salt, found in Africk under sand, when the Moon grow­
eth toward the full. It is like stone-allum, and is medicinable in dissolving and purging of flegm.  

AMNISTIE (f.) an Amnisty, or general Pardon.  

AMODIER, bailler à ferme, to farm, or to let out. 
Amodier, ptendre à ferme, to take to farm. 
Amodié, let out, also taken to farm. 
Amodiateur (m.) he that lets out, or he that takes to farm.  

AMOINDRIR, to lessen, di­
minish, abate, allay, extenu­
ate. 
Amoindrir la douleur, to allay the pain, 
Amoindrir l'Autorité de quê­
cun, to lessen, to curtail a mans Authority. 
S'Amoindrir, to grow less, to di­
minish. 
Votre Autotité s'amoindrit, your Power grows less and less. 
Amoindri, lessened, diminished, abated, allayd, extenuated. 
Amoindrissement (m.) a les­
sening, diminishing, abating, al­
laying, or extenuating.  

AMOLLIR, to soften, molli­
fy, to make soft, or tender. 
La Volupté amollit les coura­
ges, Voluptuousness makes men effeminate. 
Amollir par sa Patience & par sa douceur la dureté, l'opiniâtre­
té, l'obstination de quêcun, by patience and meekness to conquer a mans hard, stiff, and stubborn hu­
mour. 
S'Amollir, devenir moû, to grow soft, or tender. 
Amolli, softned, mollify'd, made soft, or tender. 
Amollissement, (m.) a soft­
ning, mollifying, a making soft, or tender.  



AMOME (m.) arbrisseau odoriferant, a small and thick a­
romatical Shrub growing in Ar­
menia, round together like a white violet, and the leaves whereof are most like the leaves of a white Vine.  

AMONCELER, mettre en un monceau, to heap, to make up into (or lay on) a heap. 
Amoncelé, mis en un mon­
ceau, heaped up, made up into (or laid on) a heap. 
Amoncelement (m.) a heap­
ing, or gathering together into a heap.  

AMONT, terme de gens de Riviere, up the River. 
Vent d'Amont, an East-wind.  

AMORCE (f.) a bait. 
Les Voluptés sont les amorces des Vices, Pleasures are the baits of Vices. 
Amorce de feu, tinder, or touch­
wood. 
Amorce de fusil, the prime or powder for the touch-hole of a gun. 
Amorcer un fusil, to prime a gun, to put powder into the touch­
hole. 
Amorcer quêcun, to draw one in, to allure, or intice him. 
Amorcé, drawn in, allured, or inticed. 
Mon pistolet est il amorcé? is my pistol primed? 
Amorceur (m) he that baits, primes, or intices. 
Amorcement (m.) a baiting, alluring, or inticement.  

AMORTIR, éteindre le feu, to quench, or to put out the fire. 
Amortir ses passions, to bridle (or restrain) his passions. 
S'Amortir, to wax cold, to begin to be cool, or to cease, to be less vehe­
ment and earnest. 
Les fougues de la Jeunesse s'a­
mortissent avec l'âge, the heats of youth decrease as age increa­
ses. 
Amortir un fief, to extinguish, redeem, or buy out a fief, to free it from escheat. 
Amortir une rente annuelle, en payant le principal, to buy out a rent-charge. 
Amorti, quenched, put out, ex­
tinguished. 
Avoir les piés tout amortis, to have his feet benummed. 
Fief amorti, a fief that is extin­
guished, redeemed, or bought out, that is freed from escheat. 
Amortisseur (m.) celui qui a­
mortit, he that quenches, puts out, or extinguishes. 
Amortisseur de fief, he that ex­
tinguishes or buys out a fief. 
Amortissement de feu (m.) quenching, or extinguishment. 
Amortissement de fief, an exemption from escheat. 
Lettre d'Amortissement, a Li­
cence of alienation (or of purchase) in mort-main. 
Amortissement, extremité ter­
minant une piece de menuserie, massonnerie, ou d'autre ouvra­
ge, & lui donnant de l'ornement, pinacles, battlements, and images set on buttresses to garnish buil­
dings. 
Amortissement de muraille, the coping or head of a wall made to cast off the rain.
 
* Amour, & ses derivés. V. Ai­
mer.  

AMPHIBIE, amphibious, living both in water and on the land. 
Des Animaux amphibies, am­
phibious creatures. 
Parmi ces Animaux l'on conte le Castor ou le bievre, le Loutre, & la Tortue, amongst those Crea­
tures we reckon the Beaver, the Otter, and Tortise.  

AMPHITHEATRE (m.) an Amphitheatre, a Place with seats and scaffolds to behold Plays on, which was two Theaters put together; a double Theater.  

AMPLE, large, vast, am­
ple. 
Un discours ample, a long dis­
course. 
Un ample sujet, a copious sub­
ject. 
Amplement, amply, largely, ful­
ly, abundantly. 
Expliquer amplement une que­
stion, to debate a question ful­
ly. 
Satissaire amplement à une de­
mande, fully to satisfy a de­
mand. 
Amplier (terme de Palais) differer, to prolong, delay, or put off. 
Amplier le terme d'un paye­
ment, to put off the day of pay­
ment. 
Amplier un Prisonnier, to give a Prisoner more room. 
Amplier un Criminel, differer son Jugement, to delay a malefa­
ctors Sentence. 
Amplié, prolonged, put off, de­
layd. 
Ampliation (f.) a deferring a Sentence or verdict, when* the matter is doubtfull and not agreed upon. 
Amplifier, aggrandir, to am­
plify, inlarge, augment, or in­
crease. 
Amplifier, exaggerer quêque chose, to exaggerate a thing, to ag­
gravate it, to make it more than it is. 
Amplifié, amplify'd, inlarged, augmented, or increased. 
Amplificateur (m.) an ampli­
fier, inlarger, augmenter, or in­
creaser. 
Amplification (f.) amplifica­
tion, inlargement, augmentation, increase. 
Amplitude (f.) largeness, great­
ness, vastness.  

AMPOULE (f.) a vial, or glass vessel, with a narrow mouth and a long neck. 
S'enfler comme une ampoule, to swell and puff up like a bot­
tle. 
Ampoule, tumeur sur la chair, a small blister, wheal, or rising of the skin. 
Ampoulé, swelled up. 
Un style ampoulé, a tumid, high, or swelling style. 
Des vers ampoulés, verses that run in an high strain.  

AMUSER, entretenir, arrê­
ter, occuper, to stay, or detain one, to delay him. 
Amuser quêcun, lui faire per­
dre son tems, to make one lose his time, to keep him from going for­
ward in his work. 
Amuser quêcun de paroles, to feed one with hopes, or good words. 
Amuser sa douleur, to make him­
self insensible of his pain. 
S'Amuser à quêque chose, to busy himself about somthing. 
S'amuser à de petites choses, to stand on tristles, to be taken up with things that are not worth a mans while. 
Il s'amuse aux accessoires, & il neglige le principal, he sticks to the accessory's, and neglects the principal. 
Amuseur (m.) an amuser of peo­
ple, one that gives another vain hopes of somthing, that is apt to disappoint folks.  



Amusement (m.) empêche­
ment, let, hinderance, delay. 
Amusement pour tromper, dis­
appointment. 
Amusement, vaine occupation, trifles. 
Des amusemens d'enfans, chil­
drens toys.
 
* Amy. V. Ami under Ai­
mer.  

AMYDON. V. Amidon.

      
A N
AN (m.) a year, a twelve month. 
Il y a un an que je l'atten, I stayd for him this twelve month. 
Il y a dix ans que je ne l'ai veu, it is ten years since I saw him. 
Je viens d'apprendre qu'il ne reviendra que dans un an d'ici, I was just now told that it will be a twelve month before he comes back. 
Un homme qui a plus de cent ans, a man above a hundred years old. 
Son age est de sept à huit ans, he is betwixt seven and eight years old. 
Six ans se sont écoulés depuis ce tems là, it is six years since. 
Tous les ans, yearly, every year. 
De deux en deux ans, every o­
ther year. 
De trois en trois ans, de qua­
tre en quatre ans, &c. every third year, every fourth year, &c. 
Année (f.) the same as An, a year, a twelve month. 
L'année d'apres qu'il mourut, the year after he died. 
Il y a quéques années qu'il est mort, it is some years since he died. 
Un homme qui a beaucoup d'années, chargé (accablé) d'an­
nées, a man full of years, an aged man. 
Annales (f.) Annals, annual Chronicles, yearly relations. 
Ecrire les Annales, to write the Annals. 
Annaliste (m.) an Annalist, a writer of yearly Chronicles, a Rela­
ter of annuall occurrences. 
Annate, revenu de l'Année qu'un Benefice Ecclesiastique a vaqué, the first fruits of the Bene­
fice, the profit of a whole year after the remove or death of the Incum­
bent. 
Anniversaire, anniversary, an­
nual, yearly. 
Anniversaire d'un defunt, a yearly Obit, Trental, or service said at a certain time for the dead. 
Faire l'anniversaire d'un defunt, to celebrate the yearly obit. 
Annuel, yearly, annual.  

ANAGRAMME (m.) an Anagram, a Sentence, poesy, or pretty conceit framed of the letters of a name.  

ANALOGIE (f.) analogy, proportion, conformity, like rea­
son. 
Analogue, analogicall, confor­
mable unto some other thing, an­
swering in proportion unto it, cor­
respondent. 
Analogiquement, par analo­
gie, by way of analogy.  

ANAPESTE, pied de vers, an anapoestus, a foot or measure in verse, having two first syllables short and the last long. 
Anapestique, made of such syl­
lables.  

ANARCHIE (f.) an Anar­
chy, a Common-wealth without a Head or Governour, a confused State wherein one is as good as another. 
Personne n'aime l'Anarchie que ceux qui font impunément leurs affaires au prejudice du Public, no body loves Anarchy but such as do their business safely and to the prejudice of the Pub­
lick.  

ANATHEME (m.) execrati­
on, an accursed thing. 
Anatheme, don, an offering (or gift) given to the Church or to an Idol, and hanged up in the Tem­
ple. 
Anathematiser quêcun, le devouër au Demon, to anathe­
matize one, to devote him unto the Devil. 
Anathematiser quêcun, lui sou­
haiter du mal, to wish evil to one. 
Anathematisé, anathema­
tized, or devoted unto the De­
vil.  

ANATOMIE (f.) an Anato­
my, or cutting up of body's to see the parts. 
L'Art de l'Anatomie, the Art of Anatomizing. 
Anatomique, appartenant à l'Anatomie, Anatomical, of (or be­
longing to) Anatomy. 
Anatomiser, faire une Ana­
tomie, to anatomize, to cut up and look into the parts of the bo­
dy. 
Anatomisé, Anatomized. 
Anatomiste (m.) an Anato­
mist, one that has skill in Anato­
my.  

ANCEPESSADE, ou Lance­
pessade (m.) a Lancepesado, the meanest Officer in a Foot-Com­
pany.  

ANCETRES (m) Ancestors, Predecessors, Fore-fathers. 
C'étoit la coûtume de nos An­
cêtres, it was the custom of our Forefathers.  

ANCHE (f.) la piece du hautbois qui se met dans la bouche, the little pipe tongue or tenon which is the mouth of a ho­
boy.  

ANCHOIE (f.) sorte de petit poisson, an anchove.  

ANCHRE, &c. V. Ancre.  

ANCIEN, vieux, ancient, old. 
Les Anciens, the Ancients, the Peo­
ple of old. 
A la façon des Anciens, after the manner of the Ancients. 
Une Loi ancienne, an old Law. 
C'étoit la coûtume ancienne de cette Academie, it was an an­
cient custom of this Acade­
my. 
Nòtre ancienne amitié, our old friendship. 
Ancienneté (f.) ancientness, oldness. 
De toute ancienneté, from all an­
tiquity, time out of mind. 
Anciennement, anciently, of old, in old time, in time past.  

ANCOLINE (f.) herbe de Jardin, a kind of the herb Ce­
landine, or else very like unto it, both in growing leaves and force.  

ANCRE, pour ecrire. V. En­
cre.  

ANCRE, de Navire (f.) an anchor. 
Jetter l'ancre, mouiller l'ancre, to cast anchor. 
Etre à l'ancre, to be at an­
chor. 
Lever l'ancre, to weigh the an­
chor.



Ancrer, jetter l'ancre, to an­
chor, to cast anchor. 
Ancrer, affermir quêque chose, to make a thing sure. 
Ancré, made sure. 
Ancrage, (m.) lieu commode pour jetter l'ancre, a fit place to cast anchor in.  

ANDAIN (m) a stride, or as much ground or space as a man can comprehend by striding. 
Andains de foin fauché, rows of new mow'd hay, lying on the ground about a pace asunder.  

ANDOUILLE (f.) a link, or chitterling; a big hogs guts stuffed with small guts and other intrals cut into small pieces, and seasoned with pepper and salt. 
Andouiller (m.) le premier cor du bois d'un Cerf, the brow-an­
kler, or first branch of a Deers head.  

ANDROGYNE, qui est mà­
le & femelle tout ensemble, made of both sexes, both man & woman.  

ANE (m.) an ass. 
Un Ane sauvage, a wild Ass. 
Braire comme un Ane, to bray like an Ass. 
Il faut braire avec les Anes, one must do what others do, how absurd, or sottish soever it be. 
L'Ane qui brait le plus est celui qui mange le moins, the Ass that brays most eats least. 
Des oreilles d'Ane, Asses ears, long ears. 
Oreille d'âne, sorte d'herbe, the herb comfrey, knit-work, black­
wort. 
Il faut qu'un serviteur ait une Oreille d'Ane, a servant should have an Asses ear, that is, should bear all his angry master says with­
out replying. And indeed such is the nature and custom of an Ass, that whatsoever noise is made about him, he only claps down his ears, and so follows on the way. 
Demander de la laine à un Ane, to ask for a thing where it is not to be had. 
Un bateau fait à dos d'âne, a sharp-bottomed boat. 
Un Coq à l'Ane, a Libel, Pas­
quine, or Satyr. 
Sauter du Coc à l'Ane, to digress from the matter, to leap suddenly and disorderly from one matter to another. 
A laver la tête d'un Ane on perd son tems & son savon, That is, in vain one strives to make learned a sottish, or make honest a graceless person. 
Pour un point Martin perdit son Ane, a small omission or error may turn a man to much preju­
dice. 
Monter sur l'Ane, to break, or become bankrupt. A Phrase deri­
ved from an ancient Custom, whereby such as broke were com­
pelled to ride backward on an Ass through the Town they dwelt in, holding his tail in their hand in stead of a bridle. 
Chevaucher comme des Anes debâtés. This is a Proverb said of those that are hot and frisk in copulation, as Asses be when dis­
charged of their burden, and set at liberty. 
Un Ane, un lourdaut, une bête, an ass, a sot, a dull, or ignorant fel­
low. 
Un Pont aux Anes, an easy and full Direction unto dull or unlear­
ned people for the resolution of dif­
ficultyes, which otherwise they cannot apprehend. 
Anesse (f.) a she-ass. 
Du lait d'ânesse, asses milk. 
Anon (m.) a young ass. 
Anerie (f.) bêtise, sottishness, dulness, doltishness, blockishness. 
Anerie, lourde ignorance, igno­
rance, impertinence. 
Il y a mille âneries dans ton li­
vre, thy book swarms with imper­
tinencies. 
Anier (m) one that drives asses.  

ANEANTIR, to annihilate, or bring to nothing. 
S'Aneantir, to come to nothing, to be annihilated. 
Aneanti, annihilated, or brought to nothing. 
Aneantissement (m.) annihi­
lating, or annihilation, a bringing to nothing.  

ANEAU. V. Anneau.  

ANEMONE (f.) sorte de fleur, the wind flower.

* Anerie. V. Ane.  

ANET (m) herbe odorife­
rante, the herb dill, or anise.  

ANGE (m.) an Angel. 
Les Anges sont des Esprits de­
gagés de toute matiere, Angels are Spirits not consisting of mat­
ter. 
Un Ange Gardien; an Angel Guardian, a Tutelary Angel. 
Angelique, Angelical, Angel-like, belonging to an Angel. 
Angelique (f.) sorte d'herbe, the herb Angelica. 
Angelot, (m.) sorte de froma­
ge, a sort of cheese called Angelot.  

ANGLE (m.) an angle, the space within the crossing of two lines in a superficies, or three at the least in a body. 
Angle droit, a right angle, where the magnitudes that make the an­
gle fall exactly one upon ano­
ther. 
Angle aigu, a sharp angle, less than a right. 
Angle obtus, a blunt (or obtuse) angle, bigger than a right. 
Angulaire, angular, or having angles.  

ANGOISSE (f.) anguish, grief, sorrow, perplexity, vexation of mind or body. 
Causer de l'angoisse à quêcun, to vex, grieve, afflict one, to per­
plex, or fill him with anguish. 
Etre dans l'angoisse, tourmen­
ter son esprit, se mettre en pei­
ne, to be vexed, grieved, perplex­
ed, filled with anguish. 
Avec angoisse, heavily, sorrow­
fully. 
Poire d'angoisse, choak-pear.  

ANGUILLE, (f.) sorte de poisson, an eel. 
En pressant trop l'anguille on la perd, the faster you hold a slippe­
ry thing the sooner it overslips you, or, we often lose things by too much looking to them.
 
* Angulaire. V. Angle.  

ANILLE (f.) potence de boi­
teux, a crutch for an impotent per­
son.
 
* Animal, Animer, Animosité. V. Ame.  

ANIS (m.) herbe & graine, the herb anis, and aniseed.
 
* Annales, Annaliste, Annate. V. An.  

ANNEAU (m.) a ring. 
Anneau à cachet, a seal-ring. 
Un faiseur d'anneaux, a maker of rings. 
Mettre un anneau au doit, to put on a ring, to put it on his finger. 
Tirer un anneau du doit, to pull off a ring, to take it off his fin­
ger.
 
* Année, & Anniversaire. V. An.  

ANNEXE, an annexation, or a thing annexed.

ANNONCER, to denounce,  



declare, signifie, or carry tidings unto.
Annoncer quêque chose à quê­
cun, to declare a thing to one, to bring him the news of it. 
Annoncer, predire, to foretell. 
Annoncé, denounced, declared, signified. 
Annoncé, predit, foretold. 
Annoncement, (m.) declara­
tion. 
Annonciation de la Vierge (f.) the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin.

* Annuel. V. An.  

ANNULLER, casser, to an­
nul, disannul, annihilate, abrogate, cancel, make void, or of none ef­
fect. 
Annuller ce qu'un autre a fait, to rescind (or disannul) what an­
other man has done. 
Annullé, annulled, disannulled, annihilated, abrogated, cancelled, made void or of none effect.  

ANOBLIR quêcun, lui donner titre & droit de No­
blesse, to nobilitate, or make one a Noble, to give one a title and right of Nobleman or Gentle­
man. 
Anoblir, rendre illustre, don­
ner de l'éclat, to set a thing forth, to make it rich or famous. 
Anobli, nobilitated, that has got the title and right of Nobleman or Gentleman. 
Anobli, rendu illustre, inrich­
ed, set forth, or made famous. 
Anoblissement d'un homme roturier (m.) the act of making one a Noble or Gentleman. 
Anoblissement de quêque cho­
se, a beautifying, or decoring.  

ANODIN, which takes away the pain, or the sense of it. 
Medicamens anodins, Medicines which to procuring sleep take from a Patient all sense of pain.  

ANSE (f.) an ear (or handle) of a cup or pot, whereby we take hold thereof. 
Il marche, pliant les bras en for­
me d'anse, he walks with his arms on kembow.  

ANTARCTIQUE, Antar­
tick. 
Il y a deux Poles, l'Arctique & l'Antarctique, there are two Poles, the Arctick and the Antarctick.  

ANTENNE (f.) vergue de Navire, a Sail-yard.  

ANTERIEVR, anterior, that go's (or is set) before. 
Anteriorité (f.) a going be­
fore. 
Anterieurement, before.  

ANTICHAMBRE (f.) an Antichamber, any outward Cham­
ber which is near or next unto the Bed-Chamber.  

ANTICIPER, prevenir quê­
que chose, to take before, to pre­
vent, to anticipate, to forestall, to fore-possesse. 
Anticiper sur l'autorité de quêcun, to usurp a mans power and authority. 
Anticipé, taken before, prevented, anticipated, fore-stalled, fore-pos­
sessed. 
Anticipation (f.) anticipation, prevention, fore-stalment.  

ANTIDATE (m.) an antidate, or rather antedate, an older date than indeed it is. 
Antidater une écriture, to an­
tedate a writing. 
Antidaté, antedated.  

ANTIDOTE (m.) contrepoi­
son, an antidot, or counter-poyson, a preservation against poyson or evil air.  

ANTIENNE (f.) an Anthem, a publick supplication where one singeth one verse and another ano­
ther.  

ANTIMOINE (m.) pierre minerale, antimony, a white stone found in silver mines, good for the eyes.  

ANTIPATHIE, (f.) antipa­
thy, a contrariety of naturall hu­
mours, a naturall and extream disagreement of dispositions, cros­
sing or contrary inclinations of several persons without manifest cause known to themselves for it. 
Avoir de l'antipathie avec quê­
cun, to have an antipathy against one.  

ANTIPERISTASE (f.) anti­
peristasis, a mutuall or general co­
hibition, compression, or repulsion of humours, whereby they become the stronger, and the more strong­
ly possess the parties they are in.  

ANTIPODES (m.) the Anti­
podes. 
Les Antipodes sont ceux qui ont leurs piés contre les nôtres, those are called Antipodes who go directly against us, or with the soles of their feet against ours.  

ANTIQUE, ancien, antick, ancient. 
Travaillé à l'antique, cut with anticks, or with antick-works. 
Une Antique, une vieille me­
daille, an old medal. 
Une Antique demi-effacée, an old medal half worn out. 
Antiquité (f.) Antiquity. 
L'Antiquité, les Anciens, Anti­
quity, or the Ancients. 
De toute antiquité, from all an­
tiquity, time out of mind. 
Antiquaire (m.) an Antiquary, one that professes or delights in the search or Knowledge of Antiqui­
ty's.  

ANTITHESE (f.) Figure de Rhetorique, qui se fait par une certaine batterie de paroles con­
trariantes, & comme enemies l'une de l'autre, Antithesis, a Rhetoricall exornation, when contraries are opposed to contra­
ries.  

ANTONOMASE (f.) Fi­
gure de Rhetorique, quand on met un nom pour un autre, a Pronominacion, the using of an epithet or property instead of the proper name whereunto it be­
longs.  

ANTRE (m.) caverne, a den, cave, or cavern. 

†ANXIETÉ (f.) peine, anxie­
ty, trouble, perplexity, great care.

  
A O
AOUT (m.) un des douze mois de l'Année, August, one of the twelve months of the year.

  
A P
APARTEMENT de maison (m.) an Apartement, or part of a great House. 
Apartement, habitation parti­
culiere de quêcun, ones apart­
ment, or that part of the house where he lodges. 
Il a choisi son apartement dans ce quartier de Logis, he has cho­
sen this part of the house to dwell in.

†APATHIE (f.) the vice of wanting affection.
Apathique, sans affection, qui n'aime personne, one without af­
fection,  



that loves (or cares for) no body.  

APERITIF, of an opening pow­
er or quality. 
Remede aperitif, qui ôte les ob­
structions, an opening remedy.  

APHORISME (m.) an Apho­
rism, or general rule in Phy­
sick.  

APHRODILLE, herbe, aspho­
dill.  

APOCALYPSE (f.) Revela­
tion de S. Jean, the Apocalypse, or Saint Johns Revelation.  

APOCRYPHE, livre apo­
cryphe, an Apocryphal book, a part of Scripture which is not Ca­
nonicall. 
Les Livres Apocryphes, the A­
pocrypha.  

APOINTER, &c. V. Appoin­
ter.  

APOLOGIE (f.) an apology, defence, or excuse. 
Faire l'apologie de quêcun, to make ones apology.

†APOLOGUE. V. Fable.  

APOPHTHEGME (m.) sen­
tence, an apothegm, a short and pithy sentence.  

APOPLEXIE (f.) an apoplexy, a disease which causeth one to fall, and taketh away from him moving and feeling, and hindreth him from breathing. 
Apoplectique, one that hath an apoplexy.  

APOSEME. V. Apozeme.  

APOSTASIE (f.) reniement de la Foy, an apostasy, a revolting or falling away from a Religion for­
merly professed. 
Apostasier de la Foy, to aposta­
tise, or to fall away from a Religion formerly professed. 
Apostat (m.) an Apostate.  

APOSTILLE (f.) any small addition unto a discourse in wri­
ting.  

APOTRE (m.) an Apostle, whose calling was to plant and preach the Gospel in the whole World without limitation. 
Apostolat (m.) Apostleship, the Office of an Apostle. 
Apostolique, Apostolicall, be­
longing to an Apostle.  

APOSTROPHE (f.) mar­
que d'une voyelle rejettée, an a­
postrophe, a dash that stands in stead of a vowel put out. 
Apostrophe, figure de Rhetori­
que, a Figure of Rhetorick, as when a man converts his speech from the Judge or person to whom he speaks to some that are absent. 
Apostropher quêcun, to con­
vert his speech to one.  

APOSTUME (f.) an impo­
stume, an inward swelling full of corrupt matter. 
Apostumer, meurir, to impo­
stumate, to rise in (or to grow to) an impostume, to suppurate in­
wardly. 
Apostumer, suppurer, rendre le pus, to break out into mat­
ter. 
Qui fait apostumor, that caus­
eth matter. 
Apostumé, impostumed, or impostumated, suppurated inward­
ly.  

APOTHEOSE (f.) a dedicati­
on, consecration, canonization of men to become Gods. 
Faire l'apotheose de quêcun, to make one a God.  

APOTICAIRE (m.) an Apo­
thecary. 
Apoticairerie (f.) Apotheca­
ry-ship, the trade or skill of an A­
pothecary.  

APOZEME, decoction, a de­
coction of water with divers sorts of herbs and spices, used in stead of syrop.  

APPAISER, to appease, pacify, calm, or quiet. 
Appaiser un homme qui est en colere, to pacify an angry man. 
Appaiser Dieu, to be reconciled with God. 
Appaiser une Sedition, to sup­
press a Sedition. 
Appaiser un different, to com­
pose a difference. 
Appaiser une douleur, to take a­
way the pain. 
Appaiser les flots de la Mer, to calm, to quiet the Sea. 
S'Appaiser, to grow quiet, or calm. 
Appaisé, appeased, pacify'd, cal­
med, quieted. 
Homme facile à étre appaisé, a man easie to be appeased, soon ap­
peased. 
Sa colere s'est appaisée, his an­
ger is abated, is over. 
Le vent s'est appaisée, the wind is down. 
La Tempête s'est appaisé, the storm is over. 
Appaisement (m.) an appeasing, or appeasment, pacification, calm­
ing, or quieting.  

APPANAGE (m.) Appe nage, the portion of a younger Brother in France; The Lands, Dukedoms, Counties assigned by the King to his younger Sons or Brethren, for their Intertainment. Also any portion of land or money delivered unto a Son, Daughter, or Kinsman, in lieu of his future right of Suc­
cession for the whole, which he re­
nounces upon the receit thereof. 
Appanagé, he that hath an E­
state as it were to use only, 
J'ai eté appanagé de cette Ter­
re, j'ai eu cette Terre pour ap­
panage, I had that portion of Land allotted me for use.  

APPANTIS (m.) an addition to a house.  

APPAREIL, Apparat (m.) pomp, glory, magnificency. 
Appareil, preparatif, a prepara­
tion for something. 
Faire l'appareil d'un Banquet, to prepare all things for a Feast. 
Avec appareil, gallantly, costly, with great preparation. 
Appareil d'une blessure, that which is used towards the curing of a wound, a Surgeons apparel for cure. 
Mettre le premier appareil sur une blessure, to begin the cure of a wound. 
Appareiller quêque chose, la preparer, to prepare a thing, to get it ready. 
Appareiller (en terme de ma­
rine) se preparer à faire voile, to make ready for a Voyage. 
S'Appareiller, se preparer, to make himself ready. 
Appareillé, preparé, prepa­
red, got ready. 
Appareilleur (m.) Inten­
dant d'une besongne, an Over­
seer of some work.
 
* Apparence, Apparent, Ap­
paremment. V. Apparoir.
 
S'APPARENTER, to get new kindred, to make new Rela­
tions.
Etre bien apparenté, avoir be­
aucoup, ou de bons Parens, to to be well ally'd, to have many or good kindred.  

APPARIER, joindre, to match, to joyn one thing with an­
other. 
Apparier une chose morte à une vivante, to couple (or to joyn) a dead with a living thing.
S'Apparier, to couple, or match, as birds do in the spring, or a lit­
tle  









before they would breed. 
Apparié, matched, coupled, joyn­
ed together. 
Appariement (m.) a match­
ing, coupling, or joyning toge­
ther.
 
Before this page, there are two duplicated pages, flv and f2r.

  

APPAROIR, APPAROI­
TRE, to appear, be seen, or shew it self on a sudden. 
Un Ange lui apparût en songe, an Angel appeared to him in a dream. 
Il apparoit bien du crime, mais non pas de la penitence, the crime is clear, but not the repen­
tance. 
Il Apparoit, Il Appert, deux Verbes Impersonnels. V. Il Pa­
roit (which is better) under the Verb Paroitre. 
Apparent, vraisemblable, like­
ly, probable. 
Apparent, manifeste, apparent, evident, manifest, plain. 
Apparent, illustre, notable, or of great note, eminent. 
Les plus apparens de la Ville, the most eminent (the chiefest) men of the Town. 
Apparence (f.) exterieur, shew. 
Une chose de belle apparence, a thing goodly to see, beautifull, fair in appearance. 
Ce Livre a une belle appa­
rence, this book makes a fine shew. 
Cette action est honnête en apparence, that action seems to be honest. 
Apparence, marque, ou indice, a sign, appearance, or colour. 
Il n'y a aucune apparence de venin, there is no sign of poyson. 
Une grande méchanceté ca­
chée sous une belle apparence, a great wicked tess cloathed with a fair pretence. 
S il y a quêque apparence de vertu, if there be any appearance of vertue. 
Fausse apparence de vertu, a false shew of virtue. 
Ceux qui ont l'apparence d'é­
tre sages, those that seem to be wise men. 
Il a l'apparence d'étre homme de bien, he looks like a good ho­
nest man. 
Apparence, probabilité, likely­
hood. 
Il n'y a point d'apparence qu'il meure si tot, there is no likely­
hood of his dying so soon, it is not likely that he will die so soon. 
Quelle apparence qu'on vous pardonne cette faute? what hopes is there that such a fault should be forgiven you? 
Apparemment, probablement, apparently, probably. 
Il le fera apparemment, it is likely that he will do it. 
Apparemment, en apparence, seemingly. 
Apparition (f.) an apparition, or vision. 
Apparu (the Participle of the Preter tense) appeared, seen.  

APPARTEMENT de logis. V. Apartement.  

APPARTENIR, to belong, pertain, or appertain. 
Ce Livre lui appartient, this Book belongs to him, this is his Book. 
Cela vous appartient, that be­
longs to you, that's yours. 
Il ne vous appartient pas de re­
pondre, it is not for you to an­
swer. 
Il n'appartient qu'aux Maîtres d'enseigner, it is only for Ma­
sters to teach. 
Il vous appartient bien de faire le Docteur, what a fine man you are for a Doctor. 
Je lui ai répondu comme il appartenoit, I gave him a fitting answer, I fitted him. 
Appartenance (f.) un bien pro­
pre, a property, a thing belonging to one. 
Appartenance, accessoire, an appendant. 
Ces Terres sont des apparte­
nances de ce Fonds, those pieces of ground belong to this, or are joy­
ned to it.
 
* Apparu, V. Apparoir.  

APPATS (m.) allurements, inticements, baits, temptations. 
Appas se dit des beautés qui attirent, & Charmes de celles qui agissent par une vertu oc­
culte & magique; the french word Appas is said of attractive Beauty's, & Charmes of such as act by a secret & (as it were) magi­
call virtue. 
Les Appas de la Volupté, the baits of Uoluptuousness. 
La Gloire a de grands Appas pour nous porter à la Vertu, the love of Glory is a great step to Virtue. 
Appâter un Oiseau, to catch a bird with a bait. 
Appâter, attirer, gagner quêcun par caresses, promesses, ou pre­
sens, to coxe one, to draw one in, to allure one. 
Se laisser appâter aux vices & aux voluptés, to give himself over to the temptations of Vices and vo­
luptuousness. 
Appâté, baited, or caught with a bait.  

APPAUVRIR quêcun, to im­
poverish, make poor, or undo one. 
Appauvri, impoverished, made poor, or undone. 
Appauvrissement (m.) an im­
poverishment, or undoing of one.  

APPELER, ou Appeller, to call. 
Appeler quêque chose de son nom, to call a thing by its name. 
Appeler quêcun pour le faire venir, to call for one, to give him a call. 
Appeler quêcun à haute voix, to call one with a loud voice. 
Appeler quêcun pour aide, to call upon one for help. 
Il vient sans qu'on l'appelle, he comes uncalled for. 
Une erreur en appelle une au­
tre, one errour produces ano­
ther. 
Apeler, épeler les lettres, to spell, or set letters together. 
Appeler les Causes au Parquet, to read (or call over) the Causes which are to be heard. 
Appeller quêcun en Justice, le faire citer en Jugement, to com­
mence an action against one. 
Appeller d'une Sentence, to ap­
peal from a Judges sentence to a higher Judge. 
Appeler (prendre) à témoin, to call to witness. 
S'Appeler, to be called. 
Comment s'appelle-t-il? how is he called? what's his name? 
Il s'appelle Jaques, his name is James, or James is his name. 
Appelé, called. 
Theophraste fut appelé de ce nom, parce qu'il parloit avec une elegance toute divine, The­
ophrastus was so called, because he spoke with a divine eloquency. 
Appellant (m.) celui qui ap­
pelle en fait de Justice, he that appealeth, an appealer. 
Se porter pour Appellant, to be an appealer from one Court to ano­
ther. 
Appel (m.) an Appeal, from an Inferiour Court or Judge unto a Superiour.  



Il n'y a point d'Appel contre la Mort, Death admits no Appeal, or, none can appeal from Death. 
Appel pour se battre, a challenge to fight. 
Faire un appel à quêcun, to give one a challenge, to defy him. 
Appellation (f.) a naming, or calling a name.  

APPENDRE, to hang by. 
Appendu, hanged by. 
Appendice. (m.) appendix, ad­
dition.  

APPENNAGE. V. Appa­
nage.  

APPENTIS. V. Appantis.  

APPERCEVOIR, to per­
ceive, discern, mark, or observe. 
Appercevoir quêque chose, s'en appercevoir, to perceive a thing, to observe it, to take notice of it. 
Apperceu, perceived, discern­
ed, marked, or observed. 
Je m'en suis apperceu, I obser­
ved it, I took notice of it. 
Appercevable, perceivable, or to be perceived. 
Cette chose est si deliée qu'elle n'est pas appercevable, qu'on ne sauroit l'appercevoir, this is so small a thing that it cannot be per­
ceived.
 
* Il Appert. V. Il Paroit, un­
der the Verb Paroitre.  

APPESANTIR, rendre pe­
sant, to make heavy. 
Cette odeur appesantit la tête, this smell makes heavy the head, makes the head ake. 
S'Appesantir, devenir pesant, to become heavy, dull, or slow. 
Appesanti, made heavy.  

APPETER, desirer, to co­
vet, long for, or lust after a thing. 
Appetit, desir, inclination, passion, desire, inclination, passi­
on. 
L'Appetit Irascible, the Irasci­
ble Appetite, that Faculty of the Soul which prompts us to anger up­
on any occasion. 
L'Appetit Concupiscible, that faculty which frames our sensual desires, the concupiscible appetite. 
Appetit, faim, envie de man­
ger, stomack, or desire of eating. 
Il n'est sauce que d'appetit, a good stomack is the best sauce. 
Avoir appetit, to hunger, to be hungry. 
J'avois bon appetit quand je me suis mis à table, I had a good stomack when I sate down at ta­
ble. 
Faire venir l'appetit, remettre en appetit, to get a stomack, to provoke the appetite. 
Se mettre en appetit, to whet his appetite. 
Manger avec appetit, to eat with a good stomack. 
En mangeant l'appetit vient, one shoulder of mutton draws down a­
nother. 
En mangeant l'appetit se perd, eating quells the appetite, or a­
bates the stomack. 
Perdre l'appetit, to life his sto­
mack. 
Faire perdre (ou ôter) l'appe­
tit à quêcun, to make one lose his appetite, to take away his sto­
mack. 
Appetit, fantaisie, humour, fancy, way. 
Vivre à son appetit, to live af­
ter his own fancy. 
Appetit, ou échalote, a shalot. 
Appetissant, Appetitif, qui donne de l'appetit, that pro­
vokes the appetite. 
Cette viande est appetissante, this meat provokes the appetite. 
La puissance appetitive de l'ame, the appetitive faculty of the Soul.  

APPETISSER quêque chose, la rendre petite, to lessen, or diminish a thing, to make it lesser. 
Elles voudroient qu'on leur grossist les yeux, & qu'on leur appetissast la bouche, they would have their eys made bigger and their mouths lesser. 
Appetissé, rendu petit, mince, delié, lessened, diminished, made lesser. 
Appetissement (m.) a lessen­
ing, diminishing, or making less.  

APPLANIR, to smooth, to make smooth, or even, to level. 
Applanir un chemin, to make an even road. 
Applanir une colline, to level a hill. 
Applanir une difficulté, to resolve a hard point. 
Applani, smoothed, made smooth, or even, levelled. 
Applanisseur, a smoother, or leveller. 
Applanisseur, ou Applanieur, se­
cond tondeur de drap, the Cloth­
worker, who with his thistly cards smooths and strokes down the cloth. 
Applanissement (m.) a smoo­
thing, or making smooth or even. a levelling.  

APPLATIR, to flat, or make flat, to squash down. 
S'Applatir to fall, sink, or shrink in, to become flat. 
Applati, flatted, or made, flat, squashed down.  

APPLAUDIR quêcun, to applaud, commend, or praise high­
ly. 
Applaudi, applauded, com­
mended, or highly praised. On a applaudi cette raison, cet­
te raison fut applaudie, that rea­
son was approved of. 
Applaudissement (m.) an ap­
plause, commendation, approbati­
on, or praise. 
Chercher des applaudissemens, to seek for praise. 
Cela s'est fait avec l'applaudis­
sement de tout le Peuple, that was done with great applause.  

APPLIQUER une chose à une autre, to apply one thing to another. 
Appliquer son esprit (s'appli­
quer) à la Rhetorique, to ap­
ply (bend or give) his mind to Rhetorick. 
Appliquer toutes ses pensées à considerer quêque chose, to be wholly taken up with the conside­
ration of somthing. 
Je suis tellement en colere que je ne saurois seulement appli­
quer mon esprit pour voir ce que je dois faire, I am so tran­
sported with anger that I cannot confine my self to consider what I had best to do. 
Appliquer une partie de ses re­
venus à bâtir, to bestow a part of his revenues upon building. 
Ce mot peut s'appli uer à plu­
sieurs choses, this word may be apply'd to many things. 
Appliquons cette fable à nò­
tre discours, let us apply this fa­
ble to our discourse. 
Appliqué apply'd. 
Il s'est appliqué à cela, he has apply'd himself to that. 
Application (f) approche, application, apposition, applying, or laying unto. 
Application d'esprit, attention, attention, care, carefulness, dili­
gence. 
On y travaille avec une appli­
cation extraordinaire, the thing is a doing with all the care ima­
ginable.  



Applique, une piece d'appli­
que, a piece which makes up the work.  

APPOINTER, convenir, to agree with one about somthing. 
Appointer, opposer deux cho­
ses l'une contre l'autre, to op­
pose two things one against ano­
ther. 
Appointer, ordonner, to appoint, order, or decree. 
Appointer une requête, to an­
swer a Petition. 
Appointer les Parties en droit, a ouir droit, to refer a Cause o­
ver unto further deliberation. 
Appointer en droit à écrire, to appoint the Party's concerned to give their Plea in writing. 
Appointer les Parties contrai­
res, to state the cause. 
Appointer les Parties au Con­
seil, to order the Parties to appear before the Council. 
Appointer un different, to de­
termine, decide, end, or finish a controversy, to make a compositi­
on between Parties in controver­
sy. 
Appointer quêcun, lui fournir son entretien, to keep one, or to maintain him. 
Appointer quêcun, lui assigner une Pension, to give (or allow) one a yearly pension. 
Appointer un Soldat, to pay a Souldier his pay. 
Appointement (m.) gages, stipend, wages. 
Appointement, entretien, maintenance. 
Appointement, convention, ac­
cord, an agreement. 
Appointement en droit, the re­
ferring of a Cause unto a further deliberation or hearing, by reason that the contrary allegations, or cross pleading of the Party's require further proofs from them, or a further deliberation of the Court.  

APPOINTIR quêque chose, y faire une pointe, ou la ren­
dre pointue, to sharpen a thing at the point. 
Appointissant; as, Une chose qui va en appointis­
sant, a thing that grows narrow, sharp, or small towards the end of the point.  

APPORTER quêque chose en quêque lieu, to carry, or bring a thing to a Place. 
Apportez moi cela, bring me that. 
J'Apporterai tous les soins pos­
sibles à cette affaire, I shall use my best indeavours in that affair. 
Sa mort vous apportera beau­
coup de maux, his death will bring you many disadvantages. 
Apporter, alleguer, to bring, or to alledge. 
Quels exemples, quelles rai­
sons, quelles autorités m'appor­
tes vous? what examples, what reasons, what authorities do you bring for it? 
Il a apporté plusieurs Fables qui n'étoient nullement à pro­
pos, he has alledged many Fa­
bles that were nothing to the pur­
pose. 
Apporté, carried, or brought unto. 
Apporté, allegué, brought, or alledged. 
Apport de marchandises (m.) the bringing in of commodities, or the carriage of them. 
Apport, revenu, rente, revenue, yearly profit, or rent. 
Apport, interet, usure, the use, gain, or profit which a thing brings in to its owner.  

APPOSER un seau à quelque chose, to seal a thing. 
Apposition (f.) apposition.  

APPOSTER de faux té­
moins, to suborn, to get false wit­
nesses. 
Apposté, suborned. Ils sont instruits & appostés à cela, they are appointed and pro­
cured under hand for that pur­
pose.  

APPRECIER, taxer une chose, to value, to set a price or a rate upon a thing. 
Appreciateur (m.) a rater, pri­
ser, or valuer. 
Appreciation (f.) a rating, pri­
sing, or valuation.  

APPREHENDER, craindre quêque chose, to fear, or to dread a thing, to perceive an evil coming upon us. 
Apprehender pour soi, to fear for himself. 
Apprehender quêque mal de son enemi, to fear his enemy lest he should do him a mis­
chief. 
Apprehender la douleur, to be frighted with the conceit of the pain. 
Apprehender d'interesser son honneur, to be loth to ingage his honour. 
J'apprehende de l'avertir, I am loth to advertise him. 
Apprehensif, craintif, fearful, timorous. 
Apprehension (f.) crainte, ap­
prehension, or fear. 
Cet accident me donne de grandes apprehensions, that misfortune puts me into great fear. 
J'ai grande apprehension de sa colere, I stand in great fear of his anger. 
Etre dans une apprehension à mourir, to be ready to die for fear. 
Avec apprehension, fearfully, ti­
morously.  

APPRENDRE quêque chose, to learn something. 
Apprendre facilement, to learn easily, or with ease. 
J'ai appris cela par experience, that I learnt by experience. 
Apprendre sa leçon par cœur, to learn his lesson by heart, or with­
out book. 
Apprendre de quêcun à jouër du Lut, to learn of one to play upon the Lute. 
J'ai appris la Geographie en fort peu de tems, I learnt Geo­
graphy in a very short time. 
Apprendre des nouvelles, to hear news. 
J'ai appris de fâcheuses nou­
velles, I heard (I am told) sad news. 
Je l'ai appris de plusieurs, I had it from several hands. 
Je l'ai appris de bonne part, I have it from good hands. 
Je l'ai appris par ouïr dire, I know it by hear-say. 
Apprenez qu'il ne fait pas bon se jouër avec lui, take notice that it is not safe meddling with him. 
J'apprens que vous vous absen­
tez sort souvent, I am informed (I hear) that you absent your self very often. 
Vos Lettres m'apprendront toutes choses, your Letters shall inform me of every thing, I shall know all by your Letters. 
Apprendre, enseigner, to learn, or to teach. 
Apprendre à quêcun à jouër du Lut, to learn (or to teach) one to play upon the Lute. 
Il faut lui apprendre à parler Latin, he must be taught to speak Latin.  



Apprendre aux Poissons à na­
ger, to learn fishes to swim. To which answers the English Pro­
verb, to teach his Grandam to grope Ducks. 
Appris, appris par cœur, got without book. 
Une chose apprise, qu'on a ap­
prise, qu'on a ouï dire, a thing heard of, which one has been told of. 
Appris, instruit, taught, instru­
cted. 
Un Jeune homme bien appris, bien elevé, a well-bred young man, a young man well trained up. 
Un Jeune homme mal appris, an ill-bred young man, a young man who has had no good breeding be­
stowed upon him. 
Apprentif (m.) a Prentice, or an Apprentice, a learner of some Trade or other. 
Je suis Apprentif en ce métier, I am an Apprentice in that Trade. 
Je ne suis plus Apprentif, j'ai fait mon apprentissage, I have served my apprenticeship. 
Apprentissage (m.) Prentice­
ship, or Apprenticeship.
Mettre quêcun en apprentis­
sage chez un Maitre Ouvrier, to bind one an apprentice. 
Avoir fait son apprentissage, to be out, of prenticeship, to be out of his time.  

APPRETER quêque chose, to prepare a thing, or to make it ready. 
Apprêter des viandes, to dress meat. 
Apprêter le diner, to dress din­
ner, to make dinner ready. 
S'Apprêter, to make ready, to dispose himself to something. 
Apprêté, prepared, made ready.
Des viandes apprêtées, meat that is well dressed. 
Apprêt (m.) preparation.
On travaille à de grands ap­
prets pour cette Guerre, there are great preparations a making for this War.
 
* Appris. V. Apprendre.  

APPRIVOISER, to tame, to break, or make tame. 
Apprivoiser une bête feroce, to tame a fierce creature. 
Apprivoiser, affaiter un Oiseau, to man a hawk. 
Apprivoiser un barbare, un homme d'une humeur sauvage, to tame a wild man, to make him sociable. 
Apprivoiser une fille, la rendre complaisante & familiere, to bring up a young maid to his hand, to make her gentle and tra­
ctable. 
Apprivoisé, tamed, or made tame.
Une bête apprivoisée, a tamed beast. 
Apprivoisement (m.) a ta­
ming, breaking, or making tame.
 
* Approbateur, & Approbati­
on. V. Approuver.  

APPROCHE (f.) an approach, or drawing near unto.
Faire les approches d'un Siege, to make his approaches in a Siege. 
Approcher une chose d'une autre, to draw one thing near another. 
Approchez la table de moi, draw the table near me. 
Approchez vôtre oreille, let me speak a word in your ear. 
Approcher quêcun, to have ac­
cess to one. 
J'ai l'honneur d'approcher le Roi, I have the honour of a free access to the King. 
Approcher, neut. to come near, or to be much like. 
Sa maniere de parler approche fort de la vôtre, he has a way of speaking much like yours.
Il n'a rien dit qui approchât de la verité, he said nothing that came near the truth. 
S'Approcher, to approach, to draw on or near, to be nigh at hand. 
S'approcher des murailles d'une Ville, to draw near (approach, or come near) the walls of a Town. 
La nuit s'approche, night draws on. 
La Mort s'approche, Death is a coming on. 
L'heure de son arrivée s'appro­
che, the time of his arrival draws near, or is at hand. 
Approché, approached, drawn near unto. 
Approchant, semblable, like.
Je n'ai rien veu d'approchant de ce que vous dites, I saw no­
thing like that which you speak of. 
Le mensonge a quêque chose d'approchant de la verité, a lie has some resemblance to the truth. 
Approchamment, presque, al­
most, een almost.  

APPROFONDIR un fossé, un puy, to make a ditch or a well deeper, to dig farther into it. 
Approfondir une matiere (ou une question) la traiter à fond, to search the bottom of a thing, to penetrate into a business. 
Approfondi, made deeper, or digged farther into.
Une matiere approfondie, a subject thoroughly examined and discussed. 
Approfondissement d'une cho­
se qu'on creuse (m.) the making of a thing deep or hollow.
 
S'APPROPRIER quêque chose, to appropriate a thing, to convert it unto his own use.
Approprié, appropriated. 
Appropriation (f.) an appro­
priating, or appropriation.  

APPROUVER, to approve, like, allow of, consent to. 
J'approuve vótre excuse, I ap­
prove of your excuse, I like it.
Mes yeux n'approuvent pas vô­
tre geste, ni mes oreilles vôtre discours, my eyes like not your carriage, nor my ears your dis­
course. 
J'approuve les loüanges qu'on vous donne, I do approve (I think you deserve well) the commenda­
tions given you. 
Approuvé, approved, or liked of, consented to. 
Approbateur (m.) he that ap­
proveth, or alloweth. 
Approbation (f.) an approba­
tion, allowance, confirmation of.
Donner son approbation à quê­
que chose, to give his approbation of a business.
Donner son approbation à quê­
cun, to give one his approbati­
on.
Un homme qui vit dans l'appro­
bation, dont la vie merite l'ap­
probation de tout le monde, aux actions de qui tous donnent leur approbation; a man of an ap­
proved life and conversation, whose virtue is known and noted every where.  

APPUI (m.) soûtien, any thing that holds up another, a prop, stay, or help. 
J'y suis monté sans aucun appui, I got up without any help. 
Appui, sur quoi l'on peut s'ac­
couder, a thing to lean his ellow upon.  



Une fenêtre à hauteur d'appui, a window of a good height to lean on. 
Hétoit l'Appui de sa Patrie, he was the support and the strength of his Country. 
Appuier, to uphold, or hold up, to bear up, to stay, prop, underprop, support. 
J'appuie toutes mes esperances sur vôtre credit, I ground all my hopes (or, I rely altogether) upon your credit. 
Il m'a communiqué son dessein, & je l'ai appuié, he has intimated his design to me, and I confirm'd him in it. 
S'appuier, to lean on or upon, to depend upon. 
S'appuier sur un bâton, to lean upon a stick. 
Il s'appuie contre la muraille, he leans against the wall. 
S'appuier sur un roseau, to lean upon a reed. 
Je m'appuie sur vous, I depend upon you. 
Appuié, upheld, or held up, born up, stayd, propped, underpropped, supported. 
Appuié de vôtre faveur, de vô­
tre autorité, de votre justice, tru­
sting in your favour, in your power, and justice. 
Etre appuié d'amis, to have the support of friends. 
Ceci est appuié sur des simples conjectures, this is grounded meerly upon conjectures.  

APRE, rude à manier, rugged, rough in handling. 
Un froid âpre & violent, a sharp and violent cold. 
Apre à l'ouie, harsh. 
Apre au goût, sharp, tart, or un­
pleasant in tast. 
Un homme apre en ses humeurs, a man of a churl sh, surly, rigo­
rous, and severe temper or dispo­
sition. 
Un homme âpre, ou ardent à quêque chose, a man that is ea­
ger, earnest, vehement, hot in any matter. 
Apreté (f.) l'âpreté d'un che­
min, the ruggedness of a road. 
Apreté d'une peau, the roughness of ones skin. 
Aprement, sharply, eagerly, tart­
ly, harshly, unpleasantly, roughly, ruggedly, severely, rigorously, sur­
lily, churlishly, vehemently, ear­
nestly. 
Aprelle (f.) herbe à frotter la vaisselle, an herb called horse tail, or shave-tail.  

APRES, after, next to. 
Apres soupé, after Supper. 
Apres demain, after to mor­
row. 
L'un apres l'autre, one after ano­
ther. 
Il couroit apres lui, he runned af er him. 
Le troisiéme jour apres son de­
part, the third day after his depar­
ture. 
Apres tout je trouve que vous avez tort, after all (when all is done) I find that you are in the wrong. 
Apres Ciceron, il est le Roi des Orateurs, next to Tully he is the King of Orators. 
Il étoit assis apres lui, he sate next to him. 
Apres lui je n'ai point de meil­
leur Ami que votre frere, next to him I have no better friend than your brother. 
Apres cela, after that, then. 
Apres cela douterez vous enco­
re de mon amitié? after that will you still question my friend­
ship? 
Etre apres une affaire, y tra­
vailler, to be about a business, to have a business in hand. 
Il étoit apres un siege, cd. occu­
pé à assieger une Ville, he was busie about a siege, he was ta­
ken up with it. 
L'Apres-midi, the afternoon. 
L'apres-dinée, the time after dinner. 
D'apres, by. 
Nous l'avons fait d'apres cet original, we made it by that ori­
ginal. 
Le Jour d'apres, the next day af­
ter, the day following. 
Apres (an Adverb) after that, and then. 
Je souperai, & apres je m'irai coucher, I will eat my supper, and after that (and then) I'le go to bed. 
Incontinent apres, presently af­
ter. 
Long tems apres, a long time af­
ter. 
Un peu apres, a little while af­
ter. 
Il vient apres, he comes af­
ter. 
Je m'en suis defait le mieux que j'ai pû apres m'en étre bien servi, I have put it off as well as I could, after I had used it a great while. 
Apres que, after, after that, when. 
Trois jours apres qu'il fut ar­
rivé, three days after this arri­
vall. 
Apres qu'il fut parti, when he was gone. 
Ceci arriva apres que j'eu don­
né les Lettres, this hapned after that (or when) I had delivered the Letters. 
Apres qu'il a bien bû il est elo­
quent, when he is in drink, he is most eloquent.

  
A Q
AQUATIQUE, qui nait ou qui demeure dans l'eau, living or breeding in the water, that haunts the water. 
Aqueux, waterish, or full of wa­
ter. 
Aqueduc (m.) an aqueduct, or conduit of water.  

AQUILIN, nez aquilin, a hawk nose, a nose bowing like a hawks beak.

  
A R
ARAGNÉE (f.) a spider, or spinner. 
Toile d'aragnée, a cobweb. 
Aranteles, filandres, filamens formés en l'air, & tombans en terre sur les plantes, &c. fila­
ments that are formed in the air, and fall down upon plants, &c.  

ARBALETE (f.) a Cross­
bow. 
Bander une arbalete, to bend a cross-bow. 
Arbaletrier (m.) a Cross-bow man, or one that shoots in a Cross-bow.  

ARBITRE (m.) volonté, will, pleasure, fancy. 
Libre arbitre, ou franc arbitre, free-will. 
Perdre son libre arbitre, to lose his free will. 
Un Arbitre, une personne que l'on a choisie pour decider un different, an Arbitrator, a friend­
ly compounder of differences ac­
cording to equity, an Umpire.  



Choisir quêcun pour Arbitre, to chuse one an Arbitrator. 
Nous vous prenons pour Arbi­
tre de ce Differant, nous nous en rapporterons à vous, we take you for a Judge of our controver­
sy, and we will stand to your arbi­
tration. 
Faire l'office d'Arbitre, to per­
form the place of an Arbitrator. 
Arbitrage (m.) an arbitrati­
on, or award, the power and sen­
tence of an Arbitrator. 
Mettre une affaire en arbi­
trage, to put a thing into arbi­
tration. 
Arbitraire, arbitrary, uncon­
troulable, at the will and pleasure of one. 
Arbitrairement, at ones will and pleasure.  

ARBOISE (f.) fruit d'arboi­
sier, the harsh red berry, called an arbute, or tree strawberry. 
Arboisier, Arbousier (m.) l'arbre qui porte l'arboise, an arbut, or strawberry tree.
 
* Arborer. V. under Arbre.  

ARBRE (m.) a tree. 
Arbre fruitier, qui porte du fruit, a fruitfull tree, a tree bear­
ing fruit. 
Arbre non fruitier, arbre qui ne porte point de fruits, a fruit­
less tree, a tree that bears no fruit. 
Arbre sauvage, a wild tree. 
Arbre cultivé, a tree planted, that is not wild. 
Arbre enté, a tree grafted. 
Arbre portant deux & trois fois l'an, a tree that bears two or three times a year. 
Un jeune arbre, a young tree. 
Un vieux arbre, an old tree. 
Croitre en arbre, to grow to be a tree. 
Planter des arbres dans les Vi­
gnes, afin qu'ils servent d'echa­
las, to set trees for Vines to grow amongst. 
Couper la pointe des arbres, to top trees. 
Un émondeur d'arbres, a lop­
per of trees. 
Bâtardiere, pepiniered arbres, a seed-plot, nurse-garden, or nur­
sery, wherein young trees are set to be afterwards removed. 
Lieu planté d'arbres, a grove of trees, an orchard, or hop-yard, a place planted with trees. 
Couper les branches trop épa­
isses des arbres qui font trop d'ombre, to make a glade in a wood. 
Déchausser un arbre, to bare the roots of a tree, to dig up the earth about it. 
Rechausser un arbre, to heap earth about the roots of a tree. 
Ecorcer un arbre, to pull off the bark of a tree. 
Ebrancher un arbre, to cut small boughs off a tree. 
L'Arbre ne tombe pas du pre­
mier coup, the Tree falls not at the first blow, great matters are not atchieved so soon as attempted. 
L'Arbre de vie, dont il est fait mention dans la Bible, the Tree of life, whereof mention is made in the Bible. 
Arbre de vie, sorte d'arbre, an aromaticall tree so called. 
On conoit l'Arbre par son fruit, the Tree is known by its fruit. 
Les racines d'un arbre, the roots of a tree. 
Les fibres de racine, the small strings, or hair-like threds of roots. 
Rejetton naissant à côté du tronc, a young sprout of a tree. 
Le tronc d'un arbre, the stump, stem, stock, or body of a tree, 
L'écorce du tronc, the bark, or rind. 
L'écorce molle couvrant le bois, that which is between the bark and the wood of the tree. 
Moelle du bois, that which may be cleft by the grain in the wood. 
Seve du bois, the sap. 
Branche, rameau d'arbre, a bough, or branch of a tree. 
Branche avec les fruits, a bough plucked off the tree with the fruit on it. 
Rainseau, a small branch, or a very little bow. 
Bouton, bourgeon, a young bud. 
Feuilles-d'arbre, the leaves of a tree. 
Fruits, fruits. 
Chair de fruit, the substance of fruit under the pill. 
Pelures, peau de fruit, the pill of fruits. 
Noyau de fruit, the kernell of fruits. 
Queuë de fruit, the stalk of fruits. 
Galle de certains arbres, gall. 
Ecorce dure de quêques fruits, a shell. 
Ecorce verte couvrant le bois du fruit, the rind, or upper green shell of a nut. 
Emouchete, chaton de cer­
tains arbres ressemblant à une queuë de chat, comme noyer, avellanier, &c. the cats tail on nut-trees, or the long bud hang­
ing down like a long aglet. 
Cyme d'arbre, tendron de jeu­
nes feuilles, the tendrel or young branch of a tree. 
Arbre, ou mât de Navire, a mast. 
Arbres de pressoir, the beam, or timber of a press. 
Arbre de consanguinité, a tree of consanguinity. 
Chaque tête, chaque personne en la genealogie d'un arbre, the several degrees in kindred. 
Arborer un étendart, to set up the Colours. 
Arboré, set up. 
Arbrisseau (m.) petit arbre, a shrub,  

ARC (m.) a bow. 
Les extremités d'un arc, the horn of a bow. 
La corde d'un arc, a bow-string. 
Avoir plusieurs cordes à son arc, cd. avoir ressource en cas de necessité, to have more than one string to his bow. 
Bander un arc, to bend a bow. 
Débander un arc, to unbend a bow. 
Tirer de l'arc, to shoot in a bow. 
Fait en arc, made like a bow, bow-like. 
Arc en ciel, the rain-bow. 
L'Arc en ciel paroit avec ces quatre couleurs, le rouge, le verd, le bleu, & le jaune; the Rain-bow appears to us with these four different colours, red, green, blew, and yellow. 
Arc de trionfe, a triumphal Arch set up for a Trophy or Monument of Victory. 
Arc boutant, an arch, or bowing pillar, a buttress, or post that serves to shore, support, or under-set a building. 
Arcade (f.) an arch, or vault. 
Vouté en arcade, fashioned like an arch. 
Arcangelet (m.) ou arc à jal­
let, petite arbalete, a stone-bow. 
Arceau (m.) petit arc, pe­
tite voute, a little bow, or arch. 
Arceau de berceau d'enfant, the cover of a childs cradle.
Arceau de provins de vigne, branches of vine turned bow-wise,  



and having the top set in the ground. 
Arceau de treille de jardin, the bowing of an arbor, its bending like a bow. 
Courber en arceau, to make a thing bow-wise. 
Archer (m) qui use d'arc & de fleche, an Archer, a Bow-man. Archer de la Garde d'un Prince, a Yeoman of a Princes Guard. 
Archer de Prevôt, Sergent, a Sergent, or a Beadle, one of the Provost Marshals attendance. 
Archet de violon (m.) the bow of a violin. 
Arçon de selle de cheval (m.) the bow of a saddle, or a saddle-bow. 
Se tenir ferme à l'arçon, to sit fast on a saddle. 
Faire perdre les arçons à un Cavalier, le desarçonner, le jetter hors des arçons, to cast one off horse-back, or out of the saddle. 
Arçonné, set on horseback, or between the saddle-bows. 
Bien arçonné, qui se tient fer­
me à l'arçon, that sits fast in a saddle.  

ARCENAL. V. Arsenac.  

ARCHAL, fil d'archal (m.) wire, copper-wire. 
Jalousie, panier d'archal, con­
tre-vitre d'archal, a grate to look through made of wire.  

ARCHE (f.) coffre, a chest, or coffer. 
L'Arche de Noé, Noahs Ark. 
L'Arche de l'Alliance, the Ark of the Covenant, the Ark of the Testimony. 
Arche, ou arcade, an arch.

* Archer, and Archet. V. Arc.  

ARCHEVEQUE (m.) an Arch-Bishop. 
Archevêché (m.) dignité d'Archevêque, Arch-bishoprick. 
Archevêché, Palais d'Arche­
vêque, an Archbishops Palace. 
La France a quinze Archevê­
chez, & sous ces quinze Arche­
vêchez six vints Evêchez suf­
fragans, France has fifteen Arch­
bishopricks (to wit, of Paris, Lyon, Rheims, Toulouse, Vienne, Arles, Bourdeaux, Auch, Aix, Narbon­
ne, Tour, Bourges, Rouen, Sens, Embrun) and under them six score Bishopricks.  

ARCHIDIACRE (m.) an Arch-deacon. 
Archidiaconat (m.) an Arch­
deaconship, or Arch-deaconry.  

ARCHIDUC (m.) an Arch-Duke. 
Archiduchesse (f.) an Arch-Dutchess.  

ARCHIPRETRE (m.) an Arch-priest, head-priest, or chief Priest.  

ARCHITECTE (m.) an Architect, a Master-Mason, or Carpenter, a Surveyor of the chief building, the chief Author, prin­
cipall plotter, or deviser. 
Architecture, (f.) art d'Ar­
chitecte, architecture, the art, or science of building. 
Architecture, ouvrage de tel art, the framing, or building of a house, &c.  

ARCHITRAVE (f.) the ar­
chitrave of pillars, or stone-work, the master-beam in buildings of timber.  

ARCHIVES, the Place where­
in all the Records, Charters, and Evidences that concern the King, or belong unto the Crown, are kept in chests and boxes, the Rolls for the Crown.
 
* Arcon, Arçonné. V. Arc.  

ARCTIQUE, Artick. 
Le Pole Arctique, the Arctick (or North) Pole. 
Le Cercle Arctique, the Artick Circle.  

ARDEUR (f.) chaleur ar­
dente, ardour, or burning heat. 
Ardeur d'esprit, fervency, ea­
gerness, earnestness, vehemency. 
Parler avec ardeur, to speak ea­
gerly. 
Vous en avez agi avec trop d'ar­
deur, you have carried your self with too much eagerness or passion in that business. 
Ardent, embrasé, ardent, hot, burning. 
Un esprit vif & ardent, a quick sharp wit. 
Un discours ardent, an eager, or earnest discourse. 
Desir, passion, affection arden­
te, a vehement passion, or desire. 
Ardans, feux errans, espece de meteore, an ignis fatuus, the flit­
tering or going fire flashes or flames which be seen by night, and near unto waters. 
Ardemment, avec ardeur, ardently, hotly, fervently, ear­
nestly, eagerly, vehemently, with great heat, passion, or desire.  

ARDILLON (m.) clou de boucle à courroie, the tongue of a buckle.  

ARDOISE, (f.) slate. 
Une maison couverte d'ar­
doise, a house covered with slates  

ARENES, les Arenes (f.) a Theater for a place to fight in, strow'd with gravel. Such was that stately Amphitheater of Nimes in Languedoc, which is now called les Arenes de Nimes.  

ARETE de poisson (f.) the small bone of a fish. 
Arête, en massonnerie, the edge, or out-standing ridge of a stone or stone-wall.
 
* Argemone. V. Argentine.  

ARGENT (m.) sorte de me­
tal, silver. 
Mine d'argent, a silver mine. 
Veine d'argent, veine de terre produisant l'argent, a vein of sil­
ver, a vein of the earth producing silver. 
Argent vif, quick-silver. 
Argent en masse, en billon, silver in the oar. 
Argent epuré, fined, or purify'd silver, silver try'd by the fire. 
Lie, ou crasse d'argent epuré, the dross or refuse of silver try'd by the fire. 
Argent mis en oeuvre, wrought silver. 
Argent de fonte, fusile silver, silver that is or may be mel­
ted. 
Argent en coquille, pour pein­
dre & argenter, silver in the shell, as it is used by Painters. 
Argent en feuille, silver foil. 
Argent battu, silver that is drawn or beaten in thin pieces with a hammer. 
Argent trait, silver wire. 
Argent filé, spun silver, or silver made into thread. 
Argent tissu, woven silver. 
Argent ras, non bruni, silver that is unburnished. 
Argent bruni, burnished sil­
ver. 
Argent mat, unpolished sil­
ver. 
Cendrée d'argent, silver dust. 
Argent monnoié, de quêque metal que ce soit, money, coin. 
Argent monnoié, monnoie d'argent, silver coin. 
Argent de bon aloy, silver of good allay, or alloy.



Argent contant, ready money. 
Prendre les promesses pour ar­
gent contant, to take promises for ready mony. 
Paier argent contant, to pay ready mony. 
Argent contant porte mede­
cine, ready mony is a ready medi­
cine. 
L'Amour fait beaucoup, mais  
l'Argent fait tout, Love is po­
tent, but Mony is omnipotent. 
Combattre avec des armes d'argent, to fight with silver arms. 
Quand on combat avec des ar­
mes d'argent on est asseuré de vaincre, he that doth fight with silver arms is sure to over­
come. 
Quand l'argent manque, tout manque, he that wants mony wants all things. 
Avoir beaucoup d'argent, to have a great deal of mony, to be a mony'd man. 
Détourner l'argent de quêcun à son propre profit, to convert ones mony to his own use. 
Oter à quêcun son argent par finesse, ou en le dupant, to wipe, conycatch, or cheat one of his mo­
ny. 
Je ne sai où prendre de l'argent, I know not where to get mony. 
Fais de l'argent de la vente des fonds, sell thy Land to make money with. 
Argenter quêque chose, to sil­
ver a thing over, to do it over with silver. 
Argenté, silvered over, or done over with silver. 
Argenterie (f.) vaisselle d'ar­
gent, silver plate. 
Argentier (m) qui a soin de la Vaisselle d'argent, the keeper of the silver plate. 
Argentier, qui travaille en ar­
gent, a silver smith. 
Argentier, qui vend de l'ar­
genterie, one that sells silver ware. 
Argentin, couleur argen­
tine, of a silver colour, silver colou­
red. 
Argentine, Argemone (f.) sorte de plante, silver herb, or wild tansy, an herb like wild poppy, and good against the disease in the ey called in Latin Argema. 
Argenteux, mêlé d'argent, mixt with silver.  

ARGILLE (f,) clay, potters clay. 
Argilleux, abondant en ar­
gille, full of clay.  

ARGUMENT (m.) raison, argument, reason, or proof. 
Presser un argument, to urge an argument, to insist upon it, to keep close to it. 
Argument, raisonnement, a reasoning, or proving by argu­
ment, a declaration of an argu­
ment. 
Argument, sujet, a Subject to write, reason, or speak of. 
Argumenter, to argue, reason, or dispute, to prove (prosecute, and discuss) by arguments. 
Argumentation (f.) a debating of a matter, an arguing, reasoning, disputing about it.  

ARIDE, un terroir aride, a dry and barren ground. 
Aridité (f.) dryness, want of hu­
mour.  

ARISTOCRACIE (f.) an Aristocracy, or Government of No­
bles, the Government of some few of the greatest men in a state. 
Aristocratique, Aristocrati­
call. 
Un Gouvernement Aristocrati­
que, an Aristocratical Government, the Government of a State in the hands of some few great men.  

ARISTOLOCHIE (f.) sorte d'herbe, hart-wort, or birth-wort, aristolochy.  

ARITHMETIQUE (f.) l'art de conter, Arithmetick, or the art of numbring. 
Les regles de l'Arithmetique, the Rules of Arithmetick. 
Un Arithmeticien, an Arith­
metician, one that learns or practi­
ses Arithmetick.  

ARME (f.) a weapon. 
Armes offensives & defensives, armes offensive and defensive. 
Arme à feu, fire-arm. 
Prendre les armes pour se bat­
tre, to take up armes to fight. 
Poser, quitter, mettre bas les armes, to lay down the arms. 
Rendre les armes, to give up his armes. 
Etre sous les armes, to be under arms. 
Porter les armes, to bear arms. 
Les armes sont journalieres, the fortune of the war is uncer­
tain. 
Il n'est rien qui ne plie sous la force des armes, all things yeeld to the force of arms. 
Decider (vuider) un different par la voie des armes & au peril de sa vie, to decide a con­
troversy by dint of sword. 
Tout ce Pais est en armes, all this Country is under arms. 
Faits d'armes, acts or feats of Chivalry, warlike atchieve­
ments. 
Passer un Soldat par les armes, to shoot (or put) a Souldier to death. 
Faire des armes, to fence. 
Un Maitre d'Armes, a fencing Master. 
Armes, Armoiries, Arms, or coat of arms. 
Champ d'armes, the field of a coat of arms. 
Cote d'armes, a Heralds coat. 
Armer, to arm, to furnish with arms. 
Armer quêcun, to arm one, to furnish him with arms or wea­
pons. 
S'Armer, prendre les armes, to take up arms. 
S'Armer, se vêtir de ses armes, to put on his armour. 
Armé, armed, furnish't with arms, provided of weapons. 
Armé à demi, ou demi armé, half armed. 
Armé de toutes pieces, de pié en cap, armed (or fenced) on all parts from top to toe. 
Armé à crud, tout couvert de fer, armed with compleat harness, or covered all over with iron. 
Armé à la legere, a souldier we a­
ring light harness. 
Nullement armé, on qui n'est point armé, unarmed. 
Armateur (m) qui arme, qui se prepare à la Guerre sur Mer, one that furnishes Ships for a Sea-fight. 
Armateur, un Vaisseau Arma­
teur, a Privateer. 
Armement (m.) levée de gens de guerre, an arming. 
Faire un grand armement, to raise great many Forces. 
Armement, preparatif pour la Guerre, provision, or furniture for War. 
Armée (f.) an Army. 
Armée Navale, a Naval Ar­
my. 
Armée de Terre, a Land Ar­
my. 
Mettre une Armée sur pié, to set an Army on fort.
Ranger une Armée en bataille,  



to marshall an Army, to set it in array. 
Desaire l'Armée des Enemis, la mettre en deroute, to defeat the Enemy's Army, to rout it. 
Renforcer une Armée, to rein­
force an Army, to send new Forces to it. 
Commander un Corps d'Ar­
mée, to Command a body of an Ar­
my. 
Etre Chef d'une Armée, to be the Head of an Army. 
Marcher à la têto de son Ar­
mée, to march at the head of his Army. 
La Tête, le Front d'une Armée, the Head, the Front of an Army. 
L'Aile droite & l'Aile gauche d'une Armée, the right and left Wing of an Army. 
Queuë d'Armée, the rear of an Army. 
Armée de gens nouveaux, qui ne savent pas la Guerre, an Ar­
my of raw Souldiers, of fresh wa­
ter souldiers, that are unexpert for the War. 
Armée composée de vieilles Troupes, an Army of old Soul­
diers. 
Armet (m.) casque, an helmet, a horsemans head-piece. 
Armoiries. V. Armes. 
Armoyé, marqué d'armes, that hath arms upon. 
Armure (f.) harness, or armour for the body. 
Couvert d'une armure com­
plete, armed with compleat har­
ness. 
Armurier (m) an Armorer.  

ARMOIRE (m.) a cup-board.  

ARMONIAC. V. Ammoniac.  

AROMATES, drogues odo­
riferantes sweet-smelling simples. 
Aromatique, aromatical, odo­
riferous, fragrant, sweet-smelling.
Une senteur aromatique, a sweet smell, a smell of sweet spices.  

ARONDELLE, ou hiron­
delle (f.) a Swallow.
Queuë d'Aronde (for Queuë d'Arondelle) terme de Menuse­
rie, a Swallow-tail, a kind of fast­
ning timber or boards together in the shape of a Swallow.
Arondeliere (f.) sorte d'her­
be, the herb called Celandine.  

AROUSSES (f.) vesces sau­
vages, wild small vetches, which Pigeons love so well that they will never forsake the place.  
ARPENT (m.) an acre, or furlong of ground. 
Demi arpent de terre, half an acre of ground. 
Par arpens, acre by acre. 
Arpenter un champ, to mea­
sure, or survey a field. 
Arpenté, measured, or sur­
vey'd. 
Arpenteur (m.) a Surveyor, or measurer of land. 
Arpentage (m.) a survey taken of land. 
Arpenterie (f.) a surveying or measuring of land.  

ARQUEBUSE (f.) an har­
quebuse, a sort of hand-gun. 
Arquebuser quêcun, le passer par les armes, to shoot (or put) a Souldier to death. 
Arquebusé, shot to death. 
Arquebusade (f.) coup d'ar­
quebuse, a harquebuse-shot. 
Arquebusier (m.) an harque­
busier, one that serves with an har­
quebuse.  

ARRACHER, to draw out, pluck, or pull up, or out, to snatch tear, get, or take away by force. 
Arracher une dent, to draw out a tooth. 
Arracher de mauvaises herbes, to pluck up weeds. 
Arracher un arbre, to pull up a tree by the root. 
Arracher la peau, to tear ones skin off. 
Arracher les yeux à quêcun, to pull (or pluck) ones eyes out. 
Arracher les enfans d'entre les bras de leurs meres, to snatch children away from their mothers arms. 
Je n'ai pû lui arracher ce Livre de la main, I could not snatch that book from him. 
Arracher une opinion de l'e­
sprit d'un homme, to pluck an opinion or perswasion out of ones mind. 
Vous n'arracherez pas un mot de sa bouche, you won't get a word from him. 
Arraché, drawn out, plucked, or pulled up, or out, snatched, torn, got, or taken away by force. 
Un Arracheur de dents, a tooth-drawer, a mountebank. 
Arrachement (m.) a drawing out, plucking, or pulling up or out, a snatching, tearing, getting, or taking away by force.  

ARRANGER quêque chose, to set a thing in order. 
Arrangé, set in order. 
Arrangeur (m.) he that sets things in order. 
Arrangement (m.) a setting of things in order.  

ARRENTER, donner à ren­
te, to rent, or let out for rent. 
Arrenter, prendre à rente, to take at a rent. 
Arrenté, donné à rente, ren­
ted, or let out for rent. 
Arrenté, pris à rente, taken at a rent. 
Arrentement qu'on donne, (m.) a letting to rent. 
Arrentement qu'on prend, a ta­
king at a rent.
 
* Arrerages. V. Arriere.  

ARRET (m.) tout ce qui ar­
rête & retient, any rest, stop, or stay for a thing. 
Arret de lance, the rest whereon a man of arms setteth his lance. 
Mettre la lance en arret, to set­
tle his lance with a rest. 
Arret, retardement, a stay, or delay. 
Arret, Sentence de Parlement, an Order, Sentence, Decree, or fi­
nal Judgement of a Court. 
Donner, prononcer un Arret, to give an Order, to pronounce a De­
cree. 
Arrêter, to stop, stay, or make stay. 
Arrêter un homme qui court, to stop a man that runs. 
Arrêter un Chariot, un Navi­
re, &c. to stop a Cart, a Ship, &c.
Arrêter l'insolence & les fou­
gues d'un homme, to restrain (or repress) a mans insolency and fu­
ry. 
Arrêter une sedition, to suppress a sedition. 
Arrêter les larmes, cesser de pleurer, to give over (to forbear) crying. 
Arrêter l'Enemi, to resist (or withstand) his Enemy, to give him a stop. 
Arrêter, retarder quêcun, to stop, or detain one. 
Si le vent ne m'arrête, if the wind do's not make me stay. 
Si ce n'est que quêque occupa­
tion vous arrête, unless you be ta­
ken up with some business. 
Arrêter quêcun, le faire prison­
nier, to arrest one, or make him a prisoner. 
Arrêter, conclure, to determine, conclude, or resolve of. 
Arrêter un marché, to conclude (or make up) a bargain.  



J'avois arrêté de vous aller trouver, I was resolved to wait upon you. 
Arrêter le jour pour faire quê­
que chose, to appoint a day for something. 
S'Arrêter en quêque lieu, to stop, stay, or settle in a place. 
Il s'arrête à chaque pas, he makes a stop at every step. 
S'arrêter tout court en mar­
chant, to stop on a sudden. 
Je ne m'arretêrai pas un mo­
ment, I won't stay a minute. 
Il ne peut s'arrêter en une place, he can stay no where. 
A peine pourrez vous vous ar­
rêter en ce chemin glissant sans tomber, you will hardly stop in this slippery way without a fall. 
Vous vous arrêtez en beau che­
min, you stop in a fair way. 
L'eau s'arrête, the water set­
tles. 
Apres qu'on a bien couru (qu'on a beaucoup voiagé) il faut en fin s'arrêter, when a man has travelled much up and down, at last he must settle somewhere. 
S'arrêter aux mots, to stick to the words. 
Il s'arrête aux passages les plus difficiles, he undertakes (he in­
sists upon) the most difficult pas­
sages. 
S'arrêter à l'opinion d'un autre, to stand to another mans opinion or judgement. 
Il s'arrête, la memoire lui man­
que, he is out, his memory fails him. 
Arrêté, stopped, or stayd. 
Arrêté, retardé, stopped, or de­
tained. 
Arrêté, fait prisonnier, arrested, made prisoner. 
Arrêté, conclu, determined, de­
creed, concluded, resolved of. 
Il fut arrêté qu'il sortiroit, it was decreed that he should go out. 
Il avoit eté arrêté entre nous, it was agreed amongst us. 
Un jour arrêté pour faire quê­
que chose, a day appointed for something. 
Au jour arrêté, at the day ap­
pointed. 
Un homme arrêté, posé, paisi­
ble, a stayd man, a man of a stayd behaviour. 
Arrête-beuf, sorte d'herbe, the herb called rest-harrow.  

ARRHE (f.) gage, an ear­
nest. 
J'ai donné une écu d'arrhe, I gave a crown in earnest. 
Arrher une marchandise, en donner les arrhes, to give an ear­
nest for a bought commodity.  

ARRIERE, derriere, behind, backward. 
Arriere de moi, bouc puant, away from me, you stinking rogue. 
Il m'a mis en arriere, he has put me backward. 
Je mets arriere les maux que tu me causes, I pass by the troubles you put me to. 
Arrerages (m.) arrears, the rest or the remainder of a payment, that which was left behind, or un­
paid. 
Paier les arrerages, to pay off the arrears. 
Arriere-ban (m.) a Procla­
mation of the King, whereby the Gentlemen of France, or such as hold noble fiefs, are summoned to assemble and serve the King in his Wars. 
Arriere-boutique (f.) a back-shop, or back-room used for pri­
vate wares, or for working in. 
Arriere-censif, fonds arriere censif, a mesne tenure in an e­
state or land that is held by a Cense. 
Arriere-change, interet des interets, a yearly renewing of u­
sury, and taking usury upon usu­
ry. 
Arriere-fais (m.) the secun­
dine, or after-birth, the three skins wherein an infant ly's wrap­
ped while it is in the womb, or when it comes into the World. 
Arriere fief (m.) a mesne fi­
ef, a fief that is held of (or de­
pends on) an other or higher fief. From whence comes 
Arriere feudal, a mesne Lord. 
Arriere fils, petit fils (m.) the sons or daughters son. 
Arriere-foncier (m.) prove­
nant d'un arriere-fief, comme quand on dit, Rente arriere-fonciere, a rent payable on ac­
count of a mesne fief. 
Arriere-garant (m.) garant du garant, he that warrants a warranter. 
Arriere-garde d'une Armée (f.) the Rere-guard (or the Rear) of an Army. 
Arriere-Neveu (m.) a great grand son, the son of a grand child. 
Arriere-point, en matiere de coûture (m.) a back-stitch. 
Arriere-saison (f.) latter math. 
Foin d'arriere saison, du revi­
re, latter-math (or lateward) hay. 
Arriere-Vassal (m.) Vassal de Vassal, an under Vassal unto a Vassal.  

ARRIVER en quêque lieu, to arrive at (or come unto) a place. 
Arriver par eau, to come by wa­
ter. 
Je n'arrivai qu'hier à dix heu­
res du soir, I came but yesternight at ten a clock. 
Arriver par hazard, to happen, chance, or befall, 
Ce qui arrive à tous, that which happens to every man. 
Il ne me sauroit rien arriver de plus agreable, nothing can please me better. 
Ces biens ne nous arrivent pas lors que nous dormons, such good things come not to us while we ly asleep. 
S'il arrive que vous aiez besoin de moi, if you chance to want me. 
Je ne sai pas ce qui lui arrive­
ra, I know not what will befall him. 
S'il lui arrivoit quêque malhe­
ur, s'il venoit à mourir, if some mischance should befall him, if he should come to die. 
Quoi qu'il arrive, however, what­
ever happens. 
Arrivé, arrived, come, hap­
ned. 
Il ne fut pas plus tôt arrivé qu'on le saisit, he was no sooner arri­
ved but he was taken. 
La Flote est arrivée, the Fleet is come. 
Je suis arrivé au point d'honne­
ur où j'aspirois, I am arrived to that degree of honour I aimed at. 
Il est arrivé à un tel point d'impudence que, he is grown (he is become) so impudent that. 
La chose est arrivée à ce point, the thing is come that pass. 
La chose est arrivée, comme je le desirois, the thing fell out as I wished for. 
Il m'est arrivé comme à vous, I have had the same luck with you.
Il est arrivé fort à propos, it  



hapned in very good time, in the nick, very fitly or seasonably. 
Il lui est arrivé quêque petite disgrace, some small misfortune is befallen him. 
D'où il est arrivé, ce qui a eté cause que, from whence it came to pass, or which was the reason why. 
Arrivée (f.) arrival, com­
ing. 
J'atten son arrivée avec beau­
coup d'impatience, I wait for his coming with a great deal of impa­
tiency. 
Son arrivée m'a donné bien de la joie, his arrival has over-joyd me, I was over-joyd to see him safely arrived.  

ARROCHES, sorte d'herbe, an herb called an Orage, or Orach, the golden herb.  

ARROGANT, arrogant, proud, haughty, presumptuous. 
Faire l'arrogant, to carry him­
self proudly, arrogantly. 
Arrogance (f.) arrogancy, pride, presumption, haughtiness. 
Arrogamment, arrogantly, proudly, presumptuously, haughti­
ly.  

ARRONDIR quêque cho­
se, to round a thing, or to make it round. 
Arrondir une periode, to com­
pleat a period, to be curious about it. 
Arrondi, rounded, or made round. 
Une periode arrondie, au elabo­
rate period. 
Arrondissement (m.) a rounding, or making round. 
Arrondissement d'une periode, the compleating of a period.  

ARROSER, verser de l'eau sur quêque chose, to besprinkle, wet, or water gently. 
Arroser un Jardin, to water a Garden. 
La Thamise arrose la Ville de Londres, the Thames waters (or runs by) the City of London. 
Arrosé, besprinkled, wetted, watered. 
Arrosement (m.) a besprink­
ling, wetting, or watering. 
Arrosoir (m.) a watering pot.  

ARRUMER, une carte ma­
rine, to delineate (or set out) in a Sea-card all the rums of winds. 
Arrumé, carte arrumée, a Sea-card, wherein are all the quarter winds are delineated.  

ARSENAC (m.) an Arse­
nal, or Store house of Armour.  

ARSENIC (m.) arsenick, or­
pine, or orpiment.  

ART (m.) science, an art, or a science. 
Arts liberaux, the liberal Arts. 
Arts mecaniques, the mecha­
nicks, or mechanicall Arts. 
Enseigner un Art, to teach an Art. 
Apprendre un Art, to learn an Art. 
Exercer un Art, to practise an Art. 
Maitre aux Arts, a Master of Arts. 
Etre fait (ou passer) Maitre aux Arts, to be made Master of Arts. 
Art, artifice, art, artifice, craft, subtilty, cunning. 
Artifice, (m.) skill, cunning, workmanship. 
Avec un bel artifice, cunningly, like a workman. 
Ouvrage fait avec un rare arti­
fice, an ingenious, or cunning piece of work. 
Sans artifice, sans art, not artifi­
cially. 
Artifices, feux d'artifices, fire­
works. 
Faire jouër des feux d'artifices, to expose fire-works to publick view. 
Artifice, finesse, craft, subtilty, cunning. 
Artificiel, fait avec artifice, ar­
tificial, done by art. 
Artificieux, fin, witty, cunning, subtil, crafty. 
Artificieusement, cunningly, like a work-man, or with a great deal of art. 
Artillerie (f.) toute sorte de machines de guerre, artille­
ry, all warlike engins. 
L'Artillerie, les Canons, the Ordnance. 
Une piece d'artillerie, a Canon, or great gun. 
Dresser l'artillerie, to level the Ordnance. 
Pointer l'artillerie contre les murailles, to level the Canons a­
gainst the walls. 
Decharger l'artillerie, to dis­
charge the Ordnance. 
Le grand Maitre de l'Artille­
rie, the Master of the Ordnance. 
Artisan (m.) a Trades-man, a handy-crafts man. 
Je suis moi même la cause de ma disgrace, & l'artisan de mon malheur, I am my self the cause of my calamity, and the contriver of my misery. 
Artiste (m.) an Artist, an in­
genious man. 
Artistement, cunningly, inge­
niously.  

ARTERE (f.) an artery, an hollow vein in which the vital spi­
rits are. 
Les arteres battent, the pulse beats. 
Le poux (ou le battement) des arteres, the pulse, the beating or motion of the arteries. 
Le battement des arteres n'est pas le même qui se fait dans le cœur, puis que celles là s'élevent quand celui ci s'abbat, the bea­
ting of the artery's is not the same with the hearts beating, seing that the arteries rise when the heart falls. 
L'Artere trachée, ou âpre, the wind pipe, the pipe of the lungs, one of the three principal arteries of the body, and the Instrument of breath and voice.  

ARTICHAU (m.) an arti­
choke. 
Pomme d'artichau, the body of an artichoke.  

ARTICLE (m.) an article, a head, principal clause, title or point of a matter. 
Les Articles d'une Loi, the Ar­
ticles of a Law. 
Les Articles de la Foi Chrêti­
enne, the Articles of the Christian Faith. 
Les Articles d'un Contract, the Articles of an Agreement. 
Les Articles d'un Conte, the Articles of a Sum in accounts. 
Les Articles des Langues vul­
gaires, the Articles of vulgar speeches. 
Articuler, prononcer distin­
ctement, to pronounce distinct­
ly. 
Articulé; as,
Une voix articulée, a distinct voice, a voice that's easy to be un­
derstood.
 
* Artifice, Artificiel, Artifici­
eux, Artificieusement, & Artil­
lerie. V. Art.  

ARTIMON (m.) grand voile de Navire, the main sail.  

ARTISON (m.) petit ver qui s'engendre dans le bois, a wood­
worm.
 
* Artisan, Artiste, Artistement. V. Art.




  
A S
AS de carte ou de dez (m.) an ace at dice, or cards. 
As, piece de monnoie Romaine, the ancient Romans As, a copper coyn worth somewhat more than a penny sterling.  

ASCENDANT (m.) an as­
scendent, ascension, rising. 
Ascendant du Soleil sur l'hori­
zon, the Suns ascension (or rising) above the horizon. 
Ascendant, pouvoir, autorité, ascendent, power, influence. 
Avoir de l'ascendant, avoir du pouvoir sur l'esprit de quêcun, to have an ascendent upon one, to have a great influence over his mind. 
Ascension (f.) ascension. 
Ascension de notre Seigneur, Christ his Ascension. 
L'Ascension, ou le Jour de l'A­
scension, the Ascension-day. 
Ascension de Comete, the rising of a Comet.  

ASILE. V. Asyle.  

ASNE, Asnerie, Asnesse, As­
nier, & Asnon. V. Ane.  

ASPECT (m.) veuë, sight, prospect. 
Vouz avez ici un bel aspect, you have a fine prospect here. 
Du premier aspect cela semble beau, that looks fine at the first sight. 
Il eut d'abord ces deux person­
nes en aspect, they both offered themselves presently to his sight. 
Deux têtes tournées d'aspect, s'entre-regardans, two faces (or two heads) looking towards one another.  

ASPERGE (f.) sorte d'her­
be, the herb called Sperage, or Sparra-grass. 
Asperge sauvage, wild sperage.  

ASPERGOUTE (f.) sorte d'herbe, the herb called fever-few, or white wort.  

ASPERSION (f.) an asper­
sion, or a besprinkling. 
Aspersoir, avec quoi l'on prend de l'eau benite (m.) a holy water Sprinkle, made of bri­
stles.  

ASPHODELE (f.) sorte d'herbe, the daffadil, affodill, or asphodill.  

ASPIC (m.) sorte de ser­
pent, the serpent called asp, or aspick. 
Aspic, herbe, the herb spicknard, or lavander spike.  

ASPIRER à quêque chose, to aime at a thing, to aspire unto it, to desire, or covet it. 
Vous aspirez à des Honneurs où vous n'arriverez jamais, you seek for Honours that you will ne­
ver be able to compass. 
C'est une chose digne de loü­
ange, de s'arrêter au second ou au troisiéme rang, lors qu'on aspiroit au premier, it is a com­
mendable thing for a man, to be contented with the second or third rank, when he aspired to the first. 
Ne plus aspirer aux Charges, to give over the ambitious desire of great Places. 
Aspiré, marqué d'une aspira­
tion, noted (or pronounced) with an aspiration. 
Aspiration (f.) an aspiration, also a note of aspiration.  

ASPRE, Aspreté, Asprement. V. Apre.  

ASSABLER un Vaisseau, to run a ship on ground. 
Assablé, runned on ground. 
Le Navire s'est assablé, the Ship is runned on ground.  

ASSAILLIR, attaquer, to set upon, assail, assault, or attack. 
Assaillir une Ville, to assault, to batter a Town. 
Assailli, attaqué, set upon, as­
sailed, assaulted, or attacked. 
Assaillant (m) an assailant, one that sets upon another. 
Assaillans (en termes de Car­
rousel) ceux qui combattent contre celui qui en est le Te­
nant, Challengers at tilting. 
Assaut (m.) attaque, an assault, attack, or onset. 
Donner l'assaut à une Ville, to Storm a Town. 
Repousser l'Assaut, to repulse (or beat back) the besiegers. 
Prendre une Ville d'assaut, to take a Town by storm. 
Du premier assaut, at the first onset. 
Un Assaut general, a general As­
sault.  

ASSAISONNER les viandes, to season, make savory, or give good tast. 
Assaisonné, seasoned, made sa­
voury. 
Assaisonneur (m.) a seasoner. 
Assaisonnement (m.) a season­
ing, or making savoury.  

ASSASSINER quêcun, to kill one treacherously, to mur­
der him in a treacherous man­
ner. 
Assassiné, treacherously killed, slain, or murdered. 
Assassinateur (m.) a privy mur­
derer, one that goeth with a short sword to murder and kill. 
Assassin, Assassinat (m.) a privy murder, or a murderous act.

* Assaut. V. Assaillir.  

ASSEMBLER des gens, to assemble, draw, (get, bring, or ga­
ther) yolks together. 
Assembler le Senat, le Peuple, to call the Senate, to call the Peo­
ple together. 
Assembler une Armée, to get an Army together. 
Assembler des choses separées, to bring together things dispersed. 
Assembler plusieurs mots, to put (or to joyn) several words to­
gether. 
Assembler en un monceau, a­
monceler, to heap, to make up in­
to (or lay on) a heap. 
S'Assembler, to assemble, meet, flock, troop, draw, gather, or come together. 
S'Assembler en quêque lieu, to meet in some place. 
Le Senat s'assembloit dans le Capitole, the Senate used to be held in the Capitol. 
Assemblé, assembled, met (got) together. 
Assemblé en un monceau, heap­
ed up, made up into a heap. 
Assemblage (m.) a heap.
Faire un assemblage de plusie­
urs choses, to joyn many things together, to make a miscellany. 
Assemblée (f.) an assembly, meeting, company, congregation. 
Une grande Assemblée, a great assembly, meeting, or congregation. 
Il s'arrêta au milieu de l'Assem­
blée, he made a stop in the midst of the Assembly. 
Faire une Assemblée, to call an Assembly. 
Renvoier une Assemblée, to dis­
miss an Assembly. 
Assemblée de Ville, an Assem­
bly of Citizens or People. 
Il a eté loüé en pleine Assem­
blée, he was praised before all the Congregation.
Assemblée de seditieux, an as­
sembly  



(or meeting) of seditious people.  

ASSENER, fraper là où l'on visoit, to hit, strike, touch, or reach home. 
Assener un Sanglier, to strike a wild boar through. 
Assené, lancé, roidement, cast with violence. 
Un coup bien assené, a good hit.  

ASSEOIR une Statue, une Colomne, &c. to set up a Statue, a Pillar, &c. 
Asseoir les tailles sur une Pro­
vince, en faire le departement, to cess, tax, or assess a Province. 
Asseoir son Empire parmi des Peuples barbares, to settle his Empire amongst barbarous Nati­
ons. 
Asseoir son jugement sur quê­
que chose, to give his opinion in something. 
Asseoir sa veuë sur quêque ob­
jet, to look stedfastly upon an object. 
S'Asseoir, to sit down. 
Asseiez vous, sit down, sit you down. 
S'Asseoir pres de quêcun, to sit by (to sit near) one. 
S'Asseoirà table, to sit at table. 
Assis, sitting, that sits. 
Etre assis, to be sitting, to sit. 
J'étois assis aupres de lui, I sate by him. 
Etre assis sur quêque chose, to sit upon a thing. 
Etre assis à table, to sit at table. 
Assesseur (m.) a Judge lateral, or an Assistant unto a Judge, one that sits in Court as an associate with, or an adviser of him, and more particularly an assistant un­
to a Provost Marshal, or Lieu­
tenant Criminal. 
Etre Assesseur de quêcun, to be an Assistant unto a Judge. 
Asseyeur de tailles (m.) a Ces­
sor, in matter of taxes, &c. 
Assiete, Asseyement, depar­
tement de tailles, assessment, taxation, or cotisation. 
Assiete d'une Ville, the seat, site, or situation of a Town. 
Une Place forte d'assiete, a strongly seated place. 
Assiete de l'ame, disposition de l'esprit, a state of mind. 
En l'assiete où j'ai l'esprit il ne me peut arriver aucun malheur, my mind is so prepared against all chances that nothing can shake me. 
Cette elevation ne changera ri­
en à l'assiete de mon ame, this rising to honour shall not in the least change the state of my soul, my mind shall be always the same for all this change. 
En quelle assiette avoit il l'es­
prit? how did he seem to be affe­
cted? how was he concerned at it? 
Il se trouva l'esprit en une é­
trange assiete, he found himself strangely troubled, perplexed, dis­
quieted, disturbed. 
Elle remit son ame en sa premi­
ere assiete, she came to her self a­
gain. 
Assiete, ou assiete de table, a plate. 
Assise d'une muraille (f.) the foundation of a wall. 
Assises, Assemblées, Assizes, or Sessions. 
Tenir les Assises, to hold the Assi­
zes.  

ASSERTEUR de liberté (m.) a defender, maintainer of liberty. 
Assertion (f.) affirmation, an assertion, or affirmation.  

ASSERVIR quêcun, to sub­
ject, inthrall, or make one a slave. 
Asservir sa Patrie à un Tyran, to put his Country into the hands of a Tyrant. 
Asservi, subjected, inthralled, or inslaved.
 
* Assesseur. V. Asseoir.  

ASSEURER quêque chose en parlant, to assure, or affirm something, to avouch it. 
Il faut bien savoir une chose a­
vant que de l'asseurer, one needs be sure of a thing before he makes it sure to others. 
Je vous asseure que je le ferai, I assure you, I promise you that I shall do it. 
Je t'asseure, j'engage ma paro­
le, que le Roi te pardonnera, I warrant you, I ingage my word that the King shall forgive you. 
Asseurer quêcun, l'encourager, le mettre hors de toute crainte, to secure one, to put him out of all fear. 
Je ne puis pas vous asseurer qu'on n'usera d'aucune violence, I cannot promise (I cannot war­
rant) you that no violence shall be used. 
Asseurer, établir quêque chose, to make a thing sure, to establish it, to settle it. 
Asseurer son argent, to make his money sure, to secure it. 
Asseurer des marchandises, to insure ones goods. 
Asseurer ses affaires, to settle his affairs, to see them safe and out of danger. 
Asseurer la bouche à un Cheval, to use a horse to the bridle. 
Asseurer (affaiter) l'Oiseau, en termes de Fauconnerie, to man a hawk throughly. 
S'Asseurer de quêcun, pour l'a­
voir de son party, to make sure of one, to have him on his side. 
S'asseurer d'un Enemi, d'une personne qui nous donne de la jalousie, to secure himself from the attempts of his adversary. 
En m'asseurant de sa personne j'asseurerai la tranquillité publi­
que, when I am sure of his person, I shall be sure of the publick peace and quiet. 
S'Asseurer de quêcun, se saisir de lui, to make sure of one, to se­
cure one, to apprehend him. 
S'Asseurer d'une place, en y mettant Garnison, to secure a strong Place with a Garrison. 
Pour s'asseurer de ce poste il s'-applique à le fortifier, to keep that post he is about to fortify it. 
S'Asseurer de quêque chose, en étre persuadé, to be sure, to be perswaded, to be confident of a thing, to assure himself of it. 
Je m'asseure de vous le faire comprendre, I am confident I shall make you to understand it. 
Il s'asseuroit d'obtenir ce Gou­
vernement, he promised himself, he assured himself of that Govern­
ment. 
Qui pouvoit s'asseurer qu'il n'y auroit point de Voleurs? who could imagine that there should be no Robbers? 
Asseuré, certain, sure, cer­
tain. 
Etre asseuré, étre certain d'une chose, to be sure, to be certain of a thing. 
Il est asseuré d'étre pendu, he is sure to be hanged, he is confident that he shall be hanged. 
Je suis asseuré (je tiens pour as­
seuré) qu'il est mort, I am sure, I am certain he is dead. 
Soyez asseuré, tenez pour asseu­
ré, be sure. 
Je n'en ai point de nouvelles as­
seurées, I have no certain news of it. 
Asseuré, qui est en asseurance, ou hors de danger, secure, safe, or out of danger. Asseuré, hardi, resolu, bold, har­
dy,  



resolute, fearless. 
Un Ami asseuré, a true, faithful, trusty, or true-hearted friend. 
Une personne asseurée, à qui l'on peut se fier, a trusty person, who may be trusted to. 
Je vous écrirai toutes les fois que je trouverai des personnes asseurées, I shall write to you as often as I shall find persons whom I may intrust with my letters. 
Une voie asseurée, a safe way. 
Asseurance (f.) seureté, secu­
rity, safety. 
Qui est en asseurance, safe, fear­
ing nothing. 
Un lieu d'asseurance, a safe place, a place out of danger. 
Mettre quêcun en asseurance, to put one out of danger, to see that he take no harm. 
Je ne puis sortir avec asseu­
rance, it is not safe for me to go out. 
Vivre en asseurance, to live se­
curely, quietly, out of danger. 
Asseurance, hardiesse, boldness, assurance, confidence. 
Avec asseurance, sans craindre, confidently, without fear. 
Avec asseurance, sans douter, confidently, positively, with asseve­
ration. 
Asseurance, certitude, assu­
rance, sureness. 
Avez vous quêque asseurance de la Paix? are you sure the Peace is made? 
Je ne puis vous donner aucune asseurance de cela, I cannot as­
sure (or warrant) you of it. 
Asseurance, obligation, promes­
se, assurance, promise. 
Je vous donne asseurance (je vous asseure, ou je vous promet) qu'il ne lui sera fait aucun tort, I assure you (I promise you) he shall have no wrong done him. 
Asseurance, gage, gage, pledge, surety, security. 
Donner des asseurances à quê­
cun, to give one security. 
Prendre ses asseurances, ses seu­
retez, to take security. 
J'ai pour asseurance sa parole, his word is my security. 
Asseurément, certainement, surely, assuredly, certainly. 
S'il n'est pas le premier, il est du moins asseurément le second, if he be not the first, surely he is however the second. 
Asseurement, resolument, avec asseurance, sans danger, boldly, confidently, without flinching or fear. 
Asseurément, sans danger, se­
curely, safely.  

ASSEZ, enough, or enow, suf­
ficiently, very well, as much as needs. 
C'est assez parler, you said e­
nough. 
J'ai assez vêcu, I have lived long enough. 
Sera ce assez bien de la sorte? will it be well enough so? 
Sera ce assez si je vous le don­
ne? will that be enough if I give it you? 
N'est ce pas assez que vous m' aiez trompé une fois? is not it enough for you to have cheated me once? 
Ce lui est assez de le voir, he is contented if he do's but see him. 
Je me porte assez bien, I am pretty well. 
Je ne suis pas assez insensé pour le croire, I am not so mad as to believe it. 
Il se trompe assez souvent, he is often mistaken. 
Assez de gens manquent en ceci, many a people fail in this. 
Si ce n'est pas assez d'un, j'en donneraí deux, if one be not e­
nough, I shall give two.  

ASSIDU, assiduous, diligent, laborious. 
Etre assidu à quêque ouvrage, to sit hard at work, to be eager upon it. 
Assiduité (f.) assiduity, dili­
gence. 
Assiduement, assiduously, con­
stantly, continually.  

ASSIEGER une Ville, to be­
siege a Town, to lay the Siege be­
fore it. 
Assieger quêcun, l'environner en grand nombre, to surround one. 
Assiegé, besieged. 
Une Ville assiegée, a Town that's besieged. 
Les Assiegés, the besieged. 
Les Assiegeans, the Besiegers. 
Les Assiegeans furent repoussés, & perdirent beaucoup de mon­
de, the Besiegers were beaten back with the loss of many men.
 
* Assiete. V. Asseoir.  

ASSINER, ou Assigner quê­
que chose à quêcun, la lui de­
stiner, to assign, give, or appoint.
Assiner la dot d'une femme sur quêque fonds, to assign (or lay out) Land unto a woman for her jointure or dower. 
Il a assiné à tous ce qu'ils doi­
vent faire, he has appointed every one his task. 
Il m'a assiné mes gages sur les deniers publics, he has appointed my stipend to be paid out of the pu­
blick Revenue. 
Assiner, determiner le jour, to appoint the day. 
Assiner, ajourner quêcun, le fai­
re assiner pour comparoítre de­
vant le Juge, to serve a warrant of appearance upon one, to warn (or summon) him to appear before a Judge. 
Assiné, Assigné, destiné, donné, assigned, given, or appoin­
ted. 
Dot assinée sur quêque fonds, Land assigned (or layd out) unto a woman for her jointure or dow­
er. 
Lieu assiné, lieu particulier, a cer­
tain place, a place appointed or a­
greed on. 
Jour assiné, a day appointed. 
Assiné en Justice, summoned (war­
ned) to appear. 
Assination, ou Assignation (f.) destination de quêque chose à quêques personnes, an assure­
ment, appointment, or distributi­
on. 
Assination du tems & du lieu pour faire quêque chose, an ap­
pointment of time and place to do any thing. 
Assination à comparoitre de­
vant le Juge, a summons (or warrant) to appear before a Judge. 
Donner assination à quêcun lui assiner un rendez vous, to ap­
point one to meet at a certain place. 
Donner assination à quêcun de­
vant le Juge, to summon one to appear before a Judge at the day appointed. 
Manquer l'assination, à venir au lieu & tems assinez, not to come to the place appoin­
ted. 
Manquer l'assination, à com­
paroitre devant le Juge, not to appear before the Judge according to the warrant.
 
* Assis, Assise, & Assises. V. As­
seoir.  

ASSISTER, aider quêcun, to help, or assist one. 
Assistez moi de vôtre conseil,  



help me with your advice. 
Dieu vous assiste, God help you. 
Assister, étre present, to be pre­
sent at, or to stand by. 
Assister, accompagner quêcun, to accompany one. 
Assisté, secouru, helped, assist­
ed. 
Je n'ai eté assisté de personne en cette affaire, I had no body's assistance in this business. 
Assisté, accompagné, accompa­
ny'd. 
Assistant, aidant, an assistant, a helper. 
Assistant; present, a stander by. 
Assistance (f.) help, assist­
ance. 
Donner assistance à quêcun, to help, or assist one, to afford him his assistance.  

ASSOCIER, quêcun, s'asso­
cier avec quêcun, to receive one into his society, to hold society or fellowship with one. 
Associer quêcun à l'Empire, to make one his Associate or Partner in the Empire. 
Associé, associated, or joyned in fellowship. 
Associé, parsonnier, a Part­
ner. 
Associé à l'Empire, a Partner in the Empire. 
Il est vôtre associé dans vos cri­
mes, he is an accessary to your crimes. 
Associable, courtois, sociable, associable, affable, fit to hold fel­
lowship with. 
Association (f.) association, soci­
ety, fellowship.  

ASSOMMER quêcun, to fell, strike, or knock one down, to over­
bear him with blows. 
Assommé, felled struck, or knoc­
ked down. 
Assommeur (m.) a knocker, fel­
ler, or beater down.
 
L'ASSOMPTION de nòtre Dame, a solemn holy day kept by the Church of Rome the 15 of August. We term it our Lady day in harvest.  

ASSORTIR, to sort, match, or out together. 
L'Amitié ne peut lier étroite­
ment deux cœurs si la sympa­
thie ne prend la peine de les as­
sortir, friendship can never knit two hearts together, if sympathy doth not first match them. 
Assortir de choses necessaires, to furnish (or provide) with things ne­
cessary. 
Assorti, sorted, matched, or put together. 
Un habit dont les couleurs sont bien assorties, a sute of clothes the colours whereof are well mat­
ched. 
Assorti, orné, garni, furnished, trimmed. 
Assortable, sortable, suita­
ble. 
Assortiment (m.) ornement, ornament, decking, trim­
ming. 
Assortissement (m.) a sor­
ting, or matching of things toge­
ther.  

ASSOUPIR, to make dull, drowsy, heavy, or asleep. 
Assoupir une querelle, l'appai­
ser, to make up a quarrel, to pacify it. 
Assoupir, éteindre, étoufer, to suppress, extinguish, or put under foot. 
Assoupi, dull, heavy, drowsy, or sleepy. 
Une Guerre assoupie, a War that is at an end. 
Assoupissant, qui assoupit, that makes dull, heavy, drowsy, or asleep. 
Assoupissement de sommeil, (m.) a sound, deep, or dead sleep, a drowsiness. 
Assoupissement, étourdissement, a benumming, a dulness (or a trou­
ble) of mind. 
Assoupissement de querelle, an appeasing of a quarrel, a composing of a difference.  

ASSOUVIR, to fill, content, satiate, satisfy. 
Assouvir la faim, assouvir ses convoitises, to satisfy his hunger, to satisfy his lust. 
Assouvi, rassasié, filled, conten­
ted, satiated, satisfy'd. 
Assouvissement, (m.) a fil­
ling, contenting, satiating, satis­
fying.  

ASSUJETTIR, to bring un­
der, subdue, assubject, make sub­
ject. 
Assujettir (soûmettre) des Peuples à son Pouvoir, to bring Nations under his Subjecti­
on. 
S'Assujettir à quêcun, to Subject himself to one, to give himself over to his power. 
Assujetti, brought under, subdu­
ed, assubjected, made Subject. 
Etre assujetti aux Loix, to be subject to the Laws.  

ASTHME (m.) difficulté de respiration, a disease, when (through the lungs stopped with flegm) a man can hardly fetch his breath, but with wheasing, blowing, or puffing. 
Asthmatique, that draweth his wind short, which breatheth pain­
fully, pursy.  

ASTRAGALE (m.) l'os du talon des bêtes qui ont le pié fourchu, the pastle (or huckle) bone in a beast. 
Jeu d'astragale, ou des osselets, the Game that is play'd with huckle bones, the play at Cock­
al. 
Astragale, ou fusée avec ses pe­
sons, en terme d'Architecture, an Astragal, a writhen circle or ring about a Pillar, which most commonly is graven with ber­
ries.  

ASTRINGENT, astringent, astrictive, binding, or making co­
stive. 
Les Sorbes sont astringentes, sorb apples are binding.  

ASTRE (m.) a Star. 
Astrolable (m.) an Astrolabe, a flat round Instrument, whereby the severall motions of heavenly bodies and the length, height, and breadth of any other thing, may be discerned and found out. 
Astrologie (f.) la Science de predire les choses futures par la conoissance des Astres, a science called Astrology, teaching how to foretell things to come, by the mo­
tion of the Stars. 
Astrologique, Astrologicall, be­
longing to Astrology. 
Astrologue (m.) an Astrologer, one that foretells things to come by Astrology. 
Astronomie (f.) la Science des Astres, Astronomy, knowlege (or profession of the knowledge) of Stars. 
Astronome (m.) an Astrono­
mer, a Teacher or professor of the knowledge of Stars, or heavenly mo­
tions. 
Astronomique, Astronomicall, pertaining to Astronomy.  

ASYLE (m.) a Sanctuary, or privileged place, a place of re­
fuge.




  
A T
ATANASIE (f.) sorte d'herbe, tansy, an herb that hath a long jagged leaf, a long stalk, round, and on the top a knap with sweet seeds having a sharp sent.  

ATHEE (m.) one that believes there is no God. 
Atheisme (m.) Atheism, the denying of, or not believing in God.  

ATHLETE (m.) a Champi­
on at wrestling, running, and such other common games of strength and activity. 
Les douze Apôtres étoient tout autant de genereux Athletes, the twelve Apostles were so many stout Champions,  

ATOME (m.) an atome, a thing so small that it cannot be divided.  

ATOUR de femmes (m.) womens attire. 
Dame d'atour de la Reine, a Lady of the Queens Wardrobe.  

ATRABILE, black choler, melancholy. 
Atrabilaire, subject to melan­
choly, or black choler.  

ATROCE, outragious, cruel, hainous, very grievous. 
Une injure atroce, an hainous in­
jury. 
Atrocité (f.) atrocity, outra­
giousness, cruelty, barbarousness. 
Atrocement, outragiously, cru­
elly, barbarously.  

ATTACHE (f.) lien, a band, or any thing that fastneth or ti­
eth. 
Un Chien d'attache, a bloud-hound, or lime-hound. 
Attache, attachement, affecti­
on à quêque chose, an earnest bending of the mind to a thing, a mans fancy to it. 
Attache, affiche, écriteau, a Li­
bel, Proclamation, or publick E­
dict pasted on the corner-posts of Streets, or set up in open places, that all persons may take notice of it. 
Attache, permission, leave, per­
mission. 
Attacher, to ty, bind, fasten, or make fast. 
Attacher une chose à une au­
tre, to ty one thing to another. 
Attacher avec un ruban, to ty a thing with a ribbon. 
Attacher avec une épingle, to pin. 
Attachez vôtre manche qui pend, avec une épingle, pin your sleeve that hangs down for want of pinning. 
Attacher avec un bouton; to button. 
Attachez les deux bouts de vô­
tre manche avec un bouton, but­
ton your sleeve, make it fast with a button. 
Attacher un tableau contre une muraille, to hang a picture against a wall. 
Attacher des mouleures sur des coupes d'or, to set emblems (or motto's) to golden cups. 
Cet objet attacha si fort ma veuë, my eys were so much taken with that object. 
Attacher quêcun à ses interets, to bind one to him by good turns. 
S'Attacher, to stick, to take hold. 
La Vigne s'attache à tout ce qu'elle peut attraper, the Vine winds it self about any thing it takes hold of. 
S'Attacher, s'appliquer à l'é­
tude de quêque chose, to give (or to apply) his mind to a thing. 
S'Attacher à quêque chose, y in­
sister, to insist upon a thing. 
Attaché, ty'd, bound, fastened, or made fast. 
Ces choses sont attachées les unes aux autres, these things are joyned together, or depend upon one another. 
Attaché à quêcun par affection, knit in friendship to one. 
Attaché à ses sentimens, wed­
ded to his own opinion, resolute or obstinate in it. 
Attachement (m.) liaison, a joyning together, a knot, or band. 
Il a eu de l'attachement avec mes enemis, he has taken part with my enemy's, he has kept correspondence with them.  

ATTAQUE (f.) an assault, onset, or incounter. 
Donner une attaque, attaquer, to begin the fight. 
Faire l'attaque d'une Place, to attack (or make an assault upon) a Place. 
Aussi tôt que nous l'aurons in­
vestie, nous en ferons l'attaque, assoon as we have invested it, we shall attack it, we shall make an assault upon it. 
Cesser l'attaque d'une Place, to cease from attacking a Place. 
Une fausse attaque, a false at­
tack. 
Attaquer, assaillir quêcun, to set (or to fall) upon one, to as­
sault, or incounter him. 
Attaquer quêcun à coups de pi­
erres, to set upon one with stones. 
Attaquer, provoquer quêcun, to provoke, stir, or egg a man to wrath or contention. 
Attaquer une Ville, to assault, to batter a Town, to lay Siege un­
to it. 
S'Attaquer à quêcun, to coap, meddle, scuffle, grapple, quarrel, fight, or brabble with one. 
Attaqué, set upon, assaulted, or incountred. 
Etre attaqué de quêcun, to be set upon by one. 
Attaqué, provoqué, provoked.  

ATTEINDRE, toucher, to reach, or attain unto. 
Atteindre la fin qu'on s'est pro­
posée, to compass his end, to ob­
tain the thing aimed at. 
Il a atteint l'age de cent ans, he is come to an hundred years of age. 
Atteindre quêcun, to overtake one. 
Atteint, frapé, hit. 
Atteint d'un Crime, attainted, or convicted of a crime. 
Atteinte (f.) arrivée, attaque, a coming, approach, or onset. 
Je ne sens point les atteintes de la chaleur, I don't feel the onsets or approaches of heat. 
A la premiere atteinte du mal il s'est abbattu, he no sooner fell sick but he was presently deje­
cted. 
Je lui donnerai quêques atte­
intes pour lui tirer se ver du nez, I shall indeavour by some means or other to pump it out of him. 
Atteinte, coup, a blow, hit, or home touch. 
Recevoir quêque legere atte­
inte, to be lightly nipped. 
Passer sa vie sans recevoir au­
cune atteinte, to pass all his life time without any blemish. 
La Fortune me donne de tems en tems quêque atteinte, For­
tune now and then do's pinch me, is sometimes cross to me. 
Etre insensible aux plus vives atteintes de la douleur, to be in­
sensible of the sharpest pangs of pain.
Atteinte, en termes de Ma­
nege,  



is said of one that running at the Ring hits it, but gets it not. 
Il a eu deux atteintes & un de­
dans, he has hit the ring twice, and got it once.  

ATTELER des chevaux, to put the horses to a cart, coach, or the like, or to harness them for it. 
Attelé, put to a cart, coach, or the like, or harnessed for it. 
Attelage (m.) harness for a draught, &c. or for the Cattel that draw it, their furniture. 
Attelage d'artisan, a tradesmans tool, or instrument. 
Attelier d'Artisan, a place for a Trades mans tools.  

ATTENANT, next, or joyn­
ing unto. 
La maison attenante à la mien­
ne, the very next house to my own.  

ATTENDRE, to stay, tarry, wait, or expect. 
Attendez un peu, stay a little, tarry a little while. 
Pourquoi le faites vous atten­
dre? why do you make him stay? 
Attendez que je retourne, stay till I come back. 
Je n'ai rien souhaité qu'il ne m'ait donné, sans attendre que je le lui demandasse, I longed for nothing but I had it before I asked him for't. 
Je vous attendrai à la porte, I shall stay (I shall wait) for you at the door. 
J'attens sa réponse avec impa­
tience, I stay for his answer with great impatiency. 
J'atten cette faveur de vôtre bonté, I expect that favour from your bounty. 
On attend de grandes choses de vous, great things (or great mat­
ters) are expected from you. 
Vôtre courage me fait atten­
dre quêque chose de bon, I promise my self great things from your courage. 
Une pareille peine l'attend, the like punishment attends him. 
Se faire attendre à quêcun, to make one stay (to make one wait) for him. 
Je ne vous attendois pas si tôt, I did not expect you so soon. 
S'Attendre à quêque chose, to trust to, to rely, or depend upon a thing. 
Je m'attendois que vous m'écri­
riez, I expected you would write to me. 
Je ne m'attendois pas à ce­
la, I did not imagine any such thing, I could not imagine such a thing would come to pass. 
Je ne m'atten plus à cela, I rely no more upon that. 
Attendu, stay'd, waited for, ex­
pected. 
On vous a long tems attendu, you have been long expected. 
Attendant, en attendant qu'il vienne, till he comes. 
En attendant, cependant, in the mean time, in the mean while, in the interim. 
Attente (f.) expectation, hopes. 
Je suis dans une grande atten­
te, I am in great expectati­
on. 
Vous ne répondez pas à l'atten­
te qu'on a de vous, you do not answer the common expectati­
on. 
Cela est arrivé contre mon at­
tente, that fell out contrary to my expectation. 
Contre l'attente de tout le mon­
de, contrary to the expectation of all the World. 
Vous avez surpassé mon atten­
te, you are gone beyond my expe­
ctation. 
Table d'attente, a plate of cop­
per, &c. 
Pierres d'attente, the stones that stick out of a wall for new build­
ings to be joyned to it. 
Attention (f.) attention, heed, watchfulness, carefulness, dili­
gence. 
Faire quêque chose avec atten­
tion, to do a thing carefully, with great care and diligence. 
Tout le monde regarde avec at­
tention ce tableau, every one stares upon that picture. 
Attentif à quêque chose, at­
tentive, listening, heedfull, dili­
gent, carefull, vigilant, earnestly bent unto, or exceedingly set upon a thing. 
Soiez attentifs, rendez vous at­
tentifs, give ear, be attentive, mind well. 
Vous n'étes pas attentif pendant que je parle, you don't mind when I speak. 
Attentivement, attentively, carefully, heedfully. 
Ecouter attentivement une per­
sonne qui parle, to mind well what one says.  

ATTENDRIR, to soften, mol­
lify, or make tender. 
Attendrir quêcun de com­
passion, to move one to compassi­
on. 
S'Attendrir, devenir tendre, to grow soft, or tender. 
S'Attendrir, étre touché de compassion, to be moved to com­
passion. 
Attendri, softened, mollify'd, or made tender. 
Attendri, touché de compassion, moved to compassion. 
Attendrissement (m.) a soft­
ning, mollifying, or making ten­
der. 
Attendrissement, compassion; pity, compassion, tender-hearted­
ness.
 
* Attendu, & Attente. V. Atten­
dre.  

ATTENTER sur la vie de quêcun, to attempt upon a mans life. 
Attenter sur la pudicité d'une fil­
le, to go about to ravish or violate a virgin. 
Attenter sur la Juridiction de quêcun, to incroach upon another mans Jurisdiction. 
Attentat (m.) a bold, or wicked attempt. 
Attentat, entreprise sur le droit & l'authorité d'autrui, an in­
croachment upon another mans right and authority. 

* Attentif, Attention, Attenti­
vement. V. Attendre.  

ATTENUATION (f.) en termes de Palais; as, Ecrire par attenuation, to exte­
nuate or lessen a mans crime in writing. 
Repondre par attenuation, to extenuate his crime by an an­
swer.  

ATTERRER quêcun, le jet­
ter par terre, to throw one, to throw him down to the ground, to overthrow him. 
Atterré, prostrate, lying flat, o­
verthrown, destroy'd. 
Atterrement (m.) the throwing of one down to the ground.  

ATTESTER quêque chose, to attest, testify, witness, or con­
firm a thing by witness. 
Attester quêcun, le prendre à témoin, to call one to wit­
ness.



Attesté, attested, verify'd. 
Attestation (f.) certificat, a Certificate, an Attestation. 
Donner attestation à quêcun, to grant one a certificate. 
Prendre attestation de quêcun, to take a Certificate of one.  

ATTIEDIR quêque chose, to warm a thing, or to make it luke­
warm. 
S'Attiedir, to begin to be luke­
warm.  

ATTIFFER une femme, to deck, prank, or trim up a wo­
man. 
Attiffé, femme attiffée, a wo­
man that's prank't up. 
Attiffement (m.) ornement, ornament, decking, or trimming. 

ATTIRER, to draw in, to in­
vite, intice, or allure unto, to attract. 
Attirer quêcun par caresses, to draw one in by kind usage. 
Attirer par persuasion, to draw one in by perswasion. 
Vous atirez sur vous les yeux & l'affection de tout le monde, you attract the eyes and love of all the world. 
Cet Objet m'attire tout à lui, that Object takes me wholly up. 
Vous attirerez plusieurs apres vous dans le même malheur, you will draw many people after you in­
to the same misery. 
J'ai attiré sur moi le mal que je pouvois eviter, I have runned in­
to a mischief which I might have avoided. 
Un mal en attire un autre, one evil draws on another, one evil springs out of another. 
S'Attirer quêque malheur, to draw some mischief or other upon himself, to incur (or run into) a mis­
chief. 
S'Attirer la haine de tous ceux de sa conoissance, to incur the hatred of all his acquaintance. 
Attiré, drawn in, invited, inti­
ced, allured unto, or attracted. 
Attiral (m.) equippage, e­
quippage, provision, or furniture. 
Attrait (m.) appas, alleche­
ment, a bait, allurement, attracti­
on, inticement. 
Se laisser gagner aux attraits du Vice & aux charmes de la Vo­
lupté, to give himself over to the temptations of Vice and the charms of Voluptuousness. 
Attractif, Attrayant, attra­
ctive, inticing, alluring, that has the power or property to draw. 
Une vertu attractive, an attra­
ctive power. 
Attraction (f.) an attraction, or a drawing to.  

ATTISER le feu, to stir the fire, to lay one coal or brand near unto another.  

ATTITRER (aposter) de faux Témoins, to suborn false wit­
nesses. 
Attitré, aposté, suborned.  

ATTOUCHEMENT (m.) a gentle touching, light handling, soft feeling of.
 
* Attrait, Attractif, Attrayant, Attraction. V. Attirer.  

ATTRAPER, atteindre quê­
cun, to overtake one, to catch him. 
Attraper, surprendre quêcun, to surprise one, to take him una­
wares, tardy, or in the deed doing, to be even with him. 
Attraper, tromper quêcun, to cozen, or cheat one. 
Attrapé, overtaken, caught. 
Attrapé, surpris, surprised, ta­
ken unawares, or tardy. 
Il en tient, il est a ttrappé, he is met with, he is caught. 
Attrapé, trompé, cozened, chea­
ted.  

ATTREMPANCE, ou tem­
perance, temperance, or modera­
tion.  

ATTRIBUER, to attribute, impute, or put upon. 
J'attribue cette saute à vôtre i­
gnorance, I attribute this fault to your ignorance. 
S'Attribuer quêque chose, to challenge, assume, or take upon himself. 
Attribué, attributed, imputed, or put upon. 
Attribut (m.) an Attribute. 
Les Attributs de Dieu, God's Attributes.  

ATTRISTER quêcun, to grieve one, to make him sad, heavy, or sorrowfull. 
S'Attrister de quêque chose, to take a thing to heart, to be grieved for it. 
Attristé, agrieved, grown sad, made sorrowfull.
 
S'ATTROUPER, to troop to­
gether, to assemble in troops or companies.

  
A U
AU, a masculine Article, or a Preposition bearing the energy of a masculine Article, is set before masculine Nouns that begin with a consonant and signify's, to the, in the, at the; as, 
Il est allé au Palais du Duc, he is gone to the Dukes Palace.
Il est au College, he is in the Colledge. 
Il demeure au Cygne noir, he lives at the black Swan.
In the Plurall Number Au is turned into
Aux (in English) to the, in the, or at the, as the singular Au.  

AVAL, en terme de Riviere, down, or downward. 
Ils courent la Riviere, l'un a­
mont, & l'autre aval, they go up and down the River. 
Un Vent d'aval, a west-south-west wind, or a westerly wind that somewhat inclines to the South. 
Avaler quêque chose, to swal­
low somthing, to let it down the throat. 
Avalé, swallowed. 
Avalement (m.) a swallowing down.  

AVANCE (f.); as, Faire des avances de quêque chose, faire les premieres de­
marches, to make the first advan­
ces in a thing, to make the first step towards it. 
J'ai fait toutes les avances de nôtre Amitié, I made the way for our friendship, I made the first advances in our friendship. 
D'avance, par avance, before hand. 
Paier d'avance, to pay before hand. 
Avance d'une muraille, the co­
ping of a wall. 
Avancer quêque chose, la pousser avant, to move a thing (to set it) forward. 
Avancer la main, to put forth his hand, or stretch it forwards. 
Avancer un discours, le mettre en avant, to utter (or bring forth) a matter. 
Je n'avance aucune parole qui ne soit vraie, I speak not a word but what I know to be true. Avancer de l'argent à quêcun,  



to advance mony to one, to give him money before hand. 
Avancer le pas, to make speed, to go in hast. 
Avancer un dessein, to further (to put on, to forward) a de­
sign. 
Avancer les bornesde l'Empire, to inlarge his Dominions. 
Avancer le supplice a quêcun, to hasten (to forward) ones punish­
ment. 
Cet accident lui a avancé la mort, ou les jours, that mischance hastened his death, or has shortned days. 
Avancer quêcun dans les Char­
ges, to advance, prefer, or promote one. 
Avancer, aller en avant, s'avan­
cer, to go on, to proceed. 
Faire avancer une Armée vers quêque lien, to make an Army move forward to some place. 
Une maison qui avance en la rue, a house that juts into the street. 
Un Rocher qui avance dans la Mer, a Rock that shoots forth into the Sea. 
Je n'avance rien par mes plain­
tes, I get nothing by my com­
plaines. 
Je n'avance rien, je ne gagne ri­
en, I go nothing forward, I profit nothing, I don't thrive. 
Avancer, profiter en quêque chose, to make some progress in a business. 
Savancer, se hâter, to make hast. 
Il s'avance vers la Ville, he comes towards the Town, he draws towards the Town. 
Le Navire s'avance vers le Port, the Ship makes for the Port. 
S'Avancer dans les honneurs, to come to preferment. 
Avancé, moved (put, set) for­
ward. 
Avancé en âge, well stept in years, aged. 
Un Toit avancé dans la Rue, a roof jutting into the street. 
Argent avancé, mony advanced, or paid before hand. 
La nuit étoit bien avancée, it was late in the night. 
Avancé aux honneurs, advanced to honours, preferred to great ho­
nours. 
Avancement (m.) the setting of a thing forward. 
Avancement, progres, a progress, or going forward. 
Il a sait de grands avancemens dans l'étude de la Rhetorique, il y a beaucoup profité, he has made a very great progress in the study of Rhetorick, he has very much improved himself in Rheto­
rick. 
Avancement aux honneurs, pre­
ferment. 
Avant, before. 
Avant le jour, before day. 
Je vous remercie avant tous les autres, I thank you before all o­
thers. 
Il parle avant le tems, he speaks before the time. 
Mettre en avant quêque chose, la proposer, en faire mention, to offer a matter to consideration, to propound, open, declare, or men­
tion it. 
Bien avant, sort avant, far, deep­
ly, a great way. 
Le coûteau est entré bien avant dans son ventre, the knife went deep into his belly. 
Cet arbre a poussé ses racines bien avant, that tree has taken deep root. 
Gravez ceci bien avant dans vôtre esprit, let this be deeply im­
printed in your mind. 
Cette pensée est bien avant dans mon esprit, the thought of this is deeply rooted in my heart. 
Etre bien avant dans les bonnes graces de quêcun, to be much in ones favour. 
Je me suis insinué fort avant dans son amitié, I have insinua­
ted my self far into his favour. 
Nous étions dêja bien avant dans la Mer, we were already got a great way to Sea. 
La chose alla si avant que, the business went so far that. 
N'allez pas plus avant, go no further. 
Avant que, before. 
Il répond avant que d'étre in­
terrogé, he answers before he is asked the question. 
Il mourut avant que vous fussi­
és nay, he died before you were born. 
Avant qu'il fust jour, before day, before it was day light. 
Il faut vaincre avant que de penser aux dépouilles, victory must be got before we think of booty. 
Avantage (m.) a benefit, or ad­
vantage. 
Quel avantage tirez vouz de la? what benefit do you reap from thence? 
Tu ne peux esperer d'autre a­
vantage de cette action que l'applaudissement d'une multi­
tude ignorante, you cannot ex­
pect any other benefit from that action than the applause of an ig­
norant rabble. 
La Vertu a de grands avantages, Virtue has great advantages. 
Avantage, interet, advantage, interest, profit, or commodity. 
Chercher ses avantages, to mind his own interest, to leave no stone unturned for his advantage. 
C'est mon avantage, 'tis my pro­
fit, 'tis my interest. 
Prendre son avantage de la foi­
blesse de quêcun, to turn a mans weakness to his own advantage. 
Tirer son avantage de la ruine d'un autre, to better himself by the ruine of another. 
Avantage de Nature, don de Nature, a gift (or grace) of Na­
ture. 
Doué de tous les avantages de la Nature & de l'Art, indowed with all manner of gifts both of Art and Nature. 
Avoir de grands avantages sur quêcun, to be much beyond ano­
ther. 
Il n'a point d'avantage sur moi, he is no better man than I, I am as good a man as he. 
Donner à quêcun l'avantage de l'Eloquence, l'estimer le pre­
mier des Orateurs, to look upon one as the greatest Oratour, to give him the first place amongst Orators. 
L'Ame a de grands avantages sur le Corps, the Soul is much more excellent than the Body. 
Un Avantage remporté sur l'Enemi, a victory. 
Qui a eu l'avantage en ce Com­
bat? who had the better in that fight? who got the victory? 
Personne n'a eu l'avantage, there has been no Victory, both sides were equally beaten, and reti­
red upon even terms. 
Pousser son avantage, to im­
prove his advantage. 
Avantage du lieu, the conveni­
ence of a place. 
Prendre l'avantage du lieu, to make use of the convenience of the place.
Etre monté à l'avantage, to be  



excellently (or exceeding well) mounted. 
Parler à son avantage, to speak well of himself. 
Il a parlé fort à vôtre avan­
tage, he has spoken very well (he has given a very good character) of you. 
D'avantage, more. 
En voulez vouz d'avantage? will you have any more of it? 
Je dis bien d'avantage, I say more than that. 
D'avantage, de plus, outre cela, en outre, further, furthermore, moreover, besides. 
Avantager, faire des avanta­
ges à quêcun, to gratifie one, to favour him. 
Il a avantagé son aîné de dix mille écus, he has given his el­
dest Son ten thousand crowns more than any of the younger 
Il n'a en rien avantagé son fils aîné par dessus le cadet, he has allowed his eldest Son no more than the younger brother. 
Dieu a avantagé les hommes de la Raison, God has endowed men with Reason. 
Avantagé, gratify'd, favoured. 
Il a eté avantagé sur tous ses freres, he has had more than any of his brothers. 
Il veut étre avantagé en toutes choses, he will be the chief man in all things. 
Avantagé de toutes les qualités de la nature, excellently well qua­
lify'd. 
Avantageux, utile, commode, advantageous, useful, commodi­
ous. 
Avantageux, honorable, advan­
tageous, honourable. 
Il a des sentimens de moi fort avantageux, he thinks well, or advantageously of me, he has a good opinion of me. 
Il parle de lui en des termes a­
vantageux, he speaks advantage­
ously of him, he speaks much to his advantage. 
Avantageux, lucratif, good, gain­
ful, profitable. 
C'est un emploi fort avanta­
geux, 'tis a very good Imploy­
ment. 
Etre d'une taille avantageuse, to be a proper man, to be a man of a good stature. 
Avantageusement, utilement, commodement, advantageously, conveniently, commodiously. 
Avantageusement, honorable­
ment, honourably. 
Parler avantageusement de quêcun, to speak honourably of one. 
Vouz parlez trop avantageuse­
ment de vos actions, you speak with too much pride of your own actions. 
Avant-bras d'un Gendarme, a Vambrace, armour for an arm. 
Avant-cour (f.) an outward or little Court before the portal or gate of a great House. 
Avant-coureur (m.) a fore-runner. 
Avant-garde (f.) the Vanguard of an Army. 
Avant-goût (m.) a prelibation, a fore-tast of any thing. 
Les Saints ont quêque fois dans cette Vie des avantgoûts du Pa­
radis, the Saints have sometimes in this life a fore-tast of Hea­
ven. 
Avant-hier, the day before ye­
sterday, two dayes ago. 
Avant-jeu (m.) an assay, a tri­
al, or proof before a game begin. 
Avantin de vigne (m.) the arm or branch of a Vine climing or brought along from tree to tree. 
Avant-mur (m.) an avant­
mure, a fore-wall, an out (or out­
ward) wall. 
Avant-portail (m.) a fore­
porch, an outward portal. 
Avant-toit (m.) a Pent-house, or Eves, by which the water sli­
deth.  

AVANTURE, &c. V. Aven­
ture.  

AVARE, Avaricieux, cove­
tous, desirous of mony, avaricious, saving, sparing, niggardly. 
Avarice (f.) covetousness, ava­
rice. 
Il n'est rien de plus impertinent dans le Monde que l'Avarice des Vieillards, qui n'ont d'ar­
deur que pour amasser des Ri­
chesses, lors qu'ils en ont moins affaire, & qu'il leur reste moins à vivre; There is nothing more senseless in the World than the Covetousness of old folks, who are most eager to get riches when they least want it, and are upon the march out of the world. 
L'Avarice regne aujourd'hui dans le Monde, c'est un vice commun, Covetousness is now a reigning vice. 
Par avarice, through covetous­
ness. 
Avarement, sparingly, saving­
ly, niggardly, thriftily, like a pinch­
belly.
 
* Aubade. V. Aube.  

AUBAINE (f.) droit d'Au­
baine, ou droit de Seigneur sur les Biens vaquans, Escheatage, the right of succession in an E­
state for want of an heir. 
Aubaine, les Biens confisquez au Seigneur, tombez en main morte, an Estate fallen to the Lord of the Land for want of an heir.  

AUBANS (m.) grosses cor­
des de mât de Navire, the great ropes of a mast.  

AUBE du jour (f.) point du jour, the break of day, the dawn­
ing of the day, the day-peep. 
Des l'aube du jour, since the break of day. 
Se lever à l'aube du jour, to rise by break of day. 
Aube de Prêtre, a Priests Albe. 
Aubade (f.) morning Musick plaid under ones Chamber win­
dows. 
Donner une aubade à quêcun, to congratulate one at break of day with a noise of Musick.  

AUBEPINE (f.) fleur & ar­
brisseau, the white thorn, or haw-thorn.  

AUBERE, cheval aubere, a dapple gray horse.  

AUBEREAU, ou hobereau (m.) espece d'Aigle, a kind of Eagle.  

AUBERGE (f.) logis, a lodg­
ing house, an Inn. 
Auberge, sorte de fruit. V. Pavie.  

AUBIER, Aubin, Aubour d'un Arbre, le bois le plus blanc & le plus tendre entre l'écorce & le dur, the pith, sap, or whi­
test, or softest part of timber, sub­
ject unto worm-eating. 
Aubier, arbre. V. Opier.  

AUBIFOIN (m.) sorte de plante, the weed blew-bottle, blew-blaw, corn-flower, hurt-sickle.  

AUCUN, any. 
Il n'est aucun qui soit aujourd'hui plus heureux que moi, there is not any man now adayes happi­
er than I am. 
Il n'est en aucun lieu, he is no where. 
Il n'est aucun qui le sache, no body knows it.  



Aucunement, quêque peu, un peu, a little. 
Il n'est aucunement vraisem­
blable, it is not at all likely.  

AUDACE (f.) boldness, auda­
ciousness, insolence, presumption, sauciness. 
Audacieux, bold, daring, pre­
sumptuous, saucy, audacious. 
Audacieusement, boldly, da­
ringly, presumptuously, saucily, au­
daciously.  

AUDIENCE (f.) an audience, or hearing. 
Donner audience à quêcun, l'écouter, to give one audience, or to hear him. 
Avoir audience, to have audi­
ence. 
Audience de barreau, an hear­
ing of a Court of Judicature. 
Audience, le lieu où l'on plaide, the place where the Court is kept, and matters of Judgement plead­
ed and decided, an Hall of Audi­
ence. 
Audience qu'un Prince donne à un Ambassadeur, an audience given by a Prince to an Ambassa­
dour. 
Audience publique, a publick Au­
dience. 
Audience privée, a private Au­
dience. 
Audience de Congé, the last Au­
dience of an Ambassadour. 
Audiencier (m.) Gressier de l'Audience, a Register. 
Auditeur (m.) qui écoute une personne parlant en public, an auditor, or hearer. 
Auditeur de Contes, an Auditor of the Exchequer or Chamber of Accompts. 
Audition des Témoins (f.) a hearing of Witnesses. 
Auditoire (m.) an Audience, or Auditory, an assembly (or compa­
ny) of hearers, a Congregation of people met together to hear a speech in publick. 
Si nous prêchons en même lieu, je grêlerai vôtre Auditoire, vos Auditeurs vous abandonneront pour venir m'entendre, if so be that we come to preach in the same place I shall spoil your Audi­
ence, your Auditory shall leave you to hear me. 
Renvoier l'Auditoire, to dismiss the Congregation. 
Auditoire, le lieu où sont les Auditeurs, the place where the hearers meet.  

AVEC, Avecque, with, toge­
ther with. 
Je suis venu auec mon Pere, I came with my Father. 
Il l'a tué avec un coûteau, he kil­
led him with a knife. 
Avec cela, avec tout cela, for all that. 
Avec le tems, at length, in time. 
D'Avec, from.  

AVEINE, ou Avoine (f.) oats,  

AVELAINE (f.) noisette, a filbeard. 
Avelanier (m.) a filbeard tree.  

AVENIR, arriver par hazard, to happen, chance, come to pass, fall out, or befall. 
Il avient souvent que les plus grands ont besoin des plus pe­
tits, it often falls out that the greatest men stand in need of the meanest. 
S'il avenoit qu'il vinst à mourir, if he should chance to die. 
Il avint en ces jours là, it hapned in those dayes. 
L'Avenir (m.) the time to come. 
Le tems passé & l'avenir, the time past, and the time to come. 
Avenant; as,
Cas avenant (cd. s'il arrivoit) qu'il mourust, in case, (or, if he should chance) to die. 
Avenant, propre à quêque cho­
se, fit, handsom, decent, neat. 
Un homme avenant, courtois, a civil man. 
Mal avenant, unapt, or unfit. 
Avenu, hapned, or come to pass. 
Avenement (m.) coming. 
A son avenement à la Couronne les Prisonniers furent delivrés, at his coming to the Crown the Prisoners were released. 
Depuis son avenement à la Couronne les choses ont bien changé de face, since his coming to the Crown the face of things is very much changed. 
Avenue (f.) a passage, or entry into a place, an avenue. 
Fermer les avenues à quêcun, to shut up all the avenues. 
Se saisir de routes les avenues, to possess himself of all the ave­
nues. 
Il y avoit a l'entrée de la Mai­
son une Avenue de cyprez fort longue & fort droite, just before the house there was a very long and straight walk of cyprus trees. 
Avent (m.) the time of Advent before Christmas. 
Aventure (f.) an adventure, chance, or hap. 
Une bonne aventure, a good luck, or a good wind-fall. 
Une triste aventure, an ill luck, a mishap, or mischance. 
Exposer quêque chose à l'aven­
ture, to venture a thing. 
A toute aventure, whatever falls out. 
Dire à quêcun sa bonne aven­
ture, to tell one his fortune. 
Par aventure, d'aventure, per­
adventure, by chance. 
Aventureux, qui s'expose à l'aventure, aux dangers, ven­
turesom. 
Aventurier (m.) an adventu­
rer, one that without compulsion or charge go's to the War to try his fortune. 
Aventuriers, Pirates, Privateers, or Pirats. 
Aventurine (f.) a sort of coun­
terfeit, or artificial stone.  

AVENTER (terme de ma­
rine) mettre la voile au vent, to set sail, to sail away.  

AVERER quêque chose, to aver a thing, or to verify it. 
Averé, conu, averred, veri­
fy'd. 
C'est une chose averée, it is most certain, most sure.  

AVERSION (f.) repugnance, aversion, averseness. 
Avoir de l'aversion pour quê­
que chose, to be averse from a thing. 
Avoir quêcun en aversion, to be out of conceit with one, to hate him.

† AVERTANCE (f.) attenti­
on, consideration, advertency, attention, consideration.
Je passe ceci avec avertance, I pass this by wittingly. 
Sans avertance, unwisely, unwit­
tingly, foolishly, rashly.  

AVERTIR quêcun de quê­
que chose, to advertise, to warn (or tell) one of a thing, to give him warning (or notice) of it, to inform him, or send him word of it. 
Je les avertis de cela, I give them warning of it. 
Vouz deviez m'en avertir, you should have told me on't. 
Sans m'avoir averti il est parti, he went away and said not a word to me.  



Averti, warned, or told of a thing. 
Avertissement (m.) advertise­
ment, warning. 
Donner des avertissemens à quêcun, to give one some adver­
tisements.
 
* Aveu. V. Avouër.  

AVEUGLE, blind, destitute of sight. 
Je crois que vous étes aveugle, I think you are blind. 
Un Aveugle ne sauroit juger des couleurs, a blind man cannot judge of colours. 
Nous sommes pour l'ordinaire aveugles en nos propres affaires, we are most commonly blind in our own concerns. 
A l'aveugle, blind-fold, without consideration, regard, or ground. 
Faire quêque chose à l'aveugle, to do a thing blind-fold, rashly, foolishly, unadvisedly. 
Obeir à l'aveugle, to submit wholly to ones will. 
Se jetter à l'aveugle au milieu des epées nues, to run blindfold amongst naked swords. 
Se laisser emporter à l'aveugle, to be hurried on by a blind pas­
sion. 
Aveugler quêcun, to blind one. 
Aveuglé, blinded. 
Aveuglement (m.) defaut de veuë, blindness, or want of sight. 
Aveuglément, temeraire­
ment, blindly.  

AUGE (m.) vaisseau dans quoi l'on donne à manger & à boire aux animaux, a manger, a trough. 
Augive (f.) espece d'arceau de voute, an ogive.  

AUGMENTER, to augment, increase, amplify, or inlarge. 
Cette nouvelle a augmenté ma douleur, this news has increased my trouble. 
Augmenter un livre, to inlarge, or to amplifie a book. 
S'Augmenter, to increase, neut. 
Augmenté, augmented, increa­
sed, amplified, inlarged. 
Augmentateur, (m.) an aug­
menter, increaser, amplifier, in­
larger. 
Augment (m.) Augmentati­
on (f.) augmentation, increase.  

AUGURE (m.) presage, di­
vination, soothsaying, or conje­
cture of things to come, a fore-to­
ken, presage, fore-warning, or omen. 
Je pren cela pour bon augure, I take it as a good omen. 
Denoncer de mauvais augures, to tell ominous things. 
Augure, devin, an Augur, a sooth­
sayer, a diviner. 
Augure, l'Office, ou la Dignité d'un Augure, the dignity, or place of an Augur. 
Augurer, conjecturer, predi­
re l'avenir, to divine, to conje­
cture, to foretell, to ominate. 
Qu'augurez vous de cela? what do you gather from that? 
J'augure que tu mourras, I con­
jecture (or gather) that you will die. 
Je n'en augure rien de bon, I promise my self no good of it. 
Autant que je puis augurer, so far as I gather by conjecture.  

AUGUSTE, sacré, august, ho­
ly, sacred.  

AVIDE, desirous, greedy. 
Avidité, (f.) avidity, greediness, eager desire.  

AVILIR quêque chose, to make a thing vile, to make it cheap. 
Avilir son autorité, to make his authority despicable or contemp­
tible.  

AUJOURD'HUI, to day, this day, now, now a daies. 
Il faut que je sorte aujourd'hui, I must go out to day. 
Il n'en est pas de même aujour­
d'hui, it is not so now, it is not so now adaies. 
Dispute d'aujourd'hui, this days dispute. 
Ce n'est pas d'aujourd'hui que les gens de bien sont persecu­
tés, it is not a new thing for good people to be persecuted.  

AVIRON (m.) rame, an oar. 
Tirer à l'aviron, ramer, to oar.  

AVIS (m.) nouvelle qu'on donne de quêque chose, an ad­
vice, information, notice, intelli­
gence. 
Je vous donnerai avis de cela, I shall send you word, or give you notice of it. 
Avis, sentiment, opinion, opini­
on, mind, judgment. 
A mon avis, in my opinion, in my mind, in my judgment. 
Je suis de votre avis, I am of your opinion, of your mind. 
Je suis de tout autre avis, I am quite of another mind. 
Changer d'avis, de sentiment, d'opinion, to change his mind, to to be of another mind. 
Les avis sont contraires, various are the opinions of men concerning it. 
Je suis d'avis qu'on prefere la Paix à la Guerre, I would have Peace to be preferred to the war. 
Je ne suis pas d'avis de lui resi­
ster, I would not have him resisted by any means. 
Il m'est avis, il me semble, me­
thinks. 
Il m'étoit avis que je le voyois, methought I saw him. 
Il m'étoit avis qu'il viendroit, I thought that he would come. 
Avis, conseil, advice, or counsel. 
Donner avis à quêcun, to advise one, or give him counsel. 
Prendre avis de quêcun, to ask advice of one, to consult, or take advice. 
Aviser à quêque chose, to con­
sider of a thing, to see to it. 
Ils avisent entr'eux à ce quil faut faire, they contrive together what's to be done. 
J'aviserai à ce que je dois faire de lui, I shall consider how to dis­
pose of him. 
On y avisera, we will think of it, we will consider (or see) what may be done in it. 
S'Aviser de quêque chose, to think of (or invent) a thing. 
Il s'avisa de vendre ses livres, it came into his mind to sell his books away. 
Je ne m'étois pas avisé de vous avertir, I did not think to mind you. 
Avisé, prudent, wary, conside­
rate, discreet, heedfull, circum­
spect. 
Un homme tres avisé, a very wary, prudent man. 
Mal avisé, inconsiderate, undis­
creet, uncircumspect.  

AVITAILLER. V. Ravitai­
ler.  

AVIVES, maladie de che­
vaux, the Vives, a disease in hor­
ses.  

AULNE. V. Aune.  

AUMELETTE (f.) an ome­
let, or pancake made of eggs.  

AUMONE (f.) an alms, a gift bestowed with a charitable respect on the poor, a charity. 
Demander l'aumône de porte en porte, to beg from door to door.  



Donner l'aumône, to give some­
thing (to bestow a charity) to the poor. 
Vivre d'aumône, to live upon charity. 
Aumônier (m.) Intendant des Aumônes, an Almoner, or Amner. 
Le Gran. Aumônier de France, the great Almoner of France. 
Aumônier, charitable envers les pauvres, an Alms giver.  

AUMUSSE, an ornament of fur worn by Canons.  

AUNE (f.) sorte d'arbre, an alder tree. 
Aunaie, lieu planté d'aunes, an alder-grove.  

AUNE (f.) an ell. 
Mesurer les autres à son au­
ne, to measure another mans corn by his own bushel. 
Je sai qu'en vaut l'aune, I know it by experience. 
Auner quêque chose, to measure a thing by the ell. 
Auné, measured by the ell. 
Auneur (m.) a measurer by the ell. 
Aunage (m.) ell measure.  

AVOCAT (m) a Counsellor at Law, an Advocate, or Pleader in ones Cause, an Atturney, a Law­
yer. 
Il m'a pris pour son Avocat, he has retained me for his Coun­
sel. 
Il n'est point de plus méchant Voisin qu'un bon Avocat, a good Lawyer an evil Neighbour. 
Un Heritage court grand'risque entre les mains d'un jeune A­
vocat, the young (or unexperien­
ced) Lawyer hazards what he pleads for. 
Un long Procez ruine les Par­
ties & enrichit les Avocats, long Suits are Lawyers harvest. 
Avocasser, faire l'Avocat, to begin to plead at the bar like a Counsellor at Law. It is a word of contempt.  

AVOINE, ou Avene (f.) oats. 
Avoine folle, bâtarde, wild oats. 
Gruan d'avoine pour faire du potage, oat meal.  

AVOIR, to have. 
Avoir beaucoup d'esprit & peu de jugement, to have much wit and little judgement. 
Qu'avez vous à dire? what have you to say? 
Je n'ai rien à vous dire, I have nothing to say to you. 
Il n'a point d'argent, he has no mony.
Sometimes the Verb Avoir is made by the English Verb to Be; as for example, 
Avoir froid, chaud, faim, ou soif, to be cold, hot, hungry, or dry. 
Il y a ici quêque Traître; here is some Traytor or other. 
Par tout il y a des bons & des méchans, there are good and bad every where. Sometimes it may be thus rendred; as, 
Il y a deux heures que je vous atten, I have staid for you these two hours.  

AVOISINER, étre voisin, to be near, to confine upon. 
Ma metairie avoisine cette mon­
tagne, my Farm is near that Moun­
tain. 
S'Avoisiner, s'approcher de quê­
que Lieu, to approach, draw near, set himself hard by, be neighbour unto. 
Avoisinement (m.) an ap­
proaching, or coming nigh un­
to.  

AVORTER, to cast the young, or bring forth before the time. 
Faire avorter les desseins de ses Enemis, to bring the designs of his Enemies to naught. 
Avortement (m.) the casting of the young, or bringing forth before the time. 
Avorton (m.) an abortive. 
Un Avorton, un petit homme, a little man, a dwarf.  

AVOUER, confesser, to con­
fess, to acknowlege. 
J'avouë qu'en cela vous avez raison, I confess you are in the right in that particular. 
Avouër sa faute, to acknowlege his fault. 
Avouër, approuver, to approve, or allow of. 
Son Pere ne l'a jamais voulu a­
vouër pour son fils, his Father would not by any means look upon him as his Son. 
Avoué, confessed, acknowled­
ged. 
Avoüé, approuvé, approved, or allowed of. 
Si vous fuiez, vous ne serez point avoué, if you run away, it will be to your discredit. 
Aveu (m.) confession, confes­
sion. 
Aveu du Vassal au Seigneur feodal, a Protestation or Confessi­
on in words or writing made by a Tenant, that he holds the things there mentioned of the Lord, unto whom he delivers it. 
Aveu, approbation, consente­
ment, approbation, consent. 
Il a fait cela par mon aveu, he did do that with my consent.  

AUPARAVANT, before. 
Long tems auparavant, a long time before, long before that. 
Il ne lui est rien arrivé que je ne lui aie dit long tems aupara­
vant, nothing hapned to him but what I told him of a long time be­
fore.  

AUPRES, tout aupres, near, by, hard by. 
Tenez vous aupres de lui, keep by him. 
Il reside aupres du Prince, he has his residence near the Prince. 
Il a toûjours aupres de lui des Soldats armés, he hath always armed Souldiers about him. 
Aupres, ou en comparaison, to, or in comparison. 
Vous étes un ignorant aupres de lui, you are an ass to him. 
Mon orgueil est humble, si on le considere aupres du vôtre, my pride is but small, if compared with yours.
 
* Auriculaire. V. Oreille.  

AVRIL (m.) April, the month of April.  

AURONE, herbe de Jardin, an herb called Southernwood.  

AURORE (f.) the morning, the break of the day, the time be­
fore Sun-rising, when the Sun sends before him his golden beams.  

AUSPICE (m.) sorte de de­
vination, auspice, a sign or token of the success or event of things shewed by flying of birds. 
Auspices favorables ou mal­
heureux, happy or unhappy auspi­
ces. 
Je l'entreprendrai sous vos au­
spices, shall take it upon me under your favourable auspices. 
Auspice, qui devine les choses à venir par la consideration des Oiseaux, a Southsayer, that can tell things to come by the slight or other motion of birds.  

AUSSI, also, too, likewise.
J'étois present, & vôtre frere aussi, lors qu'il fut tué, I was there  



and your brother also, when he was killed. 
Donnez m'en aussi, s'il vous plait, give me some too if you please. 
Il fut aussi tres maltraité, he like­
wise was scurvily used. 
Aussi, as, so. 
Il est aussi embarassé que moi, he is as puzzled as I am. 
Cela me sera aussi agreable que chose du monde, that will be as pleasing to me as any thing in the World can be. 
Je disputerai aussi courageuse­
ment que pas un autre, I shall dis­
pute as stoutly as any other. 
Il n'est pas aussi pauvre que l'on dit, he is not so poor as it is repor­
ted.
Sometimes it may be thus rendred; as,
Il est plus avisé que vous, aussi est il plus âgé, he is wiser than you, but he is older too. 
Je m'en doutai bien, aussi le pre­
vins je, I did imagine it, and there­
fore I prevented him. 
J'ai brûlé ce papier, aussi ne servoit il de rien, I burned that paper, because it was good for no­
thing. 
Je l'ai frappé, il est vrai, mais aussi il m'avoit injurié le premi­
er, I struck him, it is true, but he had abused me first. 
Aussi bien, as well. 
Je prevois aussi bien ce qui doit arriver que si je le voiois de mes yeux, I do foresee as well what will happen, as if I did see it really with my own eyes. 
Aussi tôt, forthwith, presently, out of hand. 
Aussi tôt dit aussi tôt fait, it was no sooner. spoken but it was done, no sooner said but done. 
Aussi tôt que, as soon as. 
Il est venu aussi tôt que moi, he came as soon as I. 
Aussi tôt (des aussi tôt) que je serai de retour, as soon as ever I shall be come back.  

AUSTERE, austere, severe, stern, rigorous. 
Un homme austere, a severe man. 
Austere envers soi même, qui mene une vie austere, a man that leads an austere life. 
Austerité (f.) austereness, au­
sterity, sterness, severity, rigour. 
Les Austerités, les mortificati­
ons du Corps, the mortification, quelling, taming, or punishing of the flesh. 
Austerement, austerely, sternly, severely, rigorously.  

AUSTRUCHE. V. Autru­
che.  

AUTANT, as much, so much, as many, so many. 
Avec autant de courage que de bonheur, with as much courage as good luck. 
Je t'aime autant qu'aucun autre, autant que qui que ce soit, I love thee as much as any body. 
Je l'aime autant que s'il étoit mon frere, I love him as much as if he were my own brother. 
Trois fois autant, three times as much. 
J'en ai eu autant, j'en ai eu tout autant, I have had so much for it. 
Ce Livre m'a coûté tout au­
tant, this book did cost me so much. 
J'ai autant de Soeurs que vous, I have as many Sisters as you have. 
Il y a autant de Rois que de Roiaumes, so many kingdoms, so many kings. 
Autant de têtes autant d'avis, so many men so many minds. 
Je suis autant, ou plus que lui, I am as good; if not better than he. 
Il se tait autant de fois qu'on le commande, he holds his peace as often as he is bidden. 
Autant que je puis juger, as far as I can conjecture. 
Autant que je puis m'en souve­
nir, as much as I can remember. 
Autant que jamais, as much as ever. 
Autant qu'il faut, as much as is requisite. 
Autant qu'il est possible, as much as may be. 
D'Autant plus, the more, so much the more. 
Il est d'autant plus aimable qu'il est modeste, he is so much the more lovely, because he is mo­
dest. 
On meurt d'autant plus volonti­
ers que l'on est homme de bien, the better a man liveth the more willingly he dieth.  

AUTEL (m.) an altar. 
Le Maitre Autel, le grand Au­
tel, the great (or the chief) Altar.  

AUTENTIQUE, ou Authen­
tique, Authentick, or of good Au­
thority, approved or allowed by Au­
thority. 
Autentiquement, in an authen­
tick manner. 
Auteur (m.) l'Auteur, la Cau­
se d'une chose, the Author of a thing, the contriver or the cause of it. 
Vous étes l'Auteur de ces Trou­
bles, you are the Author (or the Cause) of these troubles. 
Dieu n'est pas l'Auteur de ces maux, God is not the Author (or the Cause) of these evils. 
L'Auteur d'une nouvelle, the Author, the first reporter of a news. 
Cette nouvelle court, mais on n'en dit pas l'Auteur, there is such a report indeed, but not a word of the Author. 
Un Auteur, l'Auteur d'un Li­
vre, an Author, a Writer of a Book. 
Un Auteur veritable, un Auteur digne de foi, a worthy and credible Author. 
Autorité, ou Authorité (f.) authority, power, credit, sway. 
S'opposer à l'Autorite de quê­
cun, to oppose a mans power or au­
thority. 
Un homme d'autorité, a man of great credit. 
Un homme de peu d'autorité, a man of little or no credit. 
Vous n'avez aucune autorité sur moi, you have no manner of power over me. 
Je me suis donné l'autorité de vous reprendre, I took upon me to rebuke you. 
Perdre son autorité, to lose his credit, to lose his authority. 
Flêtrir (blesser) l'autorité de quê­
cun, lui en ôter une partie, to in­
croach upon (to usurp) ones autho­
rity. 
Autoriser quêcun, lui don­
ner de l'autorité, to authorize, put in authority, or give authority unto. 
Autoriser quêque chose, to allow (or approve of) by authority.  

AUTOMATES, engins qui se remuent d'eux mêmes, any thing that go's by a vice or poise and yet seemes to move of it self, self-moving engins or instruments.  

AUTOMNE, ou Autonne (f.) the Autumn, or fall of the leaf.  
AUTOUR, environ, about.  

AUTOUR (m.) oiseau de proie, the goss-hawk.  

AUTRE, other.



Un mal en attire un autre, one evil draws on another. 
L'un a besoin de l'autre, the one stands in need of anothers help. 
Ils se veulent mal l'un l'autre, they hate one another. 
Il dit une chose, & en pense une autre, he says one thing and means another. 
Il est tout autre que je ne cro­
yois, he is quite another man than I took him to be. 
Les uns demandent la Paix, les autres la Guerre, some stand for Peace, and others for War. 
Les uns se plaisent à une chose, les autres à une autre, some de­
light in one thing, some in ano­
ther. 
Je ne serai jamais autre que j'ai eté, I shall ever be the same man. 
La chose est tout autre qu'on ne croid, it is quite another thing than is supposed to be. 
Il aime tout autre que moi, he loves any body but me. 
Tout autre que lui eûst perdu courage, any body else had been disheartned. 
Ne voulez vous rien autre? will you have nothing else? 
Il ne fait autre chose que de badiner, he do's nothing else but trifle away the time. 
L'un on l'autre de vous deux, either of you two. 
L'un & l'autre, both. 
Ni l'un, ni l'autre, neither. 
L'un sur l'autre, one upon ano­
ther. 
L'un apres l'autre, one after an­
other. 
Une autre sois, another time. 
Un autre lieu, another place. 
Il est en quelqu'autre lieu, he is in some other place. 
A d'autres, me répondit il, je sai assez ce qu'ils pensent, go on, said he, to me, I partly know what's their intention. 
Autrefois, formerly, heretofore, in times past. 
Autrefois on étoit bien plus stu­
dieux, formerly people were much more studious. 
Autrement, d'une autre fa­
çon, otherwise. 
La chose est arrivée autrement que je ne pensois, the thing fell out otherwise than I expected. 
Autrement, à faute dequoi, à faute de cela, else, or else. 
Entrez, autrement je fermerai, come in, or else I shall shut the door. 
Autrui; as,
Etre en la maison d'autrui, to be in another mans house. 
Envier le bien d'autrui, to re­
pine at the good fortune of others, to envy it. 
S'affliger du mal d'autrui, to be sorry for another mans affliction, to sympathize with him.  

AUTRUCHE (f.) Oiseau qui ne se sert de ses ailes que pour courir, an Ostrich, or O­
stridge.  

AUVENT de boutique, pour la garder du Soleil (m.) a Shops pent-house, to keep off the Sun.  

AUXILIAIRE, auxiliary. 
Troupes Auxiliares, Auxiliary Forces, Forces sent in by the Al­
lies and Confederates. 

  
A X
AXE (f.) an axis. 
Axe de Planete, the Axis of a Planet.  

AXIOME (m.) maxime, sen­
tence, an axiom, a sentence pro­
ved, a proposition, a maxim, a principle.

  
A Y
* Ayant, or Aiant, the Partici­
ple of the Present tense of the Verb Avoir, having.  

AYDE, Ayder, &c. V. Aide.  

AYEUL, ou grand pere (m.) a grandfather. 
Ayeule, ou grand'mere (f.) a grandmother.

  
A Z
AZUR, bleu celeste (m.) a­
zur, or Sky-colour. 
Azurer, to paint (or colour) with azur. 
Azuré, painted (or coloured) with azur. 
Azurin, tirant sur l'azur, som­
what Azur-like.


   
B
B A
BAAILLER, to gape, to yawn. 
Baailler, s'entr'ouvrir, to open, or spread wide. 
Habitude de Baailler, an habit of gaping. 
Baaillement (m.) a gaping, or yawning. 
Baaillant; as,
Faire quêque chose en baail­
lant, cd. avec negligence, to do a thing slothfully, negligently. 
Baillon (m.) a gag. 
Baillonner quêcun, lui mettre un baillon pour l'empêcher de parler, to gag one. 
Baillonné, gagged.  

BABIL (m.) busy talking, chat­
tering, prating. 
Babillard (m.) a pratler. 
Babioles (f.) amusement d'enfans, trifles, whimwham, gew­
gaws, or small toys for children to play withal.  

BABION (m.) petit cinge, a kind of little ape. 
Babouin, gros cinge, a ba­
boon, a sort of great ape.  

BAC (m.) bateau à passer charretes & chevaux, a great ferry-boat, a horse-boat. 
Bac, petit bateau à passer des gens de pié, a wherry, or sculler, a little boat. 
Bac, bassin de fontaine, the Vase of a fountain. 
Bachet (m.) petit bateau, a little wherry, or sculler. 
Bachet, bassin de fontaine, the Vase of a Fountain.  

BACHELIER (m.) a Batche­
lor of Art. 
Bachelier en Theologie, Bat­
chelor of Divinity. 
Bachelage (m.) Batchelorship.  

BACULE (f.) large croupi­
ere, qui bat sur les cuisses, the largest sort of crupper. 
Bacule, sorte de peine, a kind of punishment inflicted upon the back.



Bacule, contrepoids d'un Pont levis, a square and heavy door, commonly hanging and held up by chains a pretty distance without the main gate of a Fortress, and let fall as a Port-cullis in a trice, with a whurry and to the confusion of them it reaches or lights on. 
Bacule, machine à puiser de l'eau, an engine to draw up water that hath a great poise at the end, a swipe.  

BADAUT (m) lourdaut, a sot, a coxcomb, a silly man. 
Un badaut, qui regarde & con­
sidere niaisement tout ce qui se presente à ses yeux, a gaping hoydon.  

BADELAIRE (en terme de blazon) coutelas, cimeterre, a short and broad back-sword, be­
ing towards the point like a Tur­
kish Simetar.  

BADIN, enclin à badiner, apish, full of trifles or apish tricks, a trifler. 
Badiner, faire le badin, to play apish tricks, to trifle away his time in idle things, to play the fool. 
Badinage, Badinerie, apish tricks, fooleries, toyes. 
Etre fait au badinage, s'enten­
dre avec des autres pour trom­
per quêcun, to play booty with one. 
Il est fait au badinage, he has got the trick on't, he knows how to carry himself in the combina­
tion.  

BAFOUER quêcun, le trai­
ter mal de paroles, to revile one, to give him reproachful words. 
Bafouëment (m.) a reviling of one.  

BAGAGE (m.) baggage, goods that go along with Travellers for their necessary uses, carriage. 
Cheval de bagage, a carriage-horse. 
Plier (trousser) bagage, to pack away, to truss bag and baggage. 
Crier qu'on trousse bagage, comme dans une Armée qui s'en va decamper, to give war­
ning for the making ready of all carriage, as at the removing of an Army.  

BAGATELLE (f.) chose de neant, a toy or trifle, a thing of small value. 
Une boutique pleine de baga­
telles, a shop full of toyes. 
S'occuper à des bagatelles, to be taken up with trifles, with idle things.  

BAGUE (f.) anneau, a ring. 
Les Bagues, les Joyaux d'une femme, a womans Jewels. 
Une femme parée de bagues & de joyaux, a woman adorned with rich jewels. 
Se retirer bagues sauves, to get away with bag and baggage, with­
out the loss or expence of any thing. 
Bague, prix de la Course à che­
val, the Ring whereat Gallants run with lances. 
Courir la bague, to run at the Ring. 
Course de bague, a running at the Ring. 
Gagner la bague, to carry (or bear away) the Ring.  

BAGUENAUDE (f.) sorte de plante, red winter-cherries, red night-shade, alcakengy.  

BAGUETTE (f.) baguette d'un homme à cheval, a switch, or riding rod. 
Baguette de Huissier, an Ushers rod. 
Baguette de Maitre d'hôtel, a Stewards rod. 
Commander à baguette, to com­
mand (like a Steward) absolutely, peremptorily, or with authority. 
Si tu veux conoitre un Vilain, donne lui la baguette en main, the way to discern a Knave or a Clown is to give him authority.  

BAHU (m.) sorte de coffre, a Trunk, to carry or keep things in. 
Bahutier (m.) faiseur de ba­
hu, a Trunk-maker.  

BAIGNER, arroser d'eau quêque chose, to wash a thing. 
La Riviere baigne les murailles de cette Ville, the River washes (or runs by) the walls of this Town. 
Se baigner dans une Riviere, to wash himself in a River. 
Voulez vous vous aller baigner? will you go to swim? 
Se baigner dans un Bain, to bathe himself in a bath. 
La Coûtume de se baigner é­
toit tres frequente parmi les Anciens, bathing was much used of old. 
Se baigner de larmes, to be all bathed in tears. 
Baigné, washed, or bathed. 
Baignoir (m.) cuve à se bai­
gner, a bathing tub. 
Bain (m.) a bath. 
Aller au bain, to go to the bath. 
Bain de Marie, fourneau d'a­
lambic où les plantes à distiller se cuisent & se resoudent, non à sec, mais dans l'eau bouillan­
te, Maries bath, a sort of alem­
bick where plants are distilled by the heat of boyling water.  

BAIL (m.) as, 
Bail de maison, de terre, &c. a letting of a house (or of a farm) to rent.
Bail, pouvoir, power, authority. 
Le mari vivant a le bail de sa femme, the living husband hath the wardship or government of his wife and her whole estate. 
Bail, administrateur, a guardi­
an, governour, or administrator. 
Le mari est bail de sa femme, the husband is his wifes guardian. 
Bail, tutele, the wardship a fa­
ther or mother hath of their child. 
Bailler. V. Donner.  

BAILLIAGE, ou Balliage (m.) ressort du Ballif. Tis the name of a Jurisdiction so called in some parts of France, where there is a Magistrate (called Baillif) appointed to execute Justice. 
Bailliage, lieu du Siege ou Tri­
bunal du Baillif, the Province or Precinct wherein the Baillif go­
verns. 
Baillif, ou Ballif (m.) Juge ordinaire en un Bailliage, a Magistrate appointed to execute Justice. 
Baillif de robe courte, exerçant son Office par un Lieutenant, a short gown Baillif, having a De­
puty under him. 
Baillif de robe longue, a long gown Baillif. 
Anciennement les Baillifs en France étoient non seulement Juges ordinaires, mais aussi Chefs de Noblesse, & bans & arriere-bans; Anciently the Ba­
illiffs in France were not only Judges, but also the heads of the Nobility, both Ban and Arriereban.
 
* Baillon, &c. V. sous le Verbe Baailler.

* Bain. V. sous le Verbe Bai­
gner.  

BAISER, to kiss, to salute with a kiss. 
Baiser quêcun à la bouche, to kiss one at the mouth. 
Monsieur, je vous baise les mains, Sir, I kiss your hands. 
Baisé, kissed.
Jamais je ne fus tant baisée, I  



never was so kissed in my life. 
Baiseur (m.) a kisser. 
Baisement (m.) a kissing. 
Baisemain (m.) as,
Faites lui mes baisemains, re­
member me to him, remember my service, or my respects to him. 
Un Baiser, a kiss. 
Donner un baiser à quêcun, to give one a kiss. 
Baisoter, to kiss often.  

BAISSER, to let fall, or let down. 
Baisser un pont levis, to let down a draw bridge. 
Baisser la tête, to hold (or bow) down the head. 
Se Baisser, to stoop. 
Baissé, let fall, or let down. 
Aller la tête baissée, to hang down his head, to go stooping. 
Baissement (m.) a letting fall, or a letting down.  

BAL (m.) a ball, dancing, or revelling. 
Baladin (m.) danseur, a great dancer, that is much green to dan­
cing.  

BALAFRE (f.) grande plaie, a great slash (or cut) over the face. 
On lui a fait une grande bala­
fre sur la tête, on lui a balafré la tête, il a receu à la tête une grande balafre, he has got a great slash over the head. 
Balafré, qui a de grandes plaies ou cicatrices, grievously slashed (or cut) over the face. 
Il a le visage tout balafré, tout marqué de balafres, his face is slash't all over.  

BALANCE (f.) a ballance, a pair of weights. 
Balance à deux bassins, a pair of scales. 
Anse de la balance, par où on la tient en pesant, the handle of a ballance. 
Traversin (ou fleau) de balance, où sont attachés les bassins, the beam of a ballance. 
Bassin (plat) de balance, the scale of a ballance. 
Contrepoids de balance, the counterpoise of a ballance. 
Celui qui tient la balance pour peser, a weigher, he that weighs. 
Tenir la balance égale, to hang the ballance even. 
Peser quêque chose avoc la ba­
lance, to weigh a thing with weights. 
Etre en balance, en doute, to doubt, to be uncertain what to think, say, or do. 
Balance, un des douze Signes du Zodiaque, the Ballance, one of the twelve Signes in the Zodi­
ack. 
Balancer, considerer quêque chose, to weigh, examine, ponder, or consider a thing. 
Balancer, étre en doute, to wa­
ver, doubt, or question. 
Je n'ai point balancé là dessus, I made no doubt of it, I undertook it out of hand. 
Balancer entre l'esperance & le desespoir, to be floating be­
twixt hope and despair. 
Balancier (m.) qui fait des balances, a Ballance-maker. 
Balancier, piece d'horloge, the ballance of a clock.  

BALAY (m.) a broom. 
Balayer une Chambre, to sweep a room. 
Balayé, swept. 
Balayeur (m.) a sweeper, or he that sweeps. 
Balayeures (f.) sweepings, the filth or dust that's swept out of a room.  

BALCON (m.) a balcony.  

BALE (f.) a bullet. 
Il lui perça la tête d'un coup de bale, he shot him through the head with a bullet. 
Bale de marchandise, a bale of merchandise. 
Faire une bale, to make up a bale. 
Defaire une bale, to undo a bale. 
Bale, envelope, gousse de grain de blé, the husk of wheat or other corn. 
Bale, ou paume, a ball, to play withall. 
Balot, Balon (m.) petite bale de marchandise, a little bale of merchandise. 
Balon, grande paume, a foot-ball.

* Balote (f.) petite bale de quoi que ce soit, little ball, a pellet.
Balote, pour tirer au sort, ou pour donner son suffrage, balot, a thing used to cast lots, or give his suffrage. 
Baloter, tirer au sort, to cast lots, or to chuse Officers and Ma­
gistrates. 
Baloter, donner son suffrage par balotes, to balot, to vote by way of balotation. 
Baloter, dans un Jeu de paume, to toss in a Tennis Court. 
Baloter une affaire, consulter (deliberer) sur une affaire, to deliberate (or consult) about a busi­
ness. 
Baloter quêcun, le secouër, le pousser de divers côtés, to toss one. 
Balotê, agité, tossed. 
Balotement (m.) balotation, a chusing by lots, or casting lots. 
Balotement, deliberation, con­
sultation, deliberation, consultati­
on.  

BALENE (f.) a Whale.  

BALIER, &c. V. Balayer.  

BALISES (f.) pieux plantés dans l'eau pour marquer la rou­
te que doivent tenir les Navi­
res dans les lieux dangereux, a mark set up for the direction of Sailers in a navigable River.  

BALIVEAU (m.) étalon, chêne reservé en la coupe du Bois pour la repeuplée, a Stan­
der, or a Tree left in a Wood for the increase and preservation thereof. 

† BALIVERNES, contes faits à plaisir, tales.  

BALLIAGE. V. Bailliage.

* Balon, Balot, Balote, Balo­
ter, & ses derivés. V. Bale.  

BALUSTRES, Balustrade, ballisters. 
Balustrer un lieu, to ballister a Place. 
Balustré, ballistred.  

BAN (m.) Mandement du Prince aux Seigneurs feodaux aux Seigneurs de plein fief, de fief dominant, ou relevant im­
mediatement du Prince, les ap­
pelant à son service de Guerre, a Proclamation, whereby those that hold their Lands of the Crown are summoned to meet at a certain Place, there to attend the King whi­
thersoever and against whomsoever he go's. 
Ban, Assemblée ou Compagnie composée de ces Seigneurs, an Assembly or Company of such Noble men. 
Droit de ban, droit de jussion ou contrainte par voie de criée publique, the Right of making such a Proclamation. 
Ban de moulin, droit du Sei­
gneur feodal de contraindreses Vassaux à moudre en ses mou­
lins banniers, the Royalty or Pri­
vilege of the Lord of the Mannor, whereby his Tenants and Vassals are bound to repair unto certain Mills, and to pay him a fee for the use thereof.  



Ban de four, de pressoir, de courvées, the Royalty or Privilege of the Lord of the Land as to O­
vens, Wine presses, and drudging days Work, whereby his Tenants and Vassals are bound to make use of his Ovens, to observe his Proclamation for the beginning of Vintage, and to do now and then a job of work for him in the ground or about his house, either in their own person or by their cattel plough or team. 
Crier un ban, to publish an E­
dict or Ordinance. 
Bans de mariage, banes of ma­
trimony. 
Ban, ou bannissement, a pro­
scription, outlawry, or banish­
ment. 
Sur peine de ban, upon pain of banishment. 
Rappel de ban, a recalling from banishment. 
Banage, Banalité, Banie, droit de ban, the Royalty, or Privilege of the Lord of the Man­
nor, as aforesaid. 
Banal, Baniere, qui a droit de ban, he that hath such a Pri­
vilege. 
Banal, Banier, sujet au ban ou au banage, liable to that Privi­
lege of the Lord of the Mannor. 
Four ou Moulin banal, a com­
mon Oven, or Mill, whereat all men may, and every Tenant and Vassal must bake and grind. 
Banlieuë (f.) l'étendue d'une lieuë plus ou moins autour d'une Ville, qui est de la Juri­
diction de cette même Ville, the Circuit of a league or therea­
bouts from a Town or Mannor house, being the precincts and liberties thereof, within which (if it be the Kings) the Ordina­
ry Judge of that Place, if a Lords, he or his ordinary Officer may make Proclamations, and exer­
cise what other Jurisdiction they have. 
Banlieuë de Moulin, the Com­
pass of ground whose inhabitants must carry their grist unto a com­
mon (or Lords) Mill. In Brit­
tain it contains 120 cords length from the Mill, and every cord 120 foot. 
Bannir, to banish, exile, or proscribe. 
Bannir toute crainte, to banish all fear. 
Bannir (chasser) la tristesse, to drive away melancholy. 
Banni, exilé, banished, or exi­
led. 
Bannissement (m) action de bannir, a banishing, or exiling of one. 
Bannissement, exil, banish­
ment, or exile.  

BANC (m.) a bench, form, or seat. 
Bancs des Forçats, Seats where the rowing Galley-slaves sit. 
Banc de sable dans la Mer, a­
mas de sable, a long shole, shelf, or sandy hill in the Sea, against which the waves do break.  

BANDE (f.) Bandeau, a band, a swaddling band, a long and narrow piece of any stuff. 
Bande, bord, bordure, a welt, border, or guard about a gown. 
Bande de fer, ou d'autre me­
tal, a plate of iron, or any other metal. 
Bande de fer, autour d'une rouë, the strake of a cart wheel, the iron wherewith the rounding of the cart wheel is bound. 
Bande d'Armoiries, a bend in Armory. 
Bande, troupe, a band, troop, or crue. 
Bande de gens de guerre, a band (or company) of Souldiers. 
Par bandes, in companies, or flocks, by bands or multitudes, by routs. 
Bande, party, a Party. 
Bande, faction, ligue, a facti­
on, a combination. 
Faire bande à part, se separer des autres, to bandy together in­
to a Faction. 
Bandeau. V. Bande. 
Bandelette (f.) petite bande, a little band. 
Bander, lier d'une bande, to bind, or ty with bands. 
Bander une plaie, to bind a wound. 
Bander les yeux à un criminel, to hood-wink a malefactor. 
Bander un arc, to bend a bow. 
Bander un pistolet, to cock a pistol. 
Bander toutes ses forces pour venir à bout d'une chose, to use all his strength (all his indea­
vours) to compass a thing. 
Se bander contre quêcun, to bandy, or oppose himself against one with his whole power. 
Pourquoi vous bandez vous contre la Verité? why do you withstand the Truth? 
Bander, dans un sens Veneri­
en, to stand, in a Venereal sense. 
Bandé, lié d'une bande, bound. 
Bandé, tendu, bent, as a bow. 
Bandé, ligué, that conspires or confederates together, bandy'd or combined together. 
Bandement (m.) a straining, stretching, or bending. 
Bandouilleres (f.) a Muske­
teers bandoleers, or charges. 
Bandolier (m.) voleur, a robber, a high way man.
 
* Banlieuë. V. Ban.  

BANNIERE, ou Baniere (f.) a banner, standard, or en­
sign. 
Banderole (f.) petite ense­
igne, a little flag, or streamer. 
Banneret, Baneret, ou Ban­
deret, (m.) Gentilhomme de marque aiant droit de banni­
ere, a Captain of a Quarter in a good Town, having a banner of his own.
 
* Bannir, & ses derivés. V. Ban.  

BANQUE (f.) table à con­
ter & tenir de l'argent, a coun­
ter, or table that Bankers use. 
Banque, vocation de Banquier, sorte de negoce, a Bank, where mony is let out to use, or lent, or returned by exchange. 
Tenir banque, étre banquier, to keep a bank, or to be a banker. 
Banquier (m.) a Banker. 
Banqueroute (f) a breaking, or becoming bankrupt. 
Il a fait banqueroute, he is broke. 
Il a fait banqueroute de cent mille écus, he broke for a hun­
dred thousand crowns. 
Banqueroutier (m.) a bank­
rupt, one that is broke.  

BANQUET (m.) festin, a banket, or a feast. 
Banqueter, faire festin, to banket, or to feast. 
Vous banquetez à mes dépens, you feast at my cost. 
Banqueteur (m.) a banketer, or feaster. 
Banquetement (m.) a ban­
keting, or feasting.
 
* Banquier. V. Banque.  

BAPTESME, Baptiser, Bap­
tistere. V. Batême.  

BAQUET (m.) a pail, a milk-pail.

BARAGOUIN, Patois, a dialect of the worst kind, as that  



which is called Pedlars French.  

BARBARE, barbarous. 
Un Peuple barbare, sauvage, incivil, a barbarous sort of People, a rude, rustical, uncivilized Peo­
ple. 
Barbare, inhumain, cruel, bar­
barous, inhumane, cruel. 
Un mot barbare, an uncouth word. 
Un homme dont le langage est barbare, a man who uses a bar­
barous kind of speech. 
Barbarie (f.) barbarity, rude­
ness, rusticity, incivility. 
Barbarie, cruauté, barbarous­
ness, cruelty, inhumanity. 
Barbarie, à l'égard du langage, the uncouthness of ones speech. 
Barbarisme (m) a barbarism, or an improper expression. 
Barbarement, barbarously. 
Il m'a traité tres barbarement, he has used me very barbarously.  

BARBE (m) Cheval de Bar­
barie, a Barbary horse.  

BARBE (f.) poil du men­
ton, a beard. 
La barbe commence à lui poin­
dre, il commence à avoir de la barbe, he begins to have a beard. 
Qui n'a point de barbe, beard­
less, or without a beard. 
Une longue barbe, a long beard. 
Se faire couper la barbe, to get his beard cut off. 
Se faire faire la barbe, to get himself shaved, or trimmed. 
Faire la barbe à quêcun, to shave one. 
Laisser croitre sa barbe, to let his beard grow. 
Barbe-rousse, qui a la barbe rousse, that has got a red beard, a red-bearded fellow. 
Barbe grise, a grey beard. 
Je le dirai à sa barbe, I shall tell it him to his face. 
Vous ne deviez pas leur dire ces injures à leur barbe, you should not have abused them so to their faces. 
Barbe de coc, a cocks rattles or waddles. 
Barbe de chevre ou de bouc, a goats beard. 
Barbe de chevre, sorte de plan­
te, an herb called Queen of the Meadows, meadsweet, or mead­
wort. 
Barbé, coc bien barbé, a cock that has good rattles or waddles. 
Barbes (f.) maladie de Che­
val, Pushes, or little bladders un­
der the tongues of horses, that are apt to die of it, if not speedily cu­
red. 
Barbeau (m.) sorte de pois­
son, a fish called barbel, the bar­
bel fish. 
Barbet, espece de chien (m.) a shag haired dog. 
Petit barbet, chien de Demoi­
selle, a little shag haired dog, a lap-dog. 
Barbier (m.) a barber. 
Boutique de Barbier, a Bar­
bers shop. 
Il y a des Barbiers qui ne font que la barbe & cheveux, il y en a qui se mêlent de faire des Perruques, & il y en a d'autres qui font les Chirurgiens, of Bar­
bers some are only for shaving and cutting of mens hair, others are also Perruke-makers, and others practise Surgery. 
Barbu, bearded, full of (or o­
vergrown with) beard. 
Barbon, un homme à grand'barbe, a long bearded man. 
Barbue (f.) sorte de poisson, a kind of less turbot, or turbot-like-fish. 
Barbue, marquote, sarment a­
vec sa racine, & toute autre sorte de plantes qu'on tire avec leurs racines, pour les trans­
planter, a young Vine set with the root, any plant whereof the root is quick, a quick set.  

BARBOTER, to make a noise as a seething pot. 
Barbotine (f.) wormseed.  

BARBOUILLER, salir, sou­
iller, gâter quêque chose, to blot, spot, or bedash somthing. 
Barbouiller une feuille de pa­
pier, y écrire des choses mal rangées, ou de nulle conse­
quence, to foul a sheet of paper with a disorderly and insignifi­
cant writing. 
Barbouillé, blotted, spotted, bedashed.
 
* Barbu, & Barbue. V. Barbe.  

BARDANE (f.) sorte d'herbe, a clot-bur.  

BARDE (f.) armure de cheval, barbs, or trappings for horses of service or of shew. 
Barder, to barb, or trap horses. 
Bardé, barbed, or trapped, as a great horse.  

BARDEAU (m.) petit ais à couvrir les maisons, a shingle, or small board, such as houses are covered with.  

BARDOT (m.) petit mu­
let, a little mule.  

BARGUIGNER, contester pour une chose de neant, to con­
tend (or to wrangle) about a trifle. 
Barguigneur (m.) a haggler, one that keeps a heavy doo about a thing of small consequence.  

BARICAVE (f.) fondriere, a hole, or hollow place.  

BARLONG, plus long en en quarré que large, more long than broad, or longer in one place than another.  

BARON (m.) a Baron. 
Baronne (f.) a Baroness, or a Barons Wife. 
Baronie (f.) dignité de Ba­
ron, the Dignity of a Baron. 
Baronie, domaine (ou terroir) de Baron, Barony, or a Barons Demesne.  

BARQUE (f.) a bark, or great boat.  

BARRACAN (m.) étoffe tis­
sue de poil de chevre, the stuff called Barracan.  

BARRE (f.) a bar. 
Barre de porte, pour la fermer par derriere, a bar to shut the door with. 
Fermer la porte à la barre, to shut the door with a bar. 
Barre de fer, an iron bar. 
Barre à fermer un passage, a long or thwart pole or piece of timber that shuts up a passage. 
Barre à une Porte de Ville, où l'on arrête l'Etranger, the Bar of a Town gate where a Stranger is stopt and examined. 
Barre à la Porte d'Audience, ou s'arrêtent les Commissaires nommez pour conoître sur le champ de certaines Causes, a Bar at the door of Audience, with­
out which the Commissioners named to examine of some Causes do stand. 
Commissaire à la barre, a Com­
missioner at the bar. 
Barre, en termes d'armoiries, contre bande traversant l'écu de gauche à droite, a bar in bla­
zon. 
Barre, en termes d'agricul­
ture; as,
Planter une vigne à la barre, à la siche, en fichant la plante dans un trou, to plant the slips of vines in order, either two toge­
ther, or one against another, or one by one, as we set willows. 
Barreau (m.) treillis, grate.  



Barreau, Parquet, lieu d'Audi­
ence au Palais, the Bar of a Court whereat Lawyers plead. 
Homme de barreau, a Barre­
ster, Counsellor, or pleading Law­
yer. 
Hanter le barreau, to be frequent at the bar. 
Barrer la porte, la fermer avec une barre, to bar a door. 
Barrer, fermer un passage, to shut up a passage. 
Barrer, tirer des lignes sur quê­
que chose, to draw lines upon som­
thing. 
Barrer un conte, to cross out an accompt. 
Barré, barred, shut with a bar. 
Barrement (m.) barring, or shut­
ting with a bar. 
Barres, the martial Sport called Barriers. 
Barricade (f.) a Barricado, a defence of timber, pales, earth, or stones heaped up or closed together, and serving to stop up a street, or passage, and to keep off shot, &c. 
Barricader, to barricado. 
Barricadé, barricadoed. 
Barriere (f.) a rail, a bar. 
Rompre les barrieres, to break the rails. 
Barrieres, le lieu d'où partent les Chevaux pour courir la lice; the lists, the beginning of an horse race barred in. 
Combat de barriere, a fight at barriers. 
Combattre à la barriere, to fight at barriers.  

BARRIL (m.) a barrel. 
Barrique (f.) a French vessel so called, somewhat bigger than our barrel.  

BAS, qui n'est pas haut, low. 
Une maison basse, a low house. 
Un homme de basse taille, a man of a low stature, a low man. 
Bas, inferieur, dessous, lower. 
La basse region de l'air, the lower region of the air. 
Le bas étage d'un Logis, the low­
ermost story of a house. 
Une basse Cour, a base Court, or an Inner Yard. 
Un son bas, a low sound. 
Un homme de bas lieu, de basse condition, a man of low extracti­
on, or mean condition. 
Un esprit bas, qui n'a rien de genereux, a pitifull, base, or sordid man. 
Des pensées basses, base thoughts. 
Prenez garde de rien faire de bas, take heed you do no base thing. 
Faire main basse sur tous les E­
nemis, to make an universal slaughter, to spare none of his Ene­
mies. 
Un Bas, a stocking. 
Une paire de bas, a pair of stock­
ings. 
Des bas d'estame, woosted stock­
ings. 
Des bas de fil, thread stockings. 
Bas, adv. down, low. 
Mettre bas les armes, to lay down his arms. 
Parler bas, à voix basse, to speak low, to speak with a low voice. 
Il le mit à bas de son cheval, he threw him off of his horse. 
En bas, below. 
Base (f.) soubassement, basis, ground, foundation. 
La Basse d'un Concert, the base part in Musick. 
Une basse viole, a base viol. 
Bassesse (f.) bassesse de corps, the lowness of ones body. 
Bassesse de condition, the lowness of ones condition. 
Bassesse de cœur, lowliness, abject humbleness, abjection. 
Une bassesse, une chose indigne d'un homme de cœur, an unwor­
thy thing, a thing below an honest man, a sordid (base, degenerous) a­
ction. 
Faire des bassesses, s'abaisser trop, to humble himself too much, to debase and prostitute himself to another mans humour or am­
bition. 
Faire une bassesse, une action basse ou indigne d'un honnête homme, to do an unworthy thing, to do a thing unworthy of him­
self. 
Basset (m.) chien Artois, chien terrier, a terrier, or earthing bea­
gle.  

BASANÉ, qui a le teint brû­
lé, sun-burn't, tawny, or of a swar­
thy complexion.
 
* Base. V. Bas.  

BASILIC (m.) sorte de ser­
pent, a basilisk, or cocka­
trice. 
Basilic, herbe odoriferantè, the herb called sweet basil. 
Basilic, piece d'artillerie, Basi­
lisk, a long piece of Ordinance so called.  

BASILIQUE, veine basilique, the basilical vein.  

BASQUE de pourpoint (f.) the skirt of a doublet.
 
* Basse, Bassesse, & Basset. V. Bas.  

BASSIN (m.) a bason, to wash in. 
Bassin de fontaine, the Vase of a fountain. 
Bassin de selle percée, the pan of a close stool. 
Bassin de balance; the scale of a ballance. 
Bassinet (m.) casque leger, a sleight helmet, or head piece. 
Bassinet de mousquet, de fuzil, &c. the fire pan, or touch-pan of a gun. 
Bassinet de gland, the cup of an acorn. 
Bassinet, sorte de plante, the flow­
er crowfoot. 
Bassiner un lit, le chaufer, to warm a bed with a warming pan. 
Bassiner une plaie, to wash a wound with warm liquor. 
Bassiné, warmed. 
Bassinoir (m.) chauffe-lit, a warming pan.  

BAST (m.) a pannel, or pack-saddle. 
Bâter une bête de voiture, lui mettre le bast, to sadle with a pack-saddle.  

BASTARD, & ses derivés. V. Bâtard.  

BASTANT, suffisant, suffi­
cient. 
Baste, soit, well, let it be.  

BASTELEUR. V. Bâte­
leur.  

BASTILLE (f.) petit fort, a little fortress, or a castle fur­
nished with towers, dungeons, & dit­
ches. 
La Bastille, qui est à Paris, the Bastille, which is as the Tower of London the chief Prison of the Kingdom. 
Bastion (m.) a bastion, a piece of fortification so called.  

BASTIR, & ses derivés. V. Bâtir.  

BASTON, & ses derivés. V. Bâton.
 
* Batant, Bataille, & ses deri­
vés. V. Batre.  

BATARD (m.) a bastard. 
Bâtardille (f.) a knot, a com­
pany, a generation of bastards.  



Bâtardise (f.) bastardy, the state (condition, or quality) of a bastard. 
Bâtarde (f.) petit canon, a de­
mi-canon, or demi-culverin, a smaller piece of any kind. 
Bâtardeau (m.) cloison d'ais dans l'eau pour y bâtir, l'eau é­
tant épuisée, a dam, or water stop made of piles, &c. 
Bâtardiere (f.) pepiniere d'arbres, a seed plot, nurse garden, or nursery, wherein young trees are set to be afterwards removed.  

BATEAU (m.) a boat. 
Un grand bateau, a great boat. 
Un petit bateau, a little boat. 
Batelée (f.) charge de bateau, a boats load, a boat full of some­
thing. 
Batelier (m.) a waterman, a boat man.  

BATELEUR (m.) jouëur de farces, a Jester upon a Stage. 
Bâteleur, Charlatan, Jouëur de passe passe, a Juggler, a Puppet-player. 
Bâteleur, faiseur de soubresauts, a Tumbler. 
Bâteleur, qui danse sur la corde, a dancer upon the rope. 
Bateleuse (f) a Stage wench, a woman that makes a profession of juggling, tumbling, and such other idle and base exercises. 
Batelage, Batelerie, ou action de Bateleur, Juggling, tumbling, puppet playing, any such foolish pas­
time, or legerdemain.
 
* Batelier. V. Bateau.  

BATEMARE (f.) sorte d'oi­
seau, a water swallow, or wag­
tail.  

BATEME (m.) baptism. 
Les Reformés n'ont que deux Sacremens, le Batême & la Sainte Cene, the Protestants have but two Sacraments, the Baptism and the Lords Supper. 
Recevoir le batême, to be bapti­
zed. 
Batiser un enfant, to christen, to baptize a child. 
Batisé, christened, or bapti­
zed. 
Batistaire (m.) le lieu où l'on batize, a font. 
Batistaire, témoignage par écrit que l'on a eté batizé, a certificate in writing concerning the time and place of christening.
 
* Bâter. V. Bast.
 
* Batement, Baterie, & Bateur. V. Batre.  

BATIR, to build. 
Bâtir une Ville, une Tour, to build a Town, a Tower. 
Bâtir une maison pres d'une au­
tre, to build a house by ano­
ther. 
Bâti, built. 
Une maison bien bâtie, a well built house, a well contrived house. 
Une maison mal bâtie, an ill contrived house. 
Bâtisseur (m.) a builder. 
Bâtiment (m) a building. 
Un superbe bâtiment, a magnifi­
cent building. 
Un bâtiment bien eclairé, a buil­
ding that has light enough. 
Un bâtiment bien percé, a buil­
ding full of windows. 
Décombres de bâtimens, the rubbish of old houses. 
Un bâtiment, ou Navire, a Ship, a Vessel.

* Bâtiser, & Batistaire. V. Bâtê­
me. 

* Bâtisseur. V. Batir.

* Batoir. V. Battre.  

BATON (m.) bâton à s'ap­
puier en marchant, a stick. 
S'appuier sur un bâton, to lean up­
on a stick. 
Bâton, pour fraper, a stick, club, staff, or cudgel. 
Donner un coup de bâton à quê­
cun, to give one a blow (to strike him) with a stick. 
Bâton à deux bouts, ferré aux deux bouts, a quarter staff. 
Bâton à feu, a bolt, dart, or quar­
rel shot in an engine. 
Bâton d'Augure, a crooked staff that the Augurs used in pointing the quarters of the Firmament in their divination. 
Bâton (baguette) de huissier ou de bedeau, an Vshers rod. 
Bâton de grand Maitre d'hôtel, the great Stewards rod. 
Bâton de Maréchal, a Marshals staff, or truncheon. 
Le Bâton de Jacob, un Instru­
ment de Mathematique, a Ma­
thematicall Instrument called Ja­
cobs staff. 
Parler à bâtons rompus, to dis­
course at random. 
Tour de bâton, gain que l'on fait par addresse outre ses ga­
ges, a collaterall gain or profit, a new coming in besides the wages. 
Bastonner quêcun, lui don­
ner des bastonnades, to give one the bastinado, to strike (beat, or hit) him. 
Bastonnade (f.) a bastinado, a banging, or beating one with a stick.  

BATRE, ou Battre, to beat. 
Batre quêcun à dos & à ventre, to beat one soundly. 
Batre le tambour, to beat the drum. 
Batre des oeufs pour faire une aumelette, to beat egs for an au­
melet. 
Batre les chemins, to beat the way. 
Batre le fer tandis qu'il est chaud, to beat the iron while 'tis hot. 
Batre le blé, to thresh corn. 
Batre le beurre, to churn but­
ter. 
Battre les murailles à coups de canon, to batter the walls with Ca­
non-shot. 
Batre la campagne, faire des courses sur les Terres des Ene­
mis, to make excursions into the E­
nemies Countries. 
Battre des mains, to clap hands together. 
Batre le pavé, perdre le tems à rouler par les rues, to go idlely up and down the streets, to walk much abroad, either to riot it or do one a mischief. 
Batre l'estrade, to ly in wait. 
Batre la mesure, lors qu'on chante, to beat the time in Mu­
sick. 
Batre la monnoie, to coin mo­
ny. 
Batre à routes. V. Battue. 
Ils nous battent les oreilles de leurs discours, they batter our ears with their discourse. 
Battre, neut, to beat. 
Les arteres & les veines battent sans cesse, the artery's and veines beat continually. 
Se batre la poitrine, to beat his breast. 
Se batre avec quêcun, to fight with one. 
Batu, ou Battu, beaten. 
Etre batu de quêcun, to be beat­
en by one. 
Nos Troupes ont eté battues, our Army was beaten. 
Un chemin battu, a beaten way. 
J'ai les oreilles battues de ce dis­
cours, my ears ring again with that discourse.  



Battue (f.) faire la battue à coups de gaule pour lancer la bête, battre à routes, aller bat­
tant de la houssine les buissons & haillers par les sentiers qui tra­
versent le fort de la bête, to beat the bush. 
Bateur (m.) as,
Bateur de blé, a thresher of corn. 
Bateur de pavé, an idle swagger­
ing fellow, any loose or mad youth, a dissolute or disorderly yonker. 
Bateur d'estrade, one that makes excursions into the Enemies Coun­
try. 
Batement (m.) a beating, or the act of beating. 
Batement de mains, a clapping of hands. 
Batement de cœur, the beating of the heart. 
Baterie (f.) combat, fight. 
Baterie de canon, a battery. 
Dresser une baterie, mettre en baterie les canons, to raise a bat­
tery. 
Changer de batterie, to remove the battery. 
Forteresse exposée à la batterie du Canon, a Fort exposed to the Canon. 
Donner le feu aux batteries, to fire from a Battery upon a Place. 
La baterie des tambours, the beating of the drums. 
Baterie de paroles contrarian­
tes, a rhetoricall exornation, when contraries are opposed to contra­
ries. 
Battant de cloche (m.) the clapper of a bell, a bell-clapper. 
Une Porte à deux battans, a folding or (two leaved) door. 
Bataille (f.) a Battel, or an Army. 
Bataille rangée, battel ar­
ray. 
Ranger l'Armée en bataille, to set the Battel in array. 
Bataille, le principal escadron, le corps de l'Armée, the princi­
pal bataillon or squadron of an Ar­
my. 
Bataille, combat d'Armées ene­
mies, a battel, or fight between two Armies. 
Presenter la bataille à l'Enemi, to offer battel to the Enemy. 
Donner (livrer) bataille à l'E­
nemi, to give the Enemy bat­
tel. 
Gagner la bataille, to get the day, to get the victory. 
Il mourut a pres avoir gagné la bataille, he died after he had got the victory. 
Perdre la bataille, to lose the bat­
tel, the field, the victory. 
Cheval de Bataille, a War horse, a horse for War. 
Bataillon (m.) a batalion, or part of an Army. 
Rompre un bataillon, to rout a batallion. 
Percer un bataillon de part en part, & achever de le mettre en deroute, to break through and through, and rout a batallion quite. 
Batoir (m.) batoir de lessive, a Laundresses batting staff. 
Batoir à battre une aire, ou un pavé, a rammer, a paving beetle.
 
* Bavard, &c. V. Bave.

† BAUDROIER. V. Conroyer.
Baudrier (m.) a belt, a long belt, a shoulder belt. 
Un baudrier à franges, a fringed belt. 
Un baudrier tout en broderie, an imbrodered belt.  

BAVE (f.) foam, slaver, dri­
vel. 
Baver, to foam, slaver, or dri­
vel at the mouth. 
Il bave en parlant, he foams at the mouth when he speaks. 
Un Baveux, a driveller, or sla­
verer. 
Un Bavard, un homme imper­
tinent dans ses discours, an idle babler. 
Baverelles de bride (f.) the players of a horses bit. 
Baverie, ou Bavardise, foolish talk. 
Baveret, Bavete, Bavolet, a bib, a thing to put before the bosom of a slavering child.  

BAUGE (m.) amas de bouë, a heap of dirt or mud. 
Bauge, lit, reposée de sànglier, the place wherein a wild boar hath wallowed or lyen. 
Bauge, mortier de terre grasse mêlé de paille, morter made of clay and straw.  

BAUME (m.) espece d'arbris­
seau, the balm (or balsam) tree. 
Baume, suc de baume, balsam, the gum of the balm tree. 
Huile de baume, oyl of bal­
sam. 
Bois de baume, the sweet wood of the balsam tree. 
Baume, caverne, (f.) a hole, den, cave, or grot.
 
* Bavolet. V. Bave.  

BAY, rouge obscur, bay, a sort of colour. 
Cheval bay, a bay horse.  

BAYE (f.) sorte de grain & de menu fruit de quêques ar­
bres, a berry. 
Baye, sein, golfe, a Bay of land.  

BAYONNETTE (f.) sorte de poignard, a kind of small dag­
ger. 



B E
BEANT, ouvert, gaping, ope­
ning the mouth wide. 
Avoir la gueule beante, to have his mouth wide open. 

† BEATITUDE (f.) Beatitude, blessed state.
Beatifier quêcun, le declarer bienheureux, to beatify. 
Beatifié, beatify'd. 
Beatification (f.) a beatify­
ing.  

BEAU, ou Bel, fair, fine, hand­
som, beautiful. 
Il fait beau tems, il fait beau, it is fair weather. 
Il fait beau se promener, it is fine walking. 
Voici de beau blé, here is fine corn, special corn. 
C'est un beau jeune homme, he is a fine young man. 
Beau à voir, fine to look on. 
Beau en apparence, fair in out­
ward appearance. 
Faire beau semblant à quêcun, to keep fair with one. 
Il l'a trahi sous un beausemblant d'amitié, he betray'd him under a fair pretence of friendship. 
Un bel homme, a fine comely man, a man of a goodly presence or sweet aspect. 
Une belle femme, a fine (hand­
som, beautifull, or delicate) wo­
man. 
Une belle prairie, a fine, curious, pleasant, delicate meadow. 
Je l'ai échapé belle, I scaped it fair or narrowly, I made a brave escape. 
La donner belle à quêcun, to give one a gudgeon, to sell him a bargain. 
Beau, seant, decent, seemly, hand­
som.  



Il n'est pas beau qu'un homme badine comme un enfant, it is not decent for a man to play like a child. 
Voila qui est beau, vous lever à midi, you are a fine man indeed, to rise at noon. 
Fait il pas beau voir ces coquins faire les Seigneurs? is it not a fine thing to see those silly rogues prank it and domineer? 
Beau pere, father in Law. 
Belle mere, mother in Law. 
Beau frere, brother in Law. 
Belle sœur, sister in Law.
Sometimes Beau has a peculiar emphasis with it, and may be thus rendred; as, 
Tu as beau dire, je le veux, say what you will, I will have it so. 
Tu as beau dire, on ne te croid point you may say what you will, but no body will believe you. 
Tu as beau faire, je l'emporte­
rai, it is in vain for you to struggle, I shall carry it. 
Il a beau faire, il n'en viendra pas à bout, he labours in vain, for he shall never compass it. 
J'ai beau me tuer de peine pour son service, il ne m'en sait point degré, though I confound my self for his service, yet he regards me not in the least. 
J'ai beau l'attendre, il ne vien­
dra pas, it is to no purpose for me to stay for him, he will not come. 
O que j'ai eu beau travailler! oh! how much work I have done in vain? 
Paier quêcun à beaux deniers contans, to pay one ready mo­
ny. 
Tout beau, tout beau, fair and softly, not too fast, hold there hoe. 
Tout beau, ne vous fâchez pas, peace, peace, be not angry. 
Tout beau, ne parlez pas si haut, softly, don't speak so loud. 
Il lui arracha l'oreille à belles dents, he bit off his ear. 
Beaucoup, much, greatly, a great deal. 
Vous ne m'épouvantez pas be­
aucoup, you do not fright me much. 
C'est beaucoup d'avoir com­
mencé, it is much to have be­
gun. 
Il s'en faut beaucoup que vô­
tre affaire ne soit achevée, your business is far from being end­
ed. 
C'est un plaisir beaucoup plus grand, it is a much greater plea­
sure. 
Il est beaucoup plus diligent que ses compagnons, he is a great deal more carefull than his compa­
nions. 
Je suis beaucoup plus fort que les autres, I am a great deal stron­
ger than the rest. 
Avec beaucoup de de contente­
ment, with much content, with a great deal of satisfaction. 
Il a beaucoup d'argent, he has a great deal of mony, he is a mony'd man. 
Nous sommes beaucoup de gens, we are great many. 
Beaucoup plus, beaucoup d'avantage, much more, a great deal more. 
Beaucoup moins, much less. 
Tu n'es pas à beaucoup pres si beau que ton frere, thou art no­
thing near so handsom as thy bro­
ther. 
Beaucoup de fois, many a time. 
Beauté (f.) beauty, handsom­
ness. 
Beauté d'homme, a mans beau­
ty. 
Beauté de femme, a womans be­
auty. 
La beauté est une juste propor­
tion des parties, accompagnée d'une couleur agreable & de la grace, Beauty is nothing but a just proportion of the parts, with a good complexion, and a decent car­
riage. 
C'est un enfant d'une vraie be­
auté, on ne peut rien voir de plus agreable que son visage. Il a le teint fort delicat, les yeux rians, les cheyeux frisez, le corps bien fait, le naturel doux & charmant, & c'est ce qui lui gagne les cœurs de tous ceux qui le regardent: He is a Child of a reall Beauty, and nothing can be seen more pleasing than his face. His complexion is most delicate, his eyes smiling, his hairs curled, his body well shaped, his nature sweet and charming, which makes him to win the hearts of all those who look upon him. 
Cette fille étoit belle, & cela paroissoit d'autant plus qu'il n'y avoit rien qui contribuât à relever sa beauté. Elle étoit dé­
chevelée, nuds piés, toute en de­
sordre, & si mal vêtue que, si sa beauté n'eust eté extraordinai­
re, elle eust eté étousée par tou­
tes ces choses; She was a hand­
som maid, and it appeared the more to be so, because she had no­
thing to set off her beauty. She was dishevelled, bare-footed, quite out of order, and was in so mean a dress, that if her beauty had not been extraordinary, it had been smothered up with all these disad­
vantages. 
La beauté de la Vertu n'est pas de celles qu'un petit accident efface, qu'une maladie flêtrit, & que la vieillesse détruit. Sa beau­
té est hors des atteintes de tous ces maux, toûjours fleurissante, toûjours charmante, toûjours ai­
mable & adorable. Vôtre teint, charmante Vertu, ne perd jamais son éclat, ni vos yeux leurs at­
traits, ni vôtre bouche sa frai­
cheur, ni vôtre front sa majesté, ni toutes les autres parties de vôtre corps leur justesse & leur bonne grace: The beauty of Vir­
tue is none of those which a little mischance disfigures, a disease spoiles, and old age defaces. Her beauty is beyond the reach of all those evils, always flourishing, al­
ways charming, always amable and adorable. Your complexion; so charming Virtue, doth never lose its clearness, nor your eys their attractive power, nor your cheeks their fresh colour, nor your fore­
head its majesty, nor the other parts of your body their proportion or grace. 
Il n'est point de beauté plus a­
chevée que la vôtre, there is no greater beauty than your is. 
Vos mains sont de la derniere beauté, your hands are incompa­
rable. 
Une beauté, une belle femme, a beauty, or a beautiful woman. 
C'est une Beauté achevée, she is a great beauty. 
Bellement, sans se hâter, softly, easily, at leisure, by little and little. 
Il va bellement en tout ce qu'il fait, il agit avec circonspection, he goes on fair and slowly, he is cir­
cumspect and cautious in all his a­
ctions. 
Il va trop bellement & lente­
ment en ses actions, he is too slow in his actions, he does all things too slowly. 



Bellement, sans bruit, softly, gent­
ly, gingerly. 
Marcher bellement, sans faire bruit, to walk softly, gently, gin­
gerly, and without noise. 
Parler bellement, to speak low.  

BEC (m.) the bill (or beak) of a bird. 
Il n'a rien que le bec, il parle beaucoup & ne fait rien, he is all tongue, he can do nothing but prate and tattle. 
Faire le bec à quêcun, l'embou­
cher, l'instruire sur ce qu'il doit dire, to teach one before hand what he shall say. 
Il comparut devant les Juges apres qu'on lui eut fait le bec, he appeared before the Judges when he was taught before hand what he should say. 
Tenir le bec en l'eau, to amuse, or hold in suspence. 
Passer à quêcun la plume par le bec, to draw his pen through ones lips, to baffle or abuse him. 
Bec jaune, apprentif, qui n'a point d'experience, a novice, an unskilful man, simple, raw, of no experience. 
Bec jaune, festin que fait celui qui sort d'apprentissage, a Treat that he makes who is newly come out of his prentiship. 
Becasse (f.) sorte d'oiseau, a woodcock. 
Becassine (f.) sorte d'oiseau, a snipe. 
Becfigue, sorte d'oiseau, the dainty little bird called by some Gnat-snapper, or fig-eater. 
Beche, à fouïr la terre (f.) a spade, an instrument of husban­
dry, with a beak like head, used for the opening or breaking up of hard & stony ground. 
Becher la terre, to dig, or break up the earth. 
Bechée (f.) a bill (or a beak) full. 
Bequeter, to pecklike a bird. 
Bequetement (m.) a pecking like a bird.  

BEDEAU (m.) Bedeau d'U­
niversité, a Verger in an Universi­
ty.  

BEELER, to bleat, or cry like a sheep. 
Beelement (m.) cri de brebis, a bleating, or the cry of a sheep. 

† BEFLER quêcun, to baffle one.  

BEFROY (m.) a beacon, or a watch tower, from which things may be discerned far off. 
Befroy, grande cloche, a great bell, an alarum bell. 
Befroy, ou Befray, Charpenterie soûtenant les Cloches d'un Clo­
cher, the timber work which keeps up the Bells of a Steeple. 
Befroy, Charpenterie pour in­
commoder les Assiegez, a wood­
en Tower set up against the besie­
ged.  

BEGUE, un homme qui be­
gaye, tongue-ty'd, which stammer­
eth, stuttereth, or muffleth in his speech. 
Begueyer, ou Begayer, to stam­
mer, or to muffle in the mouth, to speak imperfectly as a child that do's but begin to speak.  

BEGUIN d'enfant (m.) a big­
gin for a child.  

BELETTE (f.) sorte d'ani­
mal, a weasel.  

BEL. V. Beau.  

BELIER (m.) a ram. 
Heurter quêcun de la tête ainsi que font les Beliers, to butt like a ram. 
Belier, machine de guerre, a Ram, an engin anciently used in the besieging of Cities. So called because it had horns of iron like a Rams head, which battered the walls; or otherwise, because they rushed against the walls with it, as a Ram with his head, and back again.  

BELITRE, coquin (m) a ras­
cal, a rascally fellow.  

BELLE, & Bellement. V. Beau.  

BELLIQUEUX, warlike.  

BELOUSE de billard (f) the hazard in a billiard table. 
Belouser, to throw a ball into the hazard.
 
* Benaitier & Benediction. V. Benir.  

BENEFICE (m.) a benefit. 
Benefice Ecclesiastique, a Bene­
fice, a spirituall Living or Benefice. 
Benefice de ventre, a looseness. 
Beneficié, qui a un Benefice Ecclesiastique, an Incumbent, or Beneficed man, one that hath a Benefice. 
Beneficence (f.) beneficence, bounty, liberality.  

BENIN, benign, gracious, fa­
vourable, kind, good, liberal, boun­
tifull. 
Benignité (f.) benignity, grace, favour, kindness, bounty, goodness, 
Benignement, benignly, graci­
ously, favourably, kindly, liberally, bountifully.  

BENJOIN (m.) sorte de gomme, the aromaticall gum called Benjamin.  

BENIR, to bless. 
Dieu vous benisse, God bless you. 
Benir la table, to say grace. 
Benir une Eglise, un Aurel, &c. to consecrate a Church, an Al­
tar, &c. 
Benit, blessed, holy. 
Pain benit, holy bread. 
Eau benite, holy water. 
Beny de Dieu, blessed of God. 
C'est une Famille benie de Dieu, that Family is blessed of God, has got the blessing of God. 
Benediction (f.) blessing, bene­
diction. 
Benediction de Pain, de Vin, de Chapelle, d'Ornemens & choses semblables, the consecrating of Bread, Wine, Chappel, Ornaments, and the like. 
La benediction de table, grace. 
Benaitier (m.) a holy water pot, or stock.

* Bequeter, Bequetement. V. Bee.  

BEQUILLE (f.) jambe de bois, a wooden leg.
 
* Bercail. V. Bergerie.  

BERCEAU (m.) berceau d'enfant, a cradle. 
Arçon, arceau de berceau, the cover of a cradle. 
Berceau de treille, the bowing, or bending of an arbout. 
Bercer un enfant, to rock a child in a cradle. 
Bercé, rocked. 
On l'a bercé plus d'une heure, he was rocked above an hour.  

BERCHE (f.) petite piece d'artillerie de Vaisseau, a little piece of Ordnance called a Base.  

BERGAMOTE (f.) poire bergamote, the bergamot pear.  

BERGE (f.) sorte de bateau, a barge.  

BERGER (m.) berger de brebis, a Shepherd. 
Berger de gros betail, a herdman. 
Berger de Chevres, a Goat­
herd. 
Bergere (f.) a Shepherdess. 
Bergerie (f.) condition de  
Berger, a Shepherds condition. 
Bergerie, Bercail, a sheep-fold. 
Bergeronette (f.) sorte d'oi­
seau, the little bird called a Wag­
tail.  

BERIL (m.) sorte de pierre precieuse, a precious stone called Beryl, in fashion six square, in co­
lour like oyl or Sea-water.



BERLAN (m.) lieu où les de­
bauchés s'assemblent pour jou­
ër, a house of gaming. Also, a Game at cards so called.
Berlandier (m.) qui ne fait que jouër, a great Gamester.  

BERLE (f.) sorte d'herbe, an herb growing in the water like Alisander, but having less leaves. Some call it Belders, or Bell-rags, some yellow water-cresses, others water-parsley.  

BERLUE (f.) dimness of sight. Avoir la berlue, to be dim-sight­
ed.  

BERNER quêcun, lui don­
ner la berne, to toss one, to abuse him.  

BERTAUDER un cheval, to curtal a horse, to cut off his ears and tail.  

BESACE (f.) a bag, scrip, or wallet. 
Etre reduit à la besace, to be reduced to a beggarly condition.  

BESAGUE (f.) Instrument de Charpentier, a twibill, which is a two-edged instrument.  

BESANT (m.) monnoie d'or jadis battue à Constantinople, a besant, an ancient piece of gol­
den coyn (worth fifty French Li­
vers) thirteen whereof the French Kings were accustomed to offer at the Mass of their Consecration in Rheims. Which Custom being worn off, King Henry II. renew­
ed it, causing the same number of them to be made, which were called Bysantins. But they were not worth above a double duckat the piece. 
Besanté, terme de blazon, be­
santed, or charged with besants.  

BESCHE, Bescher, & Be­
schée. V. Beche, under Bec.  

BESOIN (m.) need, necessity, want, or great use of. 
J'ai besoin de plusieurs choses, I stand in need of several things, I want a great many things. 
Avoir besoin de toutes choses, to want every thing. 
Je vous aiderai au besoin, I shall assist you when you have occa­
sion for't. 
Je pourvoirai à vos besoins, I shall provide for you, I shall take care of you. 
L'Ami se conoit au besoin, a Friend is never known till one have need. 
Abandonner un Ami au besoin, to leave a friend in the lurch, to leave him in distress. 
Je vous viendrai voir, s'il en est besoin, lors qu'il en sera besoin, I shall wait on you when you have occasion for me. 
Il n'est pas besoin que vouz ve­
niez, you need not come, there is no necessity of your coming. 
Autant qu'il est besoin, as much as is needful. 
Qu'est il besoin d'en dire d'a­
vantage? what need is there to speak any more of it? 
Besongne (f.) un ouvrage dont on a besoin, work. 
S'occuper à quêque besongne, to be busie about something, to be imploy'd at some work. 
Hâter la besongne, to hasten his work. 
S'Attacher à sa besongne, to mind his work. 
Quitter sa besongne, to leave his work. 
Se remettre à sa besongne, to go to work again. 
Achever sa besongne, to end, to finish (or make an end of) his work.  

BETE (f.) a beast. 
Une bête sauvage, a wild beast. 
Une bête apprivoisée, a tamed beast. 
Bête de brout (en termes de Venerie) bête qui se nourrit en broutant, a brouzing beast. 
Bête noire, a wild swine. 
Bête de somme, a labouring beast, whatsoever it be, whose help we use in carriage and til­
lage. 
Vivre en bête, to live beastly, to live like a beast, to lead a beastly life. 
Prendre du poil de la bête, to take a hair of the same dog, to fall a drinking, to be cured of a fit of drunkenness. 
Une bête, un lourdaut, un ni­
ais, a brute, a sot, a block-head, a dull (or heavy) fellow. 
Une bête, un ignorant, an ass, an ignorant fellow. 
Rendre bête, abbrutir, to besot one. 
Faire la bête, se comporter in­
solemment, to carry himself sau­
cily, insolently. 
Bête, Jeu aux cartes, the Beast, a game at Cards so called. 
Bétail, Bestiaux (m.) Cattel. 
Etre riche en bétail, to be rich in cattel. 
L'Art de nourrir le bétail, the Grasiers trade. 
Faire trafic de bétail, to drive a trade of Cattel. 
Bestial, beastly, brutish. 
Bestialité (f.) beastliness. 
Bestialement, beastly, or like a beast. 
Bestiole (f.) a little beast. 
Bêtise (f.) sottise, lourdise, sottishness, blockishness, or want of wit. 
Faire une bêtise, to play the sot, to play a sottish trick.  

BETE-RAVE, ou Bette-ra­
ve (f.) sorte de racine, a root called Beets.  

BETOINE (f.) sorte d'her­
be, Betony, an herb so called.  

BETON (m.) sorte de mor­
tier qu'on jette dans les fonde­
mens, a kind of mortar used for foundations.
 
* Beu. V. Boire.  

BEVEUE (f.) an oversight. 
Faire une beveuë, to make an oversight. 
Vous avez fait une lourde be­
veuë, you made a great over­
sight.  

BEUF (m.) un beuf, an Ox. 
Le dos du Beuf fait assez conoi­
tre qu'il n'est pas fait pour por­
ter des charges, mais au moins sa tête est propre pour porter le Joug, & la Nature lui a donné des épaules fortes & larges pour pouvoir tirer plus aisément la Charrue; it is apparent by the shape of the Oxes back, that it is not made to bear burdens upon, but instead of that he has a head fit for the yoke, and Nature has given him strong and broad shoul­
ders, that he might draw the Plough with greater ease. 
Beuf à charrue, a plough-ox. 
Mettre la charrue devant les beufs, to set the cart before the horse. 
Beuf à charrete, a cart-ox. 
Beuf à l'engrais, qu'on engra­
isse, an ox that's fatning. 
Beuf de troupeau, an Ox kept in a herd. 
Un jeune beuf, a young Ox. 
Crier comme un beuf, to roar like an ox. 
On a beau mener le beuf à l'e­
au, s'il n'a soif, in vain is an Ox led to the water if he be not a thirst, or (as the English Proverb says) a man may lead his horse to the water, but cannot make him drink unless he list. 



Oeil de beuf, fenêtre en ovale, an oval window. 
Oeil de beuf, sorte de plante, the herb Ox-eye. 
Langue de beuf, a neats tongue. 
Beuf, chair de beuf, beef. 
Du beuf roti, rost beef. 
Du beuf bouilli, boyled beef. 
Du beuf à la mode, stewed beef after the French fashion. 
Bufle (m.) beuf sauvage, a bufle, or a wild ox. 
Bouvier (m.) a neat-herd, a herdsman. 
Bouvillon (m.) petit beuf, a young bullock.  

BEURRE (m.) butter. 
Du pain & du beurre, bread and butter. 
Une rôtie au beurre, a tost and butter. 
Battre le beurre, to churn but­
ter. 
Frotter de beurre, to rub with butter. 
Assaisonner quêque chose de beurre, to butter something. 
Beurrier (m.) vendeur de beurre, a butter-man, a seller of butter. 
Beurriere (f.) barril à faire du beurre, a Churn.
 
* Beuveur, Beuveuse, Beuve­
rie, & Beuvoter. V. Boire.  

BEZANT, & Bezanté. V. Be­
sant.  

BEZOAR (m.) sorte de pi­
erre, a bezoar stone. 

  
B I
BIAIS (m.) expedient, moi­
en, way, manner, course. 
Prendre une chose du bon bi­
ais, to go the right way to work, to take a right course in the mat­
ter. 
Je ne sai quel biais prendre pour cette affaire, I know not what course to take to make an end of this business. 
Peu m'importe de quel biais vous preniez ce que je dis, take it how you will, I don't much concern my self with it. 
J'ai bien de la joie de voir pren­
dre un si bon biais à vôtre des­
sein, I am very glad to see your de­
sign go on so successfully. 
Biaiser, aller de biais, to go byas, to stand aslope. 
Biaiser avec quêcun, not to deal roundly with one, to use shifts, evasions, tricks, and devices. 
Biaiser dans son discours, to speak ambiguously, to be full of eva­
sions in his discourse. 
Il voulut biaiser pour se tirer de ce mauvais pas, he did what he could to shift himself off. 
Biaiser, faire aller de biais, to place (or set) byas, to turn a­
side. 
Biaisé, placed (or set) byas, by­
assed, turned aslope. 
Biaisement (m.) the byassing of a thing.
 
* Biberon. V. Boire.  

BIBLE, (f.) l'Ecriture Sain­
te, the Bible. 
Une Bible, un livre contenant l'Ecriture Sainte, a Bible.  

BIBLIOTHEQUE (f.) a Li­
brary. 
Bibliothecaire, (m.) a Libra­
ry-keeper.  

BICHE (f.) a hind, the female of a stag.  

BICOQUE (f.) petit lieu, a little paltry Town.  

BIDET, (m.) petit cheval, a little nag.  

BIEN (m.) richesses, moiens, ones substance, estate, wealth, or riches. 
Il a de grands biens, he has a vast estate, he is mighty rich. 
Acquerir du bien, to get an estate. 
Depenser (dissiper) son bien, to mispend (to waste) his estate. 
Le bien de son Pere, ones own Fa­
thers estate, his Patrimony. 
Biens-fonds, Lands, Possessions. 
Le Souverain Bien de l'homme, the summum bonum, or supream good of a man. 
Bien, profit, avantage, good, bene­
fit, advantage. 
Preferer le bien public au sien propre, to prefer the publick good to his own. 
Un peu de repos vous fera be­
aucoup de bien, a little rest will do you a great deal of good. 
Vouloir du bien à quêcun, to wish one well. 
Dire du bien de quêcun, parler avangeusement de lui, en parler à son avantage, to speak well of one. 
Expliquer en bien quêque cho­
se, to take a thing in good part, to give it a good meaning. 
Procurer du bien à ses amis, to procure his friends some advantage or other. 
C'est le bien de la Republique, 'tis for the good of the Common-wealth. 
Cette chose vous apportera be­
aucoup de biens, that will be very beneficial to you. 
Bien, plaisir, office, pleasure, kind­
ness, favour, good office, or good turn. 
Faire du bien à quêcun, to do one a good office, to do him a kind­
ness. 
Les biens qu'on lui fait sont bien emploiez, any kindness one does him is well bestowed. 
Bien, vertu, goodness, honesty, vir­
tue, sincerity. 
Un homme de bien, a good man, an honest man. 
Une femme de bien, a good wo­
man, a virtuous woman. 
Les gens de bien, good men. 
Bien, (adv.) well, right. 
Etes vous bien ici? are you well here? 
Fort bien, tres bien, very well. 
Je me porte fort bien, I am very well, I am in very good health. 
Vous repondez bien, your answer well, or you answer right. 
Bien ou mal, la chose est faite, right or wrong, the thing is done. 
C'est bien dit, 'tis well said. 
Tout va bien, all goes well, all is well. 
Voila qui va bien, that's well. 
Aussi bien, as well, for. 
Je le savois aussi bien que vous, I knew it as well as you. 
Je chante aussi bien que lui, I sing as well as he. 
Otez vous d'ici, aussi bien n'y gagnerez vous rien, go your way, for you will get nothing by that. 
Bien, bien, il s'en repentira, well, well, he shall repent it. 
Et bien, que cela soit ainsi, well, let it be so. 
Bien, beaucoup, well, much, many, very. 
J'ai bien dîné, I dined very well. 
J'ai bien écrit aujourd'hui, I writ a great deal to day. 
Il est bien plus sage, he is much (or a great deal) wiser. 
Il parle bien autrement, ou bien mieux, he speaks much better. 
J'ai bien à faire, ou beaucoup de besongne à faire, I have much to do. J'ai bien à faire de cela? (being  



Ironically spoken) what have I to do with that? 
Il a bien de l'argent, he has a great deal of money. 
Il a bien du monde à sa suite, he has a great many Attendants, he has a great Retinue. 
Jai bien des affaires en main, I am very full of business, my hands are full. 
Un homme bien opiniâtre, a very stubborn man. 
Vous étes bien arrogant, you are very saucy. 
Etre bien avec quêcun, to agree well with one, to keep a good corre­
spondence with him. 
Mon frere n'est pas bien avec moi, my brother and I are fallen out, he and I are at variance. 
Bien, volontiers, fain, willingly. 
Je voudrois bien savoir quel est vôtre dessein, I would fain know what design you have in your mind. 
Je voudrois bien le voir, I would fain see him. 
Ou bien, or else, otherwise.
But Bien may be rendred as follow­
eth,
Voila bien dequoi faire tant le brave, a great matter indeed to be so proud of. 
Vous voila bien surpris, n'est ce pas? car vous ne m'attendiez pas, are you not very much surpri­
zed? for you did not expect me. 
Vous dites qu'il lui faut pardon­
ner, oui bien, s'il avouöit sa fau­
te, you say that he must be pardo­
ned, well and good, if he did but acknowlege his fault. 
Le veux tu bien? j'en suis con­
tent, Wilt thou have it so? I am contented. 
Bien loin de me louër, il me blâ­
me, far from praising me, he dos dis­
commend me. 
Je l'ai bien pensé, mais je ne l'ai pas dit, I thought so indeed, but I said nothing of it. 
Je vois bien que je perdrai ma peine, I clearly see that I shall lose my labour. 
Je puis bien vous asseurer, j'ose bien vous promettre, I can assure you, or, I dare promise you. 
J'en ai bien de meilleurs, I have far better. 
Il étoit bien minuit lors que nous nous retirames, it was full midnight when we went away. 
Nous étions bien cinq cens, we were full five hundred. 
Je serois bien sot de le croire, I should be a great sot to believe it. 
Qui bien aime bien châtie, he that loves throughly punishes throughly, or he that loves well pays home when he punishes. 
Qui bien aime n'oublie pas faci­
lement, sound love is not soon for­
gotten. 
Quand on est bien il faut s'y te­
nir, he that's well had best keep himself so. 
Qui bien fera bien trouvera, he that does well shall speed well. 
Qui veut bien mourir doit bien vivre, he that will die well had need live well. 
Bien que, quoi que, encore que, though, although. 
Bien que vous soiez plus âgé que lui, though you be elder than he. 
Bienfait (m) a good turn, favour, or kindness. 
Je vous accorde cela comme un bienfait, I grant you that as a fa­
vour. 
Bienfaicteur, ou Bienfaiteur (m.) a benefactor, one that doth one a good turn or kindness. 
Bienfaisant, one that loves to do good, a liberal (or bountiful) man. 
Bienheureux. See a little further, under Bonheur. 
Bienseant, fitting, decent, becom­
ing. 
Il n'est pas bienseant à un Chrê­
tien de mentir, it does not become a Christan to tell a lye. 
Cela n'est pas bienseant, that is not decent, or fitting. 
Cela ne lui est pas bienseant, that doth not become him at all. 
Bienseance (f.) decency. 
Il faut garder la bienseance en toutes nos actions & en tous nos discours, we ought to keep a de­
cency in all our actions and dis­
courses. 
La bienseance demande cela de vous, decency requires that of you. 
Avec bienseance, decently, or with decency. 
Sans aucune bienseance, unde­
cently. 
Droit de Bienseance, droit pre­
tendu de s'accommoder du bien d'autrui, a pretended right to an­
other mans house or land, which stands conveniently for one. 
Voiant que cette Maison étoit à sa bienseance il l'acheta, seeing that house lay fit for him, he bought it. 
Bien-venu, well come. 
Vous étes le tres bien venu, you are very welcome. 
Bienvenue (f.) a welcome. 
Faire la bienvenue à quêcun, to make one welcome. 
Paier sa bien venue, to pay his welcome, as Scholars do at their first entrance or admission into a School. 
Bienveuillance (f.) good will, kindness, love. 
Gagner (captiver, s'acquerir) la bienveuillance de quêcun, to get (to captivate) ones good will. 
Je sortirai de ce Païs avec la bi­
enveuillance d'un chacun, I shall go out of this Country with the love of every one. 
Avec bienveuillance, with a good will. 
Bon, good. 
Un homme extremement bon, a very good man. 
De bonnes gens, good people. 
Un homme trop bon, trop facile à donner, one that is too good, or too flexible. 
O le bon homme que vous étes! oh! what a good man you are. 
Un bon homme, un homme sim­
ple, a good man, or a simple man. 
Le bon homme, le vieillard, the good man, the good old man. 
Bon, excellent, good, excel­
lent. 
Un bon Poëte, un bon Orate­
ur, un bon Philosophe, a good Poet, a good Orator, a good Phi­
losopher. 
Bon, propre, good, sit. 
Ce Papier n'est pas bon pour é­
crire, this is no good paper to write upon. 
Des eaux tres bonnes pour les yeux, good waters for the eyes. 
Vous n'étes bon a rien, you are good for nothing. 
Bon, grand, good, or great. 
Un bon nombre de pistoles, a good quantity of pistols. 
Une bonne partie du tems, a good (or great) part of the time. 
Bon jour, good morrow. 
Bon soir, good night. 
Trouver bon, to approve, like, or allow of. 
Le trouvez vous bon? do you like it? do you approve (or allow) of it?
Je le ferai trouver bon à vôtre  



pere, I shall contrive it so that your father shall approve of it. 
Tenir bon contre quêcun, to hold out against one. 
Tenir bon dans sa resolution, to persist in his resolution. 
Tout de bon, seriously, in ear­
nest, indeed. 
Le dites vous tout de bon? do you speak in earnest, or seriously? 
Est ce ainsi tout de bon? is it so indeed? 
De bon cœur, heartily, or with a good heart. 
A quoi bon? to what purpose? 
A quoi bon tant de Livres? to what purpose so many Books? 
Bon, bon, cela va bien, voila qui va bien, good, good, that's well. 
Bon, nous sommes hors de danger, well, we are out of dan­
ger. 
Je me sauverai si l'on a du pire, mais si l'on a du bon je serai heureux, if we be worsted I shall get away, but if we get the better on't, I shall be a happy man. 
Il est bon de savoir l'Histoire du Tems passé, it is good to know the History of times past. 
Me fais tu bon cet écu? will you make me this Crown good? will you warrant it good? 
Bonheur, (m.) good luck, good fortune, prosperity, happiness. 
Vous avez bien du bonheur, vous étes heureux, le bonheur vous accompagne par tout, you got the luck on't, you are a fortu­
nate man. 
Je vous souhaite toute sorte de bonheur, I wish you all manner of happiness. 
Bienheureux, happy, fortu­
nate. 
Rendre bienheureux quêcun, to make one happy. 
Les Anges bienheureux, the blessed Angels. 
Les Bienheureux, les Saints, the Blessed, or the Saints in Hea­
ven. 
Bonté (f.) goodness, or boun­
ty. 
J'atten cette faveur de vôtre bonté, that favour I expect from your goodness. 
Puis que vous avez eu la bon­
té de venir me voir, seing you have done me the favour to come and see me. 
Aiez, je vous prie, la bonté d'ouïr mes excuses, be pleased, I pray, to hear my excuses. 
La bonté de ma cause, the justice of my cause. 
Bonté de naturel, goodness of na­
ture. 
Bonté d'esprit, excellency of wit. 
Bonnement, à peu pres, al­
most. 
Il ne fait bonnement que d'ar­
river, he is but een now come. 
Je ne saurois bonnement vous le dire, I cannot tell you exactly.  

BIERE (f.) sorte de boisson, beer. 
De la petite biere, small beer. 
De la forte biere, strong beer. 
Biere, cercueil, a coffin.  

BIEVRE (m.) castor, ani­
mal amphibie, a beaver, a beast so called, whose furr serves to make our beaver-hats. 

† BIFFER, effacer quêque chose, to rase, blot, or put out a thing.
Biffé, effacé, rased, blotted, put out.  

BIGAMIE (f.) bigamy, the marriage of two wives.  

BIGARRER, to diversify, va­
ry, mingle, or make of severall co­
lours. 
Bigarré, diversify'd, vary'd, mingled, or made of several co­
lours. 
Bigarreur (m) he that hath the art of doing a thing with se­
veral colours. 
Bigarrement (m.) a variati­
on, or diversifying in colours. 
Bigarrure (f.) variety, or di­
versity, as of several colours ming­
led together. 
Bigarreau (m.) sorte de ce­
rise, a kind of Cherry, which is half white and half red.   

† BIGEARRE, &c. V. Bizarre.  

BIGLE, louche, squinting, or looking askew.  

BIGNET (m.) a fritter.  

BIGOT, superstitieux, super­
stitious, scrupulous in his religion. 
Bigot, hypocrite, an hypocrite, one that seemeth much more holy than he is. 
Bigoterie (f.) superstition, a superstition, or superstitious way. 
Par bigoterie, superstitiously. 
Bigoterie, hypocrisie, hypocri­
sy, holiness only in shew.  

BIJOUX (m.) cloaths orna­
ments, as pendants, rings, neck­
laces, &c.  

BILAN (m.) livre de raison, particulier & propre aux paie­
mens de chaque terme, a sort of book of Accompts.  

BILBOQUET (m.) jeu d'enfant, trifles and gugaws for children.  

BILE (f.) humeur coleri­
que, the choler. 
Bile noire, atrabile, melancholy, or black choler. 
Bile jaune, choler. 
Bilieux, cholerick.  

BILLE (f.) avec quoi l'on pousse la boule au jeu du bil­
lard, the billiard-stick. 
Bille d'embaleur, a Packers stick. 
Billard (m.) jeu de billard, billiard, or play at billiard. 
Jouër au billard, to play at billi­
ards. 
La Table du Jeu de billard, the billiard table. 
Boule de billard, the billiard ball.  

BILLET (m.) a note, a ticket, a bill. 
Billet doux, a love-letter.  

BILLON (m.) monnoie de billon, defectueuse, base coin, which either hath no silver in it, or not so much as it should have, and therefore cry'd down or called in to be melted and made into bil­
lion. 
Billon, monnoie mise en fonte, money melted, or made into billi­
on. 
Billonner, faire amas de mon­
noie de billon, to take up base coin in order to melt it. 
Billonner, mettre en fonte la monnoie de billon, to melt into billion. 
Billonneur (m.) he that takes care to find out such base coin. 
Billonneur, qui met en fonte la monnoie de billon, a melter of coin into billion. 
Billonnement (m.) a melt­
ing of base coin into billion. 
Billot d'or, d'argent, ou d'au­
tre metal (m.) a wedge of gold, silver, or any other metal. 
Billot de bois, a billet, block, or log of wood.  

BINER la terre, to turn up the ground the second time. 
Binement (m.) seconde fa­
çon qu'on donne à la terre, lors qu'on la laboure pour la secon­
de fois, the turning up the ground the second time.
Binement de vigne, the second work done in Vineyards assoon as  



the Vines have branched and put forth their clusters.  

BIS, pain bis, brown bread.  

BIS-AYEUL, (m.) le pere de l'Ayeul ou de l'Ayeule, the father of the grandfather, the great grand father. 
Le Pere du Bis-Ayeul, the great grand fathers father. 
Le Bis-Ayeul du Bis-Ayeul, the great grand-fathers great grand-father. 
Bis-Ayeule (f.) a great gran­
dam, or a great grand-mother.  

BISCUIT (m.) bisket.  

BISE (f.) vent du Septen­
trion, a North-wind.  

BISET (m.) pigeon sauvage plus petit que le ramier, a kind of small stock-dove or Quest, re­
sembling a partridge, but nothing near so good.  

BISQUE (f.) riche potage, a rich kind of potage. 
Bisque, au jeu de paume, a bisk, the fourth part of fifteen.  

BISSAC (m.) a bag, a wal­
let.  

BISSEXTE (m.) jour ajoû­
té au mois de Fevrier, ce qui se fait de quatre en quatre ans, the intercalar day, which comes in every fourth year. 
Bissextil, An bissextil, An du bissexte, the Leap year.  

BISTORTE (f.) sorte d'herbe, an herb called Bitonica, or Bistort.  

BITUME (m.) bitumen, a kind of fat clay or slime clammy like pitch. It was used for lime or mortar, as also for oil in lamps, being of the nature of brim-stone. 
Bitumineux, full of bitumen, slimy, clammy, fast cleaving as bitumen.  

BIZARRE, fantasque, fan­
tasticall, capricious, odd, hair-brained. 
Bizarre, changeant, uncertain. 
Bizarrerie (f.) bizarrerie d'humeur, humeur bizarre, fan­
tasticalness, or fantastical humour. 
Bizarrement, odly, fantastical­
ly. 

  
B L
† BLAFARD, jaunâtre, yellow grown pale.  

BLAIREAU. V. Blereau.  

BLAME (m.) blame, impu­
tation, or reproach. 
Une action plutôt digne de loüange que de blâme, an action that is rather praise-worthy than blameable. 
Blâme, faute, blame, or fault. 
Il me donne le blâme de son ignorance, il en rejette le blâme sur moi, he lay's upon me the blame of his ignorance. 
Se mettre hors de blâme, to se­
cure himself from any imputation. 
Blâmer, to blame, reprove, re­
buke, tax, chide, condemn, discom­
mend, find fault with. 
Blâmer quêcun de sa paresse, to blame one for his slothfulness. 
Il blâma leur fuite, he condemned their flight. 
On te blâme d'avarice, you are taxed of covetousness. 
Blâmé, blamed, reproved, rebu­
ked, chid, taxed, condemned, dis­
commended, found fault with. 
Si vous faites cela, vous en se­
rez blâmé, if you do that, you shall be blamed for it.  

BLANC, (m.) couleur blan­
che, white, or white colour. 
Le blanc opposé au noir paroit d'avantage, a plus d'éclat, black being set against white sets it off, or sets a foil upon it. 
Le blanc de l'œil, the white of the eye. 
Blanc d'oeuf, the white of an egg. 
Blanc d'Espagne, blanc de plomb, ceruse, or white lead, wherewith women paint. 
Blanc d'eau, sorte d'herbe, a water-lilly, a water-rose, yellow and white nenuphar. 
Blanc, papier blanc, a blank of paper. 
Blanc, but, a white, or mark, to shoot at. 
Tirer (viser) au blanc, to aim at the white. 
Donner dans le blanc, tirer droit au blanc, fraper le blanc, to hit the white or the mark. 
Blanc, espece de monnoie va­
lant cinq deniers, a blank, a piece of French coin worth five deneers. 
Blanc (m.) blanche (f.) white. 
Blanc comme neige, as white as snow. 
Blanc d'âge, qui a les cheveux blancs, gray for age, white, hoa­
ry. 
Dents blanches, white teeth. 
Blanc de nature, white by na­
ture. 
Blanc par artifice, white by art, artificially white. 
Paroitre blanc, to look white. 
Les fleurs blanches des fem­
mes, the whites, a feminine dis­
ease. 
Blanchâtre, tirant sur le blanc, whitish, somewhat white, or inclining to white. 
Blancheur (f.) whiteness. 
Blancheur de cheveux, hoari­
ness, whiteness, or grayness of old age. 
Blanchir quêque chose, to whiten a thing, or to make it white. 
Blanchir de la toile, to whiten linnen cloth. 
Blanchir une muraille, to whiten a wall. 
Blanchir le linge, en le met­
tant à la lessive, to wash linnen white. 
Blanchir, devenir blanc, to whi­
ten, or grow white. 
Ma tête commence à blanchir, my head begins to be gray-hair­
ed. 
Blanchir, paroitre un peu blanc, to look somewhat white. 
Blanchi, whitened, or made white. 
Blanchi avec de la craye, white­
ned with chalk. 
Blanchisseur de toiles (m.) a Whitester. 
Une Blanchisseuse, a Laun­
dress, a washer woman. 
Blanchissage, ou Blanchissure, a whitening. 
Blanchissage de linge, washing. 
Je paie tant pour mon blanchis­
sage, I pay so much for my wash­
ing. 
Blanchisserie de toiles (f.) the place where linnen is whitened. 
Blanque (f.) sorte de Jeu de hazard, a blank lottery.  

BLASON (m.) Blazon, or the blazing of Arms. 
Il entend bien le blason, he is very skilfull in blazoning of Arms. 
Blasonner, déchiffrer les Ar­
mes d'un écu, to blaze (to bla­
zon) a Coat of Arms. 
Blasonné, blazed, or blazo­
ned. 
Blasonneur, déchiffreur de blazon, a blazer, or blazoner. 
Blasonnement (m.) a blazing, or blazoning of Arms.

BLASPHEME (m.) blasphe­
my, an opprobrious reviling of God,  



any horrible execration or great oath wherein Gods name is abu­
sed.
Blasphemer, to blaspheme, to curse (or revile) God. 
Blasphemé, blasphemed. 
Blasphemateur (m.) a blas­
phemer, a reviler of God. 
Blasphematoire, blasphemous, blasphematory.  

BLÉ, ou Bled (m.) corn. 
Blé en herbe, en épy, standing corn, that is not yet reaped. 
Manger son blé en herbe, to sell his corn on the ground and spend the many before it is ripe, to spend his rents before they be due, his revenue before it come in, wast­
fully to consume or send packing his Patrimony. 
Couper les blés, to reap the corn. 
Blé, ou froment, wheat.  

BLEME. V. Pâle.  

BLEREAU, ou Tesson (m.) bête de la grandeur d'un re­
nard, tenant du porc & du chi­
en, & vivant dans les cavernes, a badger. 
Les Blereaux vivent long tems, & quêquefois la vieillesse les rend aveugles; & alors le mâle nourrit la femelle si elle est a­
veugle, & la femelle entreti­
ent le mâle si ce même malheur lui arrive: Badgers live a long time, and it happens sometimes that old age blinds them; and then the male feeds the blind fe­
male, and the female the male if he be blind.  

BLESSER, to hurt, or wound. 
Il s'est blessé la tête, he has hurt his head. 
Blesser quêcun à mort, to wound one to death, to give him a mortal wound. 
Ces discours sales blessent les oreilles chastes, such nasty dis­
courses offend chast ears. 
Blesser l'honneur ou la reputa­
tion de quêcun, to blemish ones reputation. 
Blessé, hurt, wounded. 
Il a eté blessé, he was wounded. 
Blessure (f.) a hurt, or wound. 
Recevoir une grande blessure, to receive a great wound. 
Il est retourné, sans avoir receu aucune blessure, sans avoir eté blessé, he came back without the least hurt. 
Il est mort de plusieurs blessu­
res, he died of many wounds.  

BLET, ou trop meur, o­
ver-ripe.  

BLETTE (f.) herbe pota­
gere, the herb called blit, or blits.  

BLEU, couleur bleuë, blue, blue colour. 
Bleu, adj. qui est bleu, blue, that is of a blue colour. 
Bluet (m.) sorte de plante & de fleur, the blew-bottle. 
Bluette (f.) étincelle, a spark. 
Blueter, jetter des bluettes, to spark, or cast out sparks.  

BLOC (m.) piece de bois, a block, or log of wood. 
Vendre en bloc, ou en gros, to sell by the whole, to sell one with another. 
Blocage, ou Blocaille, menu­
es pieces de massonnerie, rub­
bish, shards, ragged stones. 
Bloquer, to block up, or shut in, to besiege, beset, or compass on all sides. 
Bloquer l'Enemi, lui fermer le passage, to block up the Enemy. 
Bloquer une Place forte, to block up a strong Place. 
Le faucon bloque la perdrix, cd. l'arrête, the hawk stops the partridge. 
Bloqué, block't up, or shut in, besieged, beset, or compassed on all sides. 
Tenir la Ville bloquée, to keep the Town blockt up. 
Cette Place forte est bloquée par nôtre Armée, that strong Place is blocked up by our Army. 
Le Blocus d'une place, the blocking up of a place. 
Faire (ou former) le blocus d'une place, la bloquer, to block up a place.  

BLOND, light, fair. 
Une perruque blonde, a light perruke. 
Une femme blonde, a fair wo­
man. 
Blondelet, tirant sur le blond, somewhat light, or fair.
 
* Bluet, Bluette, & Blueter. V. Bleu.  

BLUTEAU (m.) tamis, a searce, or boulter. 
Bluter, tamiser la farine, to boult meal. 
Bluteur (m.) a boulter of meal. 
Blutoir (m.) lieu où l'on blute, a room to boult meal in.

  
B O
BOBINE (f.) a hank of thread, &c.
 
* Bôcage. V. Bois.  

BOCAL (m.) sorte de bou­
teille, a viol, any big-bellied, long-necked and small mouthed vessel of glass or earth for water, wine, &c.  

BOCASSIN (m.) a kind of fine buckram.  

BOETE (f.) a box. 
Boëte de senteurs, a box of per­
fumes. 
Boëte à portrait, a box with a picture in it. 
Une petite boëte, a little box. 
Dans les petites boëtes on met les bons onguens, sweet oint­
ments are put in little boxes, little men most commonly are best qua­
lify'd. 
Boëte des os, le creux où ils s'emboitent, the hollow pan wher­
in a huckle bone is lodged. 
Boëtier (m.) faiseur de boë­
tes, a box-maker, a maker of boxes.  

BOEUF. V. Beuf.  

BOGUE (f.) couverture pi­
quante d'une châtagne, the rough (or prickly) rind of a green chesnut.  

BOIAU. V. Boyau.  

BOIRE, to drink. 
Boire peu, boire à petits traits, to drink little at a time. 
Boire beaucoup, boire à grands traits, to drink much, or to drink great draughts. 
Boire tout, to drink all. 
Boire avec excez, & en faire coûtume, étre un grand beu­
veur, to drink excessively, and use himself to it, to be a stout drinker. 
Il ne mange guêre, mais il boit bien, he eats little, but he drinks much. 
Il est malade de trop boire, he is sick for too much drinking. 
Donner (verser) à boire à quê­
cun, to give one some drink, to give him a glass of something. 
Boire à quêcun, boire à sa santé, to drink to one, or to drink his health. 
Boire la santé de quêcun, to drink ones health. 
Il a un peu trop bû, he has drunk a little too much.  



Nous bûmes plus de vint bou­
teilles, we drunk above twenty bottles. 
Tu as fait la folie, c'est à toi à la boire, you have committed the fault, it is fit you should suffer for't. 
L'éponge boit tout ce quelle peut recevoir de liqueur, the spunge draws in as much liquor as it can contain. 
Ce papier boit, this paper blots. 
Beu, ou Bû (the Participle) drunk. 
Tout est bû, all is drunk off. 
La Santé de Leurs Majestés fu­
rent beuës & répondues, the healths of their Majesty's were drunk and pledged. 
Beuveur, Biberon (m.) a drinker. 
C'est un grand beuveur, c'est un grand biberon, he is a great drinker. 
Biberon, papier qui boit, blot­
ting (or sinking) paper. 
Beuveuse (f.) qui boit trop, a woman given to drink. 
Beuverie (f.) drinking, or a drinking bout. 
Beuvoter, to sip, to drink little at a time. 
Boisson (f.) drink, any liquor wherewith our thirst is quenched. 
Voila d'excellente boisson, that's an excellent drink. 
Etre plein de boisson, to be full of drink, to be drunk.  

BOIS (m.) du bois, wood. 
Bois à brûler, fire-wood. 
Du bois sec, dry wood. 
Du bois verd, green wood. 
Le bois verd fait un feu fort chaud, green wood makes a hot fire. 
Bois flotté, qu'on mene par ra­
deau fur une Riviere, a float­
boat of wood or timber fastned to­
gether and convey'd down a stream unto the place where it is to be sold or used. 
Bois de moule, billets, logs, or log­
wood, great fire-wood of a certain size. 
Bois mort, dead and dry wood in forests. 
Bois de charpente, great timber­
wood. 
Chantier, amas de bois, a pile of wood. 
Il ne sait plus de quel bois faire fleche, he is at the last cast, or at his wits end, he knows no longer what course to take, what means to use, or what shift to make. 
Bois de lit, a bed-stead. 
Couper du bois, to hew wood. 
Fendre du bois, to cleave wood. 
Brûler du bois, to burn wood. 
Un Ouvrier en bois, a man that works in wood. 
Visage de bois, a disappointment, as when a man instead of a wel­
come finds himself shut out of doors. 
Un Bois, une Forêt, a Wood, or a Forest. 
Bois creu, sans avoir eté plan­
té, a Wood grown of it self. 
Bois planté à la main, a Wood of trees planted. 
Bois de haute fûtaie, a Wood of high trees. 
Bois de coupe, bois de taille, un taillis, copse-wood. 
Je sai de quel bois il s'échauffe, I know well enough what help he useth, what means he relyes on, I know what course he follows, what manner of life he leads. 
Il fait mauvais aller au Bois quand les Loups s'entreman­
gent, 'tis ill going to the Wood when Wolves eat one another. 
La Faim chasse les Loups hors du Bois, Hunger drives Wolves out of the Wood, Hunger breaks down stone walls. 
Porter des feuilles au Bois, to carry leaves to the Wood, to pour water into the Sea. 
Les Chams ont des yeux & les Bois des oreilles, Fields have eyes and Woods have ears, some hear and see him whom he hears and sees not. 
Bois, ramure, cornes de Cerf, the head or horns of a Deer. 
Cerf armé d'un beau bois, a Stag that has got fine horns. 
Haut le bois, ou, dressez vos piques, advance your pikes. 
Boiser une Chambre, to wain­
scot a room. 
Bôcage, ou Bosquet (m.) pe­
tit Bois, a Grove, a Thicket, or small Wood. 
Un Païs rempli de bôcages, a Country full of Groves. 
Bôcager, woody. 
Poesie bôcagere, a pastoral po­
em.  

BOISSEAU (m.) a bushel. 
Demi boisseau, half a bushel.
 
* Boisson. V. Boire.  

BOITER, étre boiteux, to be lame, or maimed of a leg, to limp, or to halt. 
Il boite de la blessure qu'il re­
ceut, he is lame (he halts) of the wound he received. 
Boiteux (m.) lame, cripple. 
Boiteuse (f.) a lame, or cripple woman. 
Boitement (m.) lameness of a leg, halting.  

BOMBASIN (m.) the stuff bombasine, or any kind of stuff that's made of cotton, or of cotton and linnen.  

BOMBE (f.) boule à feu, a ball of wild fire, a granado.
 
* Bon. V. under Bien.  

BONACE (f.) a Calm, a Sea-calm. 
Nous eumes tout ce jour là une grande bonace, we had all that day a great calm.  

BOND (m.) saut en l'air, a rebound. 
Bond de paume, the rebound of a ball. 
Je pris la bale au premier bond, I took the ball at the first rebound. 
Faire un bond, to make a re­
bound. 
Il fut frapé du bond que fit le boulet de canon, he was struck down with the rebound of a Can­
non-bullet. 
Un faux bond, a false rebound. 
Il m'a fait un faux bond, he has dealt falsely or treacherously with me, he has plaid me a trick. 
Aller à sauts & à bonds, to go skipping along. 
Bond de cheval, the bounding up of a horse. 
Bondir, faire un bond, faire des bonds, to bound up, to re­
bound, to rise suddenly and swift­
ly upward. 
Cela me fait bondir le cœur, le cœur me bondit quand je man­
ge de cette viande, that makes my stomack rise. 
Bondissement (m.) a bound­
ing, rebounding, leaping, jumping, jerting, or skipping upwards. 
Bondissement d'estomac, a ri­
sing of the stomack. 
Bonde (f.) bonde d'étang ou de riviere pour arrêter l'eau, a sluce, or floud-gate. 
Lever la bonde, to raise up (or open) a sluce. 
Baisser la bonde, to let down a sluce. 
Bondon (m.) bouchon de ton­
neau, a bung, or stopple.
 
* Bonheur, & Bonnement. V. under Bien. 



BONNET (m.) a cap, a bon­
net. 
Bonnet de nuit, a night-cap. 
Bonnet quarré, a four-square cap. 
Le flot d'un bonnet quarré, a lock of silk on the top of a square cap. 
Rire sous le bonnet, to laugh in his sleeve. 
Bonnete (f.) voile ajoûtée à une autre en cas de besoin, a piece of sail added when there is need of more sail. 
Bonnete traineresse, la plus basse de toutes, trainant sur le Vais­
seau, a drabler. 
Bonnete, espece de fortifica­
tion, a piece of fortification so called. 
Bonnetier (m.) faiseur de bonnets, a Cap-maker.
 
* Bontê. V. under Bien.  

BORD (m.) extremité de quoi que ce soit, the edge, side, or brim of any thing. 
Bord de Riviere, a river­
bank. 
Bord (rivage) de Mer, the Sea-shore. 
Prendre bord, to go ashore. 
Il est venu à bord en nageant, he got to shore by swimming. 
Bord d'habit, the welt, hem, or selvedge of a garment. 
Bord, ou bande attachée au bord d'une robe de femme, a border (or gard) about a womans gown. 
Le bord d'un puy, d'un fossé, the brink of a well, or ditch. 
Il est sur le bord de la fosse, he has already one foot in his grave, 
Le bord d'une tasse, the brim, tip, or edge of a cup. 
Le bord des levres, the tongues end. 
J'ai son nom sur le bord des le­
vres, I have his name at my tongues end. 
Bord, ou Navire, a ship, or ship­
board. 
J'allai me rendre à son bord, I went to his ship, I went a ship-board to him. 
Combattre de bord à bord, to fight ship to ship. 
Border, to border, gard, or welt. 
Border une robbe, y mettre une bordure, to border a gown. 
Les Soldats bordoient la Rivie­
re, the Souldiers stood along the River-side. 
Bordé, bordered, garded, wel­
ted. 
Le chemin est bordé de grands arbres, there is a rank of high trees on each side of the way. 
Bordure (f.) bordure de robe, a border, welt, hem, or gard of a gown. 
Bordure d'un miroir, ou d'un ta­
bleau, the frame of a looking glass or of a picture. 
Bordures de Jardin, the borders of a Garden. 
Bordée (f.) a broad-side. 
Nous lâchames une bordée de canon sur eux, We gave them a broad-side. 
Borne (f.) limite, bound, limit, end. 
Mettre des bornes entre deux chams, to set bounds between two fields. 
Mettre (donner) des bornes à quêque chose, to set bounds to a thing. 
Etendre les bornes de son Em­
pire, to inlarge the bounds of his Dominions. 
Passer les bornes de la Raison, to exceed the bounds of Reason. 
Se tenir dans les bornes de son devoir, to keep (or contain) him­
self within the bounds of his alle­
geance. 
Son Ambition n'a point de bor­
nes, his ambition has no bounds, he sets no bounds to his Ambi­
tion. 
Borner, to limit, or bound, to terminate, circumscribe, or set bounds to a thing. 
Il ne faut pas borner la felicité de l'homme par les plaisirs de cette vie, we should not measure mans happiness by the pleasures of this life. 
La mort ne bornera pas mon bonheur, death shall not put an end to my happiness. 
Borné, limited, bounded, ter­
minated, circumscribed, or that hath bounds set to. 
Borneur (m.) a limiter, a bounder.  

BORDEL (m.) a bawdy-house, an harlot-house. 
Hanter les bordels, to haunt bawdy-houses, 
On tient bordel dans cette mai­
son, that's a bawdy-house. 
Un bordel privé, a private baw­
dy-house. 
Un bordel publick, a publick bawdy-house. 
Le Pape tire des Bordels qui sont dans Rome un Revenu tres considerable, the Pope has a great revenue from the bawdy-houses of Rome. 
Bordelage (m.) wenching, whoring.  

BORDERIE (f.) sorte de petite metairie, a kind of little farm. 
Bordier (m.) a farmer.

* Bordure. V. Bord.  

BORGNE, one-eyed, or that hath but one eye. 
Un Borgne est Roi chez les A­
veugles, he that has but one eye is King amongst the blind, he that sees but little over-rules them that see nothing. 
Rendre borgne, éborgner quê­
cun, to put out an eye, to deprive one of an eye.
 
* Borne, &c. V. under Bord.  

BORRAS (m.) mineral dont on se sert pour souder l'or, Bo­
rax, or green earth, a hard and shining mineral or humour congea­
led in Mines, with which the Goldsmiths soder gold. 
Il y a du borras naturel & de l'artificiel, there is both natural and artificial borax.
 
* Boscage, & Bosquet. V. Bô­
cage under Bois.  

BOSSE (f.) tumeur en la chair, a bunch, or a swelling in a mans body. 
Bosse de chameau, the bunch of a camel. 
Bosse de terre, an heap of earth, a little hill, a hillock, or barrow. 
Bosse de bouclier, the bosse of a buckler or shield. 
Bosse, tumeur en quêques ar­
bres, comme aux aunes, era­
bles, &c. a knob, knot, or knur in a tree. 
Bosse, corne commençant à pousser hors de la tête du Cerf, a young horn without tines or knags. 
Bosse, en Sculpture & Menuse­
rie, a bosse, or imbossing in work­
manship. 
Ouvrage relevé en bosse, an imbossed piece of work. 
Il fut elevé en bosse apres sa mort, after his death a Statue was erected to his memory. 
L'Art de travailler en bosse, the Art of Imbossing. 
Bossete (f.) bossete de livre, a boss, such as is set on the out-side of books.



Bossete en la bride d'un che­
val, a boss, or stud in a horses bridle. 
Un faiseur de bossetes, a boss-maker, or a stud-maker. 
Bossu, un homme bossu, a crooked back, crumpt-shouldered, whose right or left shoulder sticks out. 
De jeune Medecin Cimetiere bossu, a new Physician makes a fat Church-yard. 
Le Veau & les Poulets mal cu­
its font les Cimetieres bossus, raw Veal and Chickens fill Church-yards.  

BOT, pié bot, émoussé & re­
tiré, a stump-foot.  

BOTE (f.) a boot. 
Une paire de botes, a pair of boots. 
Les genouilleres des botes, the boots tops. 
Prendre la bote, se boter, to put on his boots. 
Tirer la bote à quêcun, to pull off ones boots. 
Boter quêcun, to help one to put his boots on, to pull his boots on. 
Se boter, to put his boots on. 
Boté, booted, that has got boots on. 
Botines (f.) buskins, or light boots without tops.  

BOTE (f.) bote de foin, a bottle of hay. 
Bote (en termes d'escrime) coup de fleuret, a pass in the Art of fencing. 
Porter une bote à quêcun, to make a pass. 
Boteler du foin, to make hay into bottles. 
Boteleur (m.) a maker of hay into bottles. 
Botelage (m.) the making of bottles of hay.  

BOUART (m.) gros marteau de Monnoieur, a Coyners great hammer.  

BOUC (m.) a he-goat. 
Bouc châtré, a gelded he-goat. 
Bouc sauvage, a wild goat. 
Herbe de bouc, sorte de plante, the stinking motherwort. 
Bouquetin (m.) bouc sauvage, aux grosses & longues cornes lui battant jusques sur les reins, semées tout du long de gros neuds, en toute leur largeur; aussi vite à la course que le cha­
mois, & autant recherché que celui ci pour la bonté de sa peau, an Eveck, a sort of wild goat. 
Bouquin, chevreau mâle, a buck-goat. 
Bouquin, petit bouc, a little he-goat. 
Bouquin, odeur de bouc, the rank smell of arm-holes.  

BOUCANER, secher à la fumée du poisson ou de la chair, to smoak fish or flesh.  

BOUCHE (f.) the mouth. 
Une petite bouche, a little mouth. 
Faire la petite bouche, to sim­
per, to dissemble. 
Je n'en ai pas fait la petite bou­
che, I neither dissembled nor was loth to utter it, I spoke it openly, plainly, freely enough. 
Quand il est à table, il fait la petite bouche, when he sits at ta­
ble, he makes as if he could not eat, he shews himself a little ea­
ter. 
Il est sujet à sa bouche, he is gi­
ven to his belly. 
Une grande bouche, bouche fendue, a wide mouth. 
Ouvrir la bouche, to open his mouth. 
Ouvrir trop la bouche, to open his mouth too wide. 
Personne n'osa ouvrir la bou­
che, no body durst open his mouth. 
Fermer la bouche, to shut his mouth. 
Fermer la bouche à quêcun, le mettre au rouët, le reduire à ne savoir que répondre, to stop ones mouth, to drive him to a non-plus. 
Il m'a fermé la bouche avec ce mot, he stopped my mouth with that word. 
Je lui fermerai la bouche avec de l'argent, I shall stop his mouth with mony. 
Dire quêque chose de bou­
che, to tell a thing by word of mouth. 
Il a toûjours ce mot en bouche, he hath always that word in his mouth. 
Il dit tout ce qui lui vient en bouche, he speaks whatever comes next. 
Mettre la main devant la bou­
che, to put his hand before the mouth. 
Etre sujet à sa bouche, to be gi­
ven to his belly. 
Avoir bouche en Cour, to have budge-a-Court, to be in ordinary at Court. 
Je garde ces fruits pour la bon­
ne bouche, I keep these fruits for the last bit. 
Selon ta bourse gouverne ta bouche, govern thy mouth by thy means. 
Il l'a tout amassé en l'épargnant sur sa bouche, he has saved it all out of his own belly. 
Faire venir l'eau à la bouche, to make ones teeth water. 
Cheval qui a bonne bouche, qui mange toute pâture, a hard fee­
ding horse, that will eat any thing. 
Cheval qui est fort en bouche, a hard mouthed horse. 
Ne devoir au Seigneur que bou­
che & main, cd. que foi & hom­
mage, ce qui est en matiere de Fief la redevance la plus simple, to ow the Lord of the Land nothing but homage and fealty. 
Bouchée, (f.) a mouth-full. 
Boucher (m.) qui vend de la viande, a Butcher. 
Boucherie (f.) le lieu où l'on vend la viande, a Butchers stall, or shamble. 
Boucherie, massacre, carnage, butchery, slaughter. 
Il a fait une étrange boucherie des Enemis, he has made a great slaughter of our Enemy's.  

BOUCHER, fermer quêque chose, to stop, to shut up. 
Boucher une bouteille, to stop a bottle. 
Boucher une fenêtre, to dam up a window. 
Boucher la veuë, ôter le jour à quêcun, en se mettant devant lui, to dam up ones light, or stand in his light. 
Boucher ses oreilles aux plain­
tes de quêcun, to stop his ears to ones complaints. 
Boucher à quêcun toutes les a­
venues, tous les passages, to shut up all the avenues and passages. 
Bouche, fermé, stopped, shut up. 
Bouchon (m.) a stopple, that wherewith a thing is stopt. 
Bouchon de liege, a cork. 
Bouchon de vin à vendre, ra­
meau servant d'enseigne sur une porte, a tavern-bush. 
Bouchon, trousseau de paille ou de foin, a wisp of straw. 
Bouchonner un cheval, to rub a horse with a wisp of straw.  

BOUCLE (f.) a buckle.



Boucle d'argent ou d'or, a silver or gold buckle. 
Boucles de cheveux, a hair­
curl. 
Boucler une jument, to ring a mare, thereby to keep her from the horse. 
Boucler une assaire, to decide a business. 
Boucler un marché, to conclude a bargain. 
Boucler les Enemis, leur fermer le passage, to shut up the Enemy, to block them up. 
La Muraille boucle (en termes de Massonnerie) la muraille fait ventre, the wall bends out in the midst. 
Bouclier (m.) a Buckler, a Tar­
get, a shield. 
Petit bouclier, a little buckler, a little target. 
Bouclier à quatre angles, a four square shield. 
Bouclier en forme de croissant, a buckler like an half moon. 
Bouclier étroit & un peu long, recourbé aux deux côtés, a narrow buckler and somwhat long, bent backward on both sides. 
Bouclier à l'Espagnole, de cour­
roies entrelassées, a short square target or buckler used of the Spa­
niards and Africans. 
Bosse de bouclier, l'eminence du milieu du bouclier, the boss of a buckler. 
Armé de bouclier, armed with a buckler. 
Levée de boucliers en terme d'escrime, a preparation to fight, a trial made before the fight. 
Levée de boucliers, vaine entre­
prise sans effet, a great stirring a­
bout a small matter, huge prepara­
tion for a slight action, much ado about little or nothing. 
Il fait une grande levée de bou­
cliers pour ne rien faire, he makes great attempts which at last will come to nothing. 
Faire bouclier de quêque chose, to rely upon a thing, to shelter him­
self under it.  

BOUDIN (m.) pudding.  

BOUE (f.) dirt, mud, mire. 
Couvrir de bouë, to bespatter with dirt. 
Un Poisson nourri dans la bouë, a fish that liveth in the mud. 
Se veautrer dans la bouë, to wal­
low in the mire. 
Bouëux, dirty. 
Un chemin bouëux, sale, plein de bouë, a dirty way.  

BOUFEE (f.) boufée de vent, a puff (or gust) of wind, a sudden violent and short blast. 
Boufée de feu, a flash of fire. 
Boufi de colere, swelling with anger. 
Boufi d'une vaine opinion de soi même, puffed up with pride or self conceit.  

BOUFON (m.) a buffoon, a sportfull companion. 
Un Boufon de Theatre, a Jack pudding, a merry fool, one that liveth by making others merry. 
Boufonner, faire le boufon, to play the buffoon. 
Boufonnerie (f.) a buffoons way or discourse.  

BOUGE, petite chambre de Valet, a little room or closet built without the wall of a chamber, fit for a Servant to ly in.  

BOUGER, to budge, or to stir, neut. 
Ne bougez pas d'ici, don't stir from hence. 
Il ne bouge jamais de sa place, he never stirs from his place.  

BOUGERON, Bougre (m.) a buggerer. 
Bougeronner, to bugger, to com­
mit Sodomy. 
Bougeronné, buggered, abused by a Sodomite. 
Bougrerie (f.) buggery, Sodo­
my.  

BOUGETE (f.) a budget. 
Bougetier (m.) qui fait des bougetes, a budget maker.  

BOUGIE (f.) petite chan­
delle de cire entortillée, wax-light. 
Bougie, cierge de cire blanche, dont on se sert dans les maisons des Grands au lieu de chandel­
les de suif, a wax candle. 
Bougioir (m.) instrument à tenir bougie, à l'usage des E­
vêques quand ils officient, a thing to hold the wax candle when a Bishop officiates.  

BOUILLIR, faire bouillir quêque chose, to boyl somthing. 
Bouillir, neut. to boyl, to be a boy­
ling. 
Notre viande commence à bou­
illir, our meat begins to boyl. 
Bouillant, boyling, scalding hot. 
De l'eau bouillante, water that's scalding hot. 
Bouillamment, hotly, eagerly, fervently. 
Bouilli, boyled. 
Ceux qui se moquent de la bie­
re disent que c'est de l'eau bou­
illie, the great disparagers of beer say, that it is nothing but boyled water. 
Chair bouillie, boyled meat. 
Bouillie (f.) pap. 
Bouillon (m.) onde de li­
queur, bouillante, a walm, or see­
thing up. 
Apres trois ou quatre bouillons les herbes sont cuites, three or four walms or seethings up is e­
nough to boil herbs. 
L'eau sort de la roche à gros bouillons, the water comes impe­
tuously out of the rock, it comes gushing out of the rock. 
Bouillon, potage à humer, broth. 
Voila d'excellent bouillon, that's excellent good broth. 
Bouillon, saillie de jeunesse, an impetuous passion of youth. 
Bouillon de colere, a transport of anger. 
Bouillon, sorte de canetille, a sort of purl. 
Bouillon, sorte d'herbe, the pet­
ty mullein, wool-blade, torch­
weed, high-taper, or long-wort. 
Bouillonner, jetter des bou­
illons, to bubble. 
Bouillonner, sortir à bouillons, to gush out, to come out bub­
bling. 
Bouillonnement (m.) a bub­
bling, or gushing out.  

BOUIS (m.) sorte d'arbre, the box-tree. 
Du bouïs, box. 
Lieu planté de bouïs, a box-plot, a ground set or stored with box.  

BOULANGER, &c. V. Bou­
lenger.  

BOULE (f.) a bowl. 
Jeu de la longue boule, a play at Bowls wherein the furthest cast wins. 
Jeu de courtes boules, a play at bowls where he is the winner whose cast is nearest the mark. 
Jouër à la boule, to play at bowls. 
Jetter la boule, to bowl, or to throw the bowl. 
Faire quêque chose à boule veuë, cd. à la legere ou à l'é­
tourdi, to work on no sure grounds, to act upon hazard.
Jouër à boule veuë, faire seure­
ment ce qu'on fait, to play sure  



play, or to stand on safe terms, to hazard little or nothing. 
Boulet (m.) boulet de canon, a bullet.  

BOULEAU (m.) sorte d'ar­
bre, a birch-tree.  

BOULENGER (m) a Ba­
ker. 
Une Boulengere, a woman Baker, a Bakers wife. 
Boulengerie (f.) le métier de Boulenger, baking, or the art of baking. 
Boulengerie, lieu où l'on cuit le pain, a bake-house.
 
* Boulet. V. Boule.  

BOULEVARD (m.) a bul­
wark.  

BOULEVERSER, to over­
turn, or turn topsy turvy, to sub­
vert, to overthrow. 
Bouleversé, overturned, or tur­
ned topsy turvy, subverted, or over­
thrown. 
Bouleversement (m.) an o­
verturning, subverting, or over­
throwing.  

BOULINE (f.) aller à la bouline, to sail with a side-wind.  

BOULINGUE (f.) Bourin­
gue, voile au plus haut du màt du Navire, a topsail.  

BOUQUET (m.) a nose-gay. Faire un bouquet, to make a nosegay. 
Bouquetier (m.) a nosegay maker.
 
* Bouquin. V. Bouc.  

BOUQUIN (m.) vieux li­
vre de neant, an old book. Which makes me think very pro­
bably, that the word Bouquin is derived from Book. 
Bouquiner, feuilleter des li­
vres vieux & inutiles, to read much in old books.  

BOURASQUE (f.) a storm, or tempest, a gust of wind.  

BOURBIER (m.) dirt, mud, or mire. 
Bourbier, où se veautrent les pourceaux, a place where swine wallow.  

BOURDE (f.) mensonge, a fib. 
Donner une bourde à quêcun, to tell one a fib, to impose upon him.  

BOURDELIER (m.) Se­
igneur Bourdelier, Seigneur Fonsier, à qui les fonds doivent rentes, a Landlord unto whom the Tenant is bound to pay a yearly rent of mony, corn, and feathers, or in any two of them; which, if he omit three years together, he for­
feits his Estate. 
Fonds bourdeliers, Lands that must pay such rents, upon pain of forfeiture.  

BOURDON (m.) grosse mouche, a drone. 
Bourdon, bruit d'abeilles, the humming or buzzing of bees. 
Bourdon, gros tuiau d'une cor­
nemuse, the drone of a bag-pipe. 
Bourdon, bâton de pelerin, a Pilgrims staff. 
Planter bourdon en quêque li­
eu, y établir sa demeure, to settle (or fix himself) somwhere. 
Bourdonner, faire du bruit, to buzz, or humm like a drone. 
Bourdonner, chanter grossiere­
ment, to sing unpleasantly, or unskilfully. 
Bourdonnement (m.) a buz­
zing, or humming.  

BOURG (m.) Bourgade (f.) a Burrough, or good Town. 
De Bourg en Bourg, de Bour­
gade en Bourgade, from Bur­
rough to Burrough, from one good Town to another. 
Bourgeois (m.) a Burgess, a Citizen, a Freeman of a Town or City. 
La Milice bourgeoise, the Train bands. 
Bourgeoisie (f.) the estate or condition of a Citizen or Burgess. 
Bourgeoisie, droit de Bourge­
oisie, the Privileges of a Citizen or Burgess, his freedom. 
La Bourgeoisie, les Bourgeois, the Citizens, Burgers, or Towns men. 
Bourgmestre, Consul (m.) a Burgomaster, or Mayor, the principall Magistrate or Officer in a City or good Town.  

BOURGEON (m.) bouton de quêque plante, a young bud.
Faux bourgeon, qui vient au pié de la plante, a young shoot or scion springing out of the root or side of the stock. 
Bourgeon, bouton qui vient au visage, a pimple in the face. 
Bourgeonner, to bud, spring, or sprout out. 
La vigne commence à bourge­
onner, the vine begins to bud. 
Bourgeonné, nez bourgeon­
né, a red nose, a nose full of pimples.  

BOURGUEPINE (f.) sorte de plante, buckthorn, waythorn, or laxative ram.
 
* Bourgmestre. V. Bourg.  

BOURGUINOTE, sorte de casque, a kind of helmet.  

BOURINGUE. V. Boulin­
gue.
 
* Bourlet, & Bourlier. V. Bour­
re.  

BOURRACHE (f.) sorte d'herbe, borage.  

BOURRASQUE. V. Bou­
rasque.  

BOURRE (f.) flocks or locks of wooll, hair, &c. serving to stuff saddles, balls, and such like things. 
Bourrer quêque chose, to stuff with flocks and hair. 
Bourrer quêcun, le battre com­
me bourre, to beat, or to thump one. 
Bourré, rempli de bourre, stuffed, with hair, flocks, &c. 
Bourré, battu, beaten, thump­
ed. 
Bourru, plein de bourre, flocky, hairy, rugged, high nap­
ped. 
Du Vin bourru, new sweet wine, such as is not yet settled after Vin­
tage, new, thick, or unfined white wine. 
Un naturel bourru, ou fâche­
ux, a morose, or peevish hu­
mour. 
C'est un bourru, un bizarre, un homme d'un naturel fâcheux, he is a sad, morose, and peevish man, a man hard to please. 
Bourlet, (m.) cercle fait de drap, a wreath, or roul of cloth. 
Bourlet de chaperon de Docte­
ur ou de Magistrat, the hood worn by Graduats, Lawyers, and Citizens at their Assemblies. 
Bourlet de cheval attelé, collier bourré, an horse-collar, whereby he draweth in the cart. 
Bourlier (m.) faiseur de bour­
lets de chevaux, a maker of horses collars. 
Bourrée (f.) fagot de menu bois, a bavin, or fagot of twigs. 
Bourreau (m.) a Hangman, an Executioner. 
Bourreler, tourmenter quê­
cun, to torture, or to torment one. 
Bourrelé, tourmenté, tortu­
red, tormented. 
Bourrelerie (f.) a torture, or torment.



Bourriers (m.) paille, or­
dures mêlées avec le blé, any trash, chaff, and the like that gets amongst the corn. 
Bourrique (m.) un Ane, an Ass.  

BOURSE (f.) a purse. 
Bourse, petit sac à mettre quoi que ce soit, a bag, satchel, or pouch. 
Faire bourse à part, to live with­
out any community of goods or of estate with another. 
Selon ta bourse gouverne ta bouche, measure thy appetite by thy ability. 
Ce sont les petits gains qui em­
plissent la bourse, light gains make heavy purses. 
Une belle hotesse est un mal pour la bourse, a fair hostess brings in a foul reckoning. 
Quand on n'a pas d'argent en bourse il faut avoir du miel en bouche, let him speak fair (or give good words) that cannot spend freely. 
Coupeur de bourses, a pick-pocket. 
Bourse des graines, the green husks of wheat or any other grain being young and beginning to spire. 
Bourse de genitoires, the out­
ward skin of the cods, wherein be the stones of a man. 
Bourse de Marchands, an Ex­
change. 
La Bourse Royale de Londres est la plus belle de l'Europe, the Royal Exchange of London is the finest Exchange in Europe. 
Bourset de hune (m.) petite voile, the top-sail of a Ship. 
Boursette (f.) petite bourse, a little purse. 
Boursier (m.) a Purse-keep­
er. 
Boursier d'un College, aiant droit de recevoir certaine di­
stribution d'argent, a Pensioner, or one that hath a yearly pension in a Colledge.  

BOURSIN (en termes de Massonnerie) croûte de terre attachée à la pierre de taille, a soft and mouldring substance that cleaves to the outside of freestone in Quarries, and is usually taken or pilled from the stone before it be wrought.  

BOURSOUFLER, to swell with wind, to puff, or blow up. 
Boursouflé, swoln, or puffed up with wind. 
Boursouflement (m.) swel­
ling.  

BOUSSOLE (f.) a Mari­
ners Compass.  

BOUT (m.) extremité de quêque chose, the end, top, or tip of a thing, the extream (or utmost) part of it. 
Les doux bouts d'une Rue, the two ends of a street. 
Toucher du bout des doits, to touch with his fingers end. 
Goûter du bout des levres, to tast a thing with the tip (edge, or outside) of the lips. 
J'irai, si vous voulez, jusqu'au bout du Monde avec vous, I shall go with you to the Worlds end if you will. 
Le bout d'un fourreau d'epée, the chape of a scabbard. 
Bout rimé, the rime of a verse. 
Le haut bout de la table, the up­
per end of a table. 
Il tient le haut bout parmi ses compagnons, he is the head of all his companions, he has got the up­
per hand. 
Il veut toûjours tenir le haut bout, he is always struggling for precedency, every where he is for the upper hand. 
Venir à bout de son dessein, de son entreprise, to bring his de­
sign about, to compass it. 
Vous n'en viendrez jamais à bout, you will never bring it a­
bout, you never will compass it. 
On ne peut venir à bout de cet enfant, that child cannot be re­
claimed. 
Mettre à bout la patience de quêcun, to tire ones patience. 
Pousser une chose à bout, to drive a business to the head. 
A tout bout de champ, still, e­
ver, evermore, every where. 
Bouture (f.) tronson de bran­
che d'arbre rongné des deux bouts pour étre planté, a graff, a slip of a tree.  

BOUTEILLE (f.) a bottle. 
Bouteille de vin, a bottle of wine. 
Bouteille de biere, a bottle of beer. 
Emplir une bouteille, to fill up a bottle. 
Vuider une bouteille, to empty a bottle. 
Petite bouteille qui se forme sur la surface de l'eau, a bubble raised on the water. 
Bouteiller (m.) qui fait ou vend des bouteilles, a bottle-ma­
ker, or one that sells bottles.  

BOUTER (en termes de Venerie) pousser dehors du fort, to rouze, or to start. 
Bouté, lievre bouté & lancé, a started hare. 
Boutade (f.) fougue, a start­
ing, a sudden (violent, and unexpe­
cted) passion or stirring, a fury. 
Boutade de colere, a fit (or transport) of anger. 
Boutade de resolution, a fro­
lick. 
Boutade de poësie, a poetick ra­
pture, a poetical fury. 
Par une boutade, by a frolick. 
Par boutades, by fits. 
J'arrêterai ses boutades, I shall repress his fury. 
Boutadeux, qui ne fait rien que par boutades, full of fro­
licks, capricious, humorous, fanta­
stical. 
Boutefeu (m.) un Incendi­
aire, a Boutefeu, an Incendiary, a wilful firer of houses. 
Boutefeu, auteur de querelles, a firebrand of sedition, a kindler of strife and contention, one that loves to set and see men together by the ears. 
Boute-hors (m.) the Play cal­
led, Thrust out the harlot, where­
in the weakest ever come to the worst. 
Jouër au boute-hors, to play at that kind of play. 
Boutehors, facilité à s'enoncer, good utterance, ready tongue, quick delivery. 
Boute-selle, to horse, the word for horsemen to prepare themselves to horse.  

BOUTIQUE (f.) a Shop. 
Lever boutique, to set up shop. 
Tenir boutique, to keep a shop. 
Ouvrir la boutique, to open the shop. 
Fermer la boutique, to shut up the shop.  

BOUTON (m.) bourgeon de quêque plante que ce soit, a bud, a young bud. 
Bouton, pustule qui vient au vi­
sage, a wheal, or pimple. 
Bouton d'habit, servant d'atta­
che, a button. 
Boutons à queuë, tufted but­
tons. 
Mettre des boutons à un habit, to sow buttons to a sute of cloaths.
Serrer le bouton à quêcun, le  



tenir de court, to restrain one, to bear a hard hand over him. 
Serrer le bouton à un prodigue, lui donner peu d'argent, to keep one short of mony. 
Bouton, neud coulant aux rê­
nes d'une bride ou aux attà­
ches d'une bourse, a running knot or button in the reins of a bridle or the strings of a purse. 
Bouton de seu, an actual cau­
tere headed like a button. 
Boutonner, bourgeonner, pousser des boutons, to bud. 
Boutonner une casaque, to but­
ton a coat. 
Boutonné, buttoned. 
Visage boutonné, couperosé, a face full of red pimples. 
Boutonnier (m.) faiseur de boutons, a button-maker. 
Boutonniere (f.) a button-hole. 
Boutonnet (m.) sorte d'her­
be, rapture-wort, burst-wort, a sort of herb.
 
* Bouture. V. Bout.

* Bouvier, Bouvillon. V. Beuf.  

BOYAU (m.) bowel, gut, en­
tral, intestine. 
Titer les boyaux hors du corps, to pull out the guts or garbage. 
Le gras boyau, the fat tripe, or chitterling.

  
B R
BRAC, Brachet (m) Chien de chasse qui suit la proie à la piste, a little hound.
 
* Bracelet. V. Brasselet.  

BRAILLER, crier, to bawl. 
C'est assez brailler, you have bawled enough. 
Brailleur (m.) a bawler, a bawling man. 
Brailleuse (f.) a bawling wo­
man.  

BRAIRE, crier comme un âne, to bray, like an ass. 
Les Anes braient à l'envi, the Asses make who shall bray most. 
Le Braiement d'un âne, the braying of an ass.  

BRAISE (f.) charbon ardent, a burning coal. 
Brasier (m.) amas de braise, a quick fire of coals. 
Brasier, rechaut, a chasing-d sh.  

BRAME (f) sorte de poisson, a bream, a fish so called.  

BRAMER, crier comme un Cerf, to cry out like a hart. 

† BRAN. V. Son.  

BRANCAR (m.) any thing that hath arms, or out-bearing side-beams, and is to be carried by, or between, two. 
Brancar de litiere, the shafts of a litter.  

BRANCHE (f.) branche d'arbre, a branch, or bough of a tree. 
Une branche avec son fruit, a bough plucked off the tree with the fruit on it. 
Branche ursine, sorte d'herbe, branck ursin, bears foot, bears claw, bears breech, an herb so cal­
led. 
Branche, en matiere de genea­
logie, les descendans à côté du tige, a branch or line of a pedi­
gree, a collateral degree or side of kindred. 
Branchage (m.) the branches or boughs of a tree, or the thickness of them. 
Brancher un voleur, le pen­
dre à quelque arbre, to hang up a thief at a tree. 
Se brancher sur un arbre, to light upon a bough, to take stand in a tree as a hawk, to pearch as a phesant. 
Branchier (m.) oiseau de proie branchier, qui se pose sur des branches, a brancher, or young hawk. 
Branchu, qui a plusieurs branches, full of branches, or boughs.
 
* Brandiller. V. Branler.  

BRANDIR, to brandish, to make a thing shake or quaver by the force it is cast with, to cast it with a swing. 
Brandir un javelot, to brandish a dart.  

BRANDON (m.) a fire-brand, a torch.  

BRANLE (m.) mouvement du corps, a motion of the body. 
Donner le branle à quêque chose, la faire mouvoir, to move, or stir a thing. 
C'est lui qui a donné le bran­
le aux autres, qui les a poussés à cela, 'tis he that has incou­
raged the rest, that has brought them to it. 
Etre en branle, ou en doute, to be uncertain what to do. 
Etre en branle, ou pret à tom­
ber, to be tottering or ready to fall. 
Branle, sorte de danse, a brawl, or dance wherein many men and women holding by the hands, some­
times in a ring and sometimes at length, move all together. 
Danser un branle, to dance brawls. 
Branler, faire branler quêque chose, la secouër, to shake a thing, to jog it. 
Branler la tête, les bras, &c. to shake his head, his arms, &c. 
Branler, chanceler, étre en branle, to shake, stir, jog, move, or totter. 
Les dents me branlent, my teeth wag, my teeth are loose. 
La tête lui branle, his head shakes. 
Sa fidelité ne branla jamais, he was of an unshaken fidelity. 
L'Armée branle, the Army be­
gins to give (or to lose) ground, be­
gins to fall into disorder. 
Branler, manquer de resoluti­
on, to waver, to be wavering, ir­
resolute, uncertain, or uncon­
stant. 
Ce scelerat ne branla point par ces menaces, il se posseda tout entier, il demeura froid, that wicked man was not in the least moved by those menaces, he was nothing disturbed, and seemed not at all concerned. 
Ce fourbe ne branla point dans ses réponses, that Impostor did not faulter at all in his speech, but stood it out. 
Se Branler, se Brandiller sur un bois suspendu & balançant des deux côtés, to weigh salt. 
Branlé, shaken, jogged, moved, or stirred. 
Branlement (m.) a shaking, or jogging. 
Branlement des dents, a loose­
ness of the teeth.  

BRANQUER un canon, to plant (or level) a Cannon against something. 
Branqué, planted, levelled.  

BRAS (m.) an arm. 
La partie du bras qui est depuis le coude jusqu'a l'épaule, the upper part of the arm from the el­
bow to the shoulder. 
La partie du bras depuis le cou­
de jusqu'au poignet, the nether part of the arm from the elbow to the wrist of the hand. 
Avoir un bras fort & robuste, to have a strong arm.
Il se jetta entre mes bras, he cast  



himself into my arms. 
Je le receu à bras ouverts, I re­
ceived him with open arms. 
Ils arrachoient les enfans d'en­
tre les bras de leurs meres, they snatched the children out of their mothers arms. 
Avoir des affaires sur les bras, to have his hands full, to be pester­
ed (or troubled) with business. 
J'ai sur les bras un puissant E­
nemi, I have to do with a potent Enemy. 
Il s'accorde avec mes Enemis pour me jetter toutes leurs For­
ces sur les bras, he combines with my Enemies to turn all their For­
ces against me. 
Se tenir les bras croisés, to be in an idle posture. 
Bras, manche, sleeve. 
Il avoit le bras retroussé, jusqu'au coude, he had his sleeve turn­
ed up to the very elbow. 
Bras de chaise, the elbows of a chair. 
Chaife à bras, ou fauteuil, a Chair with elbows, a great chair. 
Bras de Mer, an Arm of the Sea. 
Bras de Riviere, an Arm of a River. 
Le Bras seculier, ou la Puissance seculiere, the Secular Power, or Secular Authority, the Civil Ma­
gistrate. 
Il fut degradé & livré au Bras Seculier, he was degraded, and then delivered to the Secular Pow­
er. 
Le Bras Ecclesiastique, la Pu­
issance Ecclesiastique, the Church Power, the Power of the Church, the Ecclesiastical Power. 
Cet homme est mon bras droit, that man is my right hand, he is my greatest help. 
Brassal (m.) an Archers brace, or bracer. 
Brassal de fer, a vambrace, or piece of armour for the arm. 
Brassal pour jouër au balon, the wooden cuff or brace worn by Bal­
loon players. 
Brasse (f.) a fathom, or mea­
sure of five foot, the length of two arms stretched out. 
Brassée (f.) an arm full, as much as one can hold within (or carry in) his arms. 
Brasselet (m.) a Bracelet. 
Brasser, remuer, battre quêque chose avec une spatule ou autre instrument, to stir (or beat) some­
thing together. 
Brasser de la biere, la cuire, la preparer, to brew, or make beer. 
Brasser, comploter, machiner quêque chose, to work under­
hand, to contrive, or devise. 
Brasser une trahison, to work treason. 
Ils me brassent un mauvais tour, they conspire (or combine) against me, they contrive a mischief a­
gainst me. 
Brasser la mort de quêcun, to contrive a mans death. 
C'est lui qui a brassé toute l'af­
faire, he is the author of all, he has been the sole manager of the business. 
Brassé, stirred, beaten together. 
Biere brassée, brew'd beer. 
Brassé, comploté, machiné, wrought under-hand, contrived, or devised. 
Brasseur (m.) brasseur de bi­
ere, a Brewer. 
Brasserie (f.) l'endroit où l'on brasse la biere, a Brew-house.  

BRAVE, vaillant, brave, stout, or valiant. 
Un brave Officier d'Armée, a brave, stout, or valiant Officer. 
Brave, bien couvert, fine, spruce, or having good cloaths on. 
Vous le faites trop brave, you make him too fine. 
Brave, galant, qui fait les cho­
ses galamment, a brave man, a fine man. 
Tout le monde avouë que c'est un tres brave homme, all the world looks upon him as a brave man. 
Faire le brave, le gentil, to af­
fect to be fine, spruce, and neat in his cloaths. 
Faire le brave, l'entendu, to swagger, to boast of his own worth, to prefer himself before others. 
Braver quêcun, lui faire in­
sulte avec mépris, to insult over one, to abuse, affront, or hector him. 
Il brave tout le monde, he af­
fronts every body. 
Bravache (m.) a Royster, or Swaggerer, one that's ever vaunt­
ing of his own valour. 
Bravade (f.) a bravado, a boast­
ful affront. 
Je me ris de ses bravades ainsi que de ses caresses, I scorn his bravado's as I do his caresses. 
Braverie, Bravoure, faste, bra­
very, shew. 
Bravement, vaillamment, bravely, stoutly, valiantly. 
Bravement, lestement, finely, neatly, quaintly, curiously. 
Bravement, excellemment, bravely, very well, finely.  

BRAY (m.) composition de poix à calfeutrer les Navires, Ship-pitch, or a kind thereof.

† BRAYES, haut de chausses, breeches, or hose.
Braye, sorte de tenailles dont on serre la bouche d'un Che­
val, barnacles for a horses nose. 
Fausse-braye, avantmur, a false bray, or out-wall in a fortress. 
Brayer (m.) bandage pour ceux qui sont rompus, a truss, or a swaddle worn by such as are burst. 
Brayer (en termes de Fan­
connerie) le tour du cul de l'Oiseau par où se décharge l'émeut, the brail, or pannel of a hawk. 
Brayette (f.) the codpiece. 
Avoir la brayette chaude, étre addonné aux femmes, to be gi­
ven to women.  

BREBIS (f.) a sheep (but pro­
perly) a new. 
Etable à brebis, a sheep-fold. 
Troupeau de brebis, a flock of sheep. 
Peau de brebis, sheeps-skin. 
Lait de brebis, ews milk. 
C'est un Proverbe que, qui se fait brebis le Loup la mange, there is a Proverb, that those who will needs be Sheep the Wolf devours, that he who carries him­
self like a Sheep shall be fleeced and fed on. 
Pendant que les Chiens s'entre-grondent le Loup devore la Brebis, Churchmens contention is the Devils harvest.  

BRECHE (f.) a breach. 
Breche de muraille, a breach in a wall. 
Faire breche, to make a breach. 
Reconoitre la breche, pour voir si elle est raisonnable, to survey the breach, and see if it be wide enough to enter. 
La 'breche faite on livre l'as­
saut, the breach being made the Town is stormed. 
Combattre à la breche pour en­
trer, to force his passage through the breach. 
Defendre la breche, to defend the breach. 
Reparer la breche, to make up the breach.
Faire breche à la reputation de  



quêcun, to make a breach in any ones reputation, to hurt or blemish it. 
Faire breche à la Justice, to transgress the Laws.  

BREDOUILLER, to speak or pronounce imperfectly.  

BREE. V. Brief.  

BRESIL (m.) bois rouge, the wood brasil.  

BRETE (f.) fleuret, a foyl, a fencers fort. 
Jouër (faire) des bretes, to fence. 
Un Breteur, a vain talker.  

BRETELLES (f.) cordes de crocheteur, a Porters cords.
 
* Breve, Brevet, Breviaire. V. Brief.  

BREUVAGE (m.) drink, or potion. 

† BRIBE, morceau de pain donné par aumône, a piece or lump of bread given unto a beg­
gar.  

BRICOLE, au jeu de pau­
me (f.) a side-stroke of a ball at Tennis, when the ball go's not right forward, but hits one of the walls of the Court, and thence bounds towards the adverse party. 
Bricole, tromperie, finesse, foul play, deceit, fraud. 
Bricoler, joüant à la paume, to toss (or strike) a ball side­
wayes. 
Bricoler, tromper, donner une bricole à quêcun, to play foul play with one, to deal cunning­
ly with him, to deceive, or disap­
point him,  

BRIDE (f.) a bridle. 
Mors de bride, the bit of a bri­
dle. 
Rene de bride, the reins of a bridle. 
Tenir la bride courte, to pull in the bridle, to curb a horse. 
Je lui tiens la bride courte, I keep him in, or I keep him un­
der, I have a strict eye over him. 
Lâcher la bride à un cheval, to let loose the reins. 
Lâcher la bride à ses passions, to indulge his passions, to grati­
fy them, to give himself over un­
to them. 
Tenir la bride à ses passions, to bridle his passions. 
Courir à bride abbatue, cou­
rir à toute bride, to run full speed. 
Je lui ai mis la bride en main, la bride sur le coû, I let him take his course, I have left him to himself, I gave him all li­
berty. 
Brides à veaux, contes faits à plaisir, tales. 
Brider un cheval, to bridle a horse. 
Ce Cheval ne se laisse point brider, that horse will not be bri­
dled. 
Brider quêcun, le tenir de court, to keep one under, or in order. 
Je briderai vôtre insolence, I shall curb his insolency. 
Bridé, bridled, restrained, or kept under.  

BRIEF, brief, short. 
Brieveté (f.) brevity, short­
ness. 
Brievement, briefly, shortly. 
Breve (f.) certaine mesure de quarreaux pesée, laquelle on donne à l'Ouvrier pour é­
tre marqués & monnoiés, the metal which is at one time de­
livered unto a Coyner to be wrought, so called, because the quantity thereof is briefly specify'd in a ticket. 
Brevet (m.) a brief or breviate, a short declaration. 
Brevet du Pape, the Popes bull. 
Brevet, perservatif à pendre au coû, an amulet, a preservative to be hanged about the neck. 
Breviaire (m.) a breviary, or mass-book. 
Il est au bout de son breviaire, he is at a plunge, or at a non-plus, he has no more to say. Which expression is grounded upon those ignorant Priests, who can say no more than what they find in their Service book.

† BRIFER, manger avide­
ment, to devour, eat hastily, feed ravenously, or like a hungry glut­
ton.
Brifeur, Brifau, grand man­
geur, a ravenous feeder.  

BRIGADE (f.) a great body of horse men. 
Brigadier (m.) a Briga­
deer.  

BRIGAND (m.) a thief, a high-way robber, but especially such as take away not only a mans goods, but his life also. 
Brigander, to rob and kill with­
all. 
Brigandage (m.) a robbing and killing.  

BRIGANTIN (m.) vaisseau de bas bord, Brigantine, a low long and swift Sea Vessel, bigger than the Frigat and less then a Foist, and having some 12. or 13. oars on a side.  

BRIGUE (f.) a private suit, or under-hand labouring for an Office. 
Briguer, to make private suit, or labour under-hand for an Of­
fice. 
Brigueur (m.) one that priva­
tely labours (or under hand sues) for the assistance or favour of others in order to get a vacant Of­
fice.  

BRILLER, to glitter, twin­
kle, shine, or sparkle. 
Le Soleil fait reluire & briller la Mer, the Sun reflects his beams upon the Sea. 
Brillant, éclatant, glittering, twinkling, shining, sparkling. 
Un homme d'une humeur bril­
lante & enjouée, a man of a brisk and lively humour. 
Brillant (a masc. subst.) bright­
ness, sparkling, or splendor. 
Distinguer les faux brillans d'a­
vec les veritables pierreries, to discern counterfeit stones from right ones. 
Brillement (m.) a glittering, twinkling, shining, or sparkling,  

BRIMBALER, sonner trop fort les cloches, to ring the bells too loud. 

† BRIN, menue piece de quê­
que chose, any small substance, deal or bit of a thing.
Brin de plante, a little slip or sprig of an herb. 
Brin de sel, a corn of salt.  

BRIQUE (f.) a brick. 
Faire la brique, to make brick. 
Un faiseur de brique, a brick-maker. 
Briquetier (m.) ouvrier en brique, a brick-maker, also a brik-layer. 
Briqueterie (f.) the art of ma­
king bricks. 
Briqueterie, ouvrage de briques, brick-work.  

BRISER, mettre en pieces, to break, bruise, beat in pieces. 
Brifer du sucre, to break sugar small. 
Ie te briserai de coups, I shall beat you to pieces.  



Briser un discours, to break off a discourse. 
Il a failli, mais brisons ici, he was in fault, but no more of that. 
Briser, se briser, to break, or split, neat. 
Le navire a brise au Port, the ship was wrackt (or cast away) in the very Port. 
Les flots se brisent contre les rochers, the waves break upon the rocks. 
Le navire s'est brisé contre un ecueil, the ship did split against a rock. 
Brisé, broken, bruised, beaten in pieces. 
Brisé de coups, bruised with blows. 
Un lit brisé, a folding bed. 
Somme brifée, a broken sum with odd mony, or a whole sum with overplus. 
Brisan (m.) écueil, an high rock in the Sea. 
Une Mer pleine de brisans, a Sea full of rocks. 
Brisées (f.) rameaux que le Veneur quêtant la bête se me en son chemin pour le reconoi­
tre apres & le reprendrè, boughs rent by hunters from trees and left in the view of a Deer, or cast over thwart the way wherein he is like­
ly to pass, thereby to hinder his running, and to recover him the better. The Woodmen call them Blinks. 
Reprendre ses brisées & sa rou­
te, to come about again to the way where the boughs were cast by the hunter. 
Reprendre ses brisées, reve­
nir à son discours & à son sujet, to return to his former dis­
course. 
Je ne vai plus sur vos brisées, I trace you no more, I follow your footing no longer; or, I am no longer your competitor, concurrent, corrival. 
Bris, (m.) bris de muraille, a breach in a wall. 
Bris de Navire, a leak in a ship. 
Droit de bris, the Admiralty of a Sea-coast, which gives a man all wracks or shipwracks. 
Brisure (f.) rupture, a break­
ing, brusing, or beating in pieces. 
Brisure d'armoiries, an addition in armory for the distinction of bro­
thers as a label, half moon, mul­
let, &c.  

BROC (m.) vaisseau à mettre du vin, a leather jack. 

† BROCARD (m.) parole pi­
quante, a nipping jest, a quip.  

BROCART, jeune Cerf. V. Broquart.

* Brocatel. V. Brocher.  

BROCHE (f.) a spit. 
Mettre la chair à la broche, to spit the meat. 
Tourner la broche, to turn the spit. 
Tourne-broche, a turn spit. 
Broches, defenses, dents de san­
glier, the tusks (or tushes) of a wild boar. 
Brochette (f.) petite broche, a skewer. 
Brocher d'or un drap de soie, to inrich with gold a silk stuff, to make cloth of tissue. 
Brocher, enfoncer les éperons, to spur a horse very hard, almost to stick him with spurring. 
Brocatel, Brocatelle, drap de soie broché d'or, tinsel, or thin cloth of gold or silver. 
Brochet (m.) sorte de poisson, a pike, a fish so called.  

BRODEQUIN (m.) a sort of buskin.  

BRODER, travailler en bro­
derie, to imbroder. 
Broder une étoffe, to imbroder a stuff. 
Brodé, imbrodered. 
Brodeur (m.) an Imbroderer. 
Broderie, Brodure (f.) ou­
vrage de brodeur, imbrodery. 
Broderie, art de brodeur, the art of imbrodering.  

BROIER. V. Broyer.  

BRONCHER, to stumble. 
Un Cheval qui bronche sou­
vent, a stumbling horse. 
Bronchement (m.) a stum­
bling.  

BRONZE (f.) metal compo­
sé de leton & de rosette, such letton or copper as must not be hammered, but melted.  

BROQUART (m.) jeune Cerf de deux ans, a two years old Deer; which, if it be a red Deer is called a Broket; if a fallow Deer, a Pricket.  

BROSSAILLES (f.) thick bushes. 
Brosse (f.) a brush. 
Brosser, netteier avec une brosse, to brush, or make clean with a brush. 
Brosser par les forets, to run through bushes or thickets.  

BROU (m.) écaille verte de noix, the outward husk of a green walnut. 

† BROUET. V. Bouillon.  

BROUETE. (f.) petit chari­
ot à une rouë, a wheel-barrow.  

BROUILLARD (m.) Brouée, (f.) nuage, a mist, a fog. 
Un air plein de brouillars, a misty (foggy) weather. 
Les Brouillars ne sont diffe­
rens des Nuées, qu'en ce qu ils se forment dans la basse Region de l'air. La Cause qui les y ar­
rête n'est autre que la froideur de cette Region laquelle se trouve assez forte pour les con­
denser; Fogs do differ from Clouds, in that fogs are formed in the lower Region of the Air, the coldness whereof being sufficient to condense the same, is that which fixes them there. 
Dissiper les brouillars, to dis­
perse (scatter, or dissipate) the mist. 
Brouillard, papier écrit qui n'est pas au net, loose papers wherein we write things carelesly or at ran­
dom. 
Brouiller, confondre plu­
sieurs choses ensemble, to jumble, handle, or confound things toge­
ther. 
Brouiller une affaire, brouiller les cartes, to perplex (or confound) a business, to make a stir. 
Brouiller une Famille, to cause a division in a Family. 
Se brouiller avec quêcun, to fall out with one. 
Brouillé, jumbled, huddled, confounded together, put in a con­
fusion. 
Des oeufs brouillés, eggs ming­
led with something and beaten to­
gether. 
Nos affaires sont bien brouil­
lées, our business is very much per­
plexed and confounded. 
Etre brouillé avec quêcun, to be at variance with one. 
Brouillerie (f.) confusion. 
Brouillerie entre des Amis, va­
riance, breach of friendship. 
Brouillerie dans un Etat, a pub­
lick Disturbance, a Broil, a Sedi­
tion. 
On n'a point veu de brouille­
rie dans ce Roiaume tant qu'il a vêcu, there has not been the least broil in this Kingdom while he lived.
Brouillon (m.) qui aime à  



brouiller les affaires, a dange­
rous or troublesom man, a trou­
bler, or trouble-house. 
Brouillon, papier écrit. V. Brou­
illard.  

BROUT, bête de brout (en termes de Venerie) bête sauve, comme Cerf, Daim, &c. all kind of Deer, wild Goats, and such like beasts. 
Brouter, to brouze, to knap (or nibble off) the sprigs, buds, bark, &c. of plants.  

BROYER, piler quêque chose, to beat small, pound, or bray. 
Broyé, pilé, beaten small, pounded, or brayed. 
Broyeur (m.) a beater of things untill they be broken small, a poun­
der, or a brayer. 
Broyement (m.) a beating small, pounding, or braying.  

BRU (f.) belle fille, la fem­
me du fils, a daughter in law, a sons wife.
 
* Bruant. V. under Bruire.  
BRUIERE. V. Bruyere.  

BRUINE (f.) gelée blan­
che, a hoar-frost.  

BRUIRE, faire du bruit, to make a noise. 
Bruiant, ou Bruyant, that makes a noise. 
Je n'aime pas ces Instrumens dont l'harmonie est trop tu­
multueuse & trop bruiante, I do not like those musical Instru­
ments that make a noise too loud and obstreperous. 
Bruant (m.) sorte d'oiseau, a kind of bird that neigheth like an horse. 
Bruit (m.) a noise. 
Bruit d'une chose resonnante, a sound. 
Bruit d'armes, a rustling. 
Bruit de coups de foüet, a jerk, a lash. 
Bruit de scie, de lime, a crashing. 
Bruit, fracas de choses qui tombent, a cracking. 
Bruit sourd, a soft and still noise, a murmur. 
Bruit de ruisseau, bruit d'arbres agités par un petit vent, bruit des oiseaux quand ils gazouil­
lent, a soft and still noise of a brook that runneth with a gentle stream, of trees when a little wind blows, and of birds when they chatter. 
Bruit de plusieurs personnes qui grommelent ensemble, a murmuring, rumbling, or shuffling of people assembled. 
Bruit de piés ou de mains, a noise of feet and hands. 
Bruit de Mer & de Tempête, a roaring, or raging of the Sea. 
Bruit de porte, & de souliers neufs, a screeking. 
Cette porte fait du bruit quand on l'ouvre, this door screeks when one opens it. 
Avoir bruit ensemble, étre en querelle, to fall out together. 
Bruit, nouvelles, a rumor, news, bruit, or report. 
Le bruit court qu'il est mort, it is reported that he is dead. 
Ce bruit s'est répandu par toute la Ville, that news is spread all the Town over. 
C'est un bruit commun, un bruit constant, it is a common re­
port. 
Semer (faire courir) quêque bruit, to spread a news. 
Bruit, estime, reputation, fame, repute, or reputation. 
Cette femme a mauvais bruit, that woman hath an ill report, or repute.  

BRULER, brûler quêque chose, to burn, to burn somthing. 
Brûler de l'encens, du papier, du bois, to burn incense, paper, wood. 
Il m'a brûlé les cheveux, he has burnt my hair. 
Brûler les maisons des Paisans, to burn the houses of the Country people, to fire them, or set them on fire. 
Brûler la chandelle par les deux bouts, disorderly to wast and consume his substance, not to care what or how one spends. 
Brûler avec quêque liqueur chaude, to scald one. 
Vous m'avez brûlé la jambe, you have scalded my leg. 
Brûler, étre en feu, étre em­
brasé, to burn, to be on fire. 
Ce bois est si verd qu'il ne sau­
roit brûler, this wood is so green that it cannot burn. 
Je me brúle, I burn my self. 
Je me suis brûlé la main, I burnt my hand. 
Il s'est brûlé avec, de l'eau chaude, he has scalded himself. 
Brûler, étre enflammé de desir ou de quelque autre passion, to desire a thing exceedingly or very earnestly, to burn with a desire. 
Brûlé, burned, or burnt. 
Un bâton brûlé par le bout, a stick burnt at one end. 
Sa maison s'est brûlée, his house is burn't down. 
Tous mes Livres se sont brûlés, ont eté brûlés, all my books are burnt. 
Il sut brûlé sur un gril, he was burnt upon a gridiron. 
Il fut brûlé tout vif, he was burnt alive. 
Brûlé, hâlé du Soleil, Sun­
burnt, swarthy. 
Brûleur (m.) celui qui brûle, a burner, or he that burns a thing. 
Brûlement (m.) l'action de brûler, a burning, firing, or scalding. 
Brûlure (f.) a burning, or burnt place in some part of ones body, a scald. 
L'huile de myrte guerit les brûlures, the oyl of mirtle heals any scald. 
Brûlure de plantes, a blasting of plants. 
Brûlot (m) Navire dont on se sert pour brûler ceux de l'E­
nemi, a fire-ship.  

BRUN, obscur, brown, dark of colour. 
Avoir les cheveux bruns, to have brown hair. 
Une brune, une femme brune, a brown woman, a woman of brown hairs or complexion. 
La Brune, le soir, the evening, the twilight. 
Brunet, tirant sur le brun, brownish, somewhat brown. 
Une Brunette, a brown girl.  

BRUNIR, polir, to burnish, or make bright. 
Brunir de l'or ou de l'argent, to burnish gold or silver. 
Bruni, poli, burnished, polished. 
Brunisseur (m.) a burnisher, polisher. 
Brunissoir (m.) a burnishing, brush or stick. 
Brunissement (m.) aburnishing, or polishing. 
Brunissure (f.) polissure de cornes de Cerf, the brightness of harts-horn.  

BRUSC (m.) myrte sauvage, sorte d'arbrisseau, butchers-broom, knee-holm, or petigree, a certain rough-pricked Shrub, whereof they made brushes or bee­
soms.  

BRUSQUE, precipité, teme­
raire, rash, inconsiderate. 
Brusquerie (f.) a rash, or in­
considerate action.
Brusquement, precipitam­
ment,  



rashly, inconsiderately.  

BRUTE, bête brute, a brute, a beast. 
Une pierre brute, a rough and unpolished stone. 
Un diamand brut, a rough (or uncut) diamond. 
Emeraude brute, opaque, qui n'est pas éclatante, a dull eme­
rald. 
Brutal, brutish, beastly. 
Un brutal, un homme (un es­
prit) brutal, a brutish man, a brute, one that doth things with­
out judgment or any consideration, a rash or heedless man. 
Un brutal, un incivil, un homme qui n'a point de civilité, a clown, a rude, unmannerly, unci­
vil man. 
Brutalité (f.) brutishness, or beastliness. 
Brutalité, faute de jugement ou de consideration, brutishness, want of judgment, rashness or heed­
lesness. 
Brutalité, barbarie, incivilité, rudeness, unmannerliness, or inci­
vility. 
Brutalement, brutishly, beastly. 
Brutalement sans aucune consi­
deration, rashly, heedlessly, incon­
siderately. 
Brutalement, barbarient, in­
civilement, rudely, incivilly, bar­
barously.  

BRUVAGE. V. Boisson.
 
* Bruyant. V. Bruire.  

BRUYERE (f.) sorte de plante, the sweet broom, heath, or ling whereof brushes be made. 
Des bruyeres, lieu semé de bru­
yeres, où il y en a quantité, a heath or heathy ground. 

  
B U
* Bû, ou Beu, Participe du Ver­
be Boire.

† BUANDIERE (f.) a Laun­
dress, a Washer woman.  

BUCHE (f.) piece de gros bois pour se chaufer, a log, or bullet of wood. 
Une buche, un lourdaut, a block­
head. 
Bucher (m.) amas de bois, a wood-pile. 
Bucher, lieu où l'on met la pro­
vision de bois, a wood-house. 
Bucher, où l'on brûloit les corps morts, the place where dead bodies were burned. 
Bucher, aller au bois, faire provision de bois, to go to the wood, to get wood, or make provision of wood. 
Bucheron (m.) qui fait la cou­
pe du bois, a wood-cleaver, or wood-seller. 
Buchete (f.) petite buche, a little stick of wood. 
Buchete de bois sec, a dry stick. 
Buchete de paille, a piece of straw.  

BUFET (m.) a cup-board. 
Bufet, sur lequel on met la vais­
selle, a cup-board for plate. 
Assortissement d'un bufet, cup-board plate. 
Un bufet chargé de vaisselle d'or & d'argent, a cup-board full of plate of gold and silver.
 
* Bufle. V. Beuf.  

BUGLOSE (f.) sorte d'her­
be, bugloss, an herb so called.  

BUIS. V. Bouis.  

BUISAR. V. Buse.  

BUISSON (m.) a bush. 
Buisson, touffe de bois êpineux, a place full of briars, a bramble bush.  

BULBE (f.) any root that is round and wrapped with many skins one upon another.  

BULLE (f.) Bulle de Pape, a Popes Bull, a Writ (Commission, or Letter) sealed with lead and sent from the Pope. 
Bullete, Bulletin, attestation des Magistrats, &c. a Magistrates ticket or cocket.  

BURE (f.) sorte de vase, a pitcher, a pot for water. 
Burete (f.) a little pitcher, or pot.  

BURE (f.) drap grossier, a thick and course cloth. 
Bureau (m) tapis de table, soit de bure, soit d'une autre é­
toffe, a table carpet. 
Bureau, le lieu où l'on delibere sur le bureau, cd. sur le tapis de table, the place where is kept a Court of Audit or of Audience. 
Bureau, les gens tenans le Bu­
reau, ceux dont l'Assemblée est composée, the Court it self, or the Officers thereof. 
Bureau, ou Audience, a Hea­
ring. 
Donner le bureau à quêcun, to grant one a hearing. 
Impetrer le premier bureau, to obtain a hearing at the first mee­
ting of the Court. 
Bureau de Douäne, a custom-house office. 
Vôtre affaire est mise sur le bureau, ou sur le tapis, your business is brought upon the Stage.  

BURELLE (en termes de blazon) une fasce de huit pieces ou plus, a number of closets in bla­
zon.  

BURET (m.) espece de pois­
son d'oû l'on tiroit autrefois la pourpre, the burret, a shell fish, of the liquour whereof purple colour was made.
 
* Burete. V. Bure.  

BURGUEPINE. V. Bour­
guepine.  

BURIN (m.) a burin, a gra­
ver, or a graving tool. 
Buriner, to grave. 
Buriné, ingraven.  

BURLESQUE, vers bur­
lesques, burlesk (or merry) verses.  

BUSC. V. Busque.  

BUSE (f.) sorte d'épervier, a buzzard, a kind of hawk that hath three stones. 
Une Buse, un lourdaut, a dunce, a dull fellow.  

BUSQUE, dont les femmes se servent (m.) a busk. 
Busquer fortune, to go seek his fortune.  

BUSTE (f.) Statue à demi corps, the whole bulk or body of a man from his face to his mid­
dle.  

BUT (m.) a mark, to shoot at. 
Frapper le but, to hit the mark. 
But, dessein, la fin qu'on se pro­
pose, design, scope, aim, end, or pur­
pose. 
Quel est vôtre but? que preten­
dez vous? what do you aim at? what would you have? 
La gloire de Dieu est mon uni­
que but, the glory of God is the only end I propose to my self. 
Bute (f.) motes de terre ele­
vées pour tirer au blanc, a butt. 
Avoir quêcun en bute, to have one at a hank. 
Il est en bute aux autres, he is a laughing stock to the rest. 
Buter à quêque chose, to aim at somthing. 
Je ne bute que là, that's all I aim at.  

BUTIN (m.) a booty, a prey. 
Faire un grand butin, to get a great booty. 
Butiner, to prey, to get booty. 



BUTOR (m.) a bittor; also a bird like to a Swan, and braying like an ass. 
Butor, lourdaut, a dull fel­
low.  

BUZARD, BUZE. V. Buse.



C
C A
CA (an Interjection of com­
manding) come on. 
Ca qu'on se lave les mains, come on, wash your hand. 
Ca qu'on travaille fort & fer­
me, come on, work hard. 
Ca (an Adverb of Place) here, hi­
ther. 
Les Oiseaux volent ça & là, birds fly here and there. 
Venez ça, come hither. 
Ils dorment tous, qui ça qui là, they all ly asleep, some here and some there. 
Ils courent qui ça qui là, qui de­
ça qui de là, they run some one way some another. 
Les uns sont allez deça, les au­
tres de là, some are gone one way, some another. 
Aller ça & là, to go up and down.  

CABALE (f.) Interpretation mystique des paroles de l'Ecri­
ture Sainte par transposition de lettres, the Jews Cabale, or a hidden Science of divine Mysteries, which the Rabbies affirm was re­
vealed and dilivered together with the Law unto Moses, and from him derived by successive relation unto Posterity. 
Cabale, complot, secrette pra­
tique, a plot, or combination. 
Cabale de gens qui font des complots en secret, a Caball, a Company of private conspira­
tors. 
Faire une cabale, to make a ca­
ball.  

CABANE (f.) a cottage.  

CABARET (m.) cabaret à vin, a tavern. 
Cabaret à biere, an ale house. 
Cabaret, sorte d'herbe, the herb hue-wort, or cabaret. 
Cabaretier (m.) tenant caba­
ret, a Tavern-keeper, or an Ale-house-keeper.  

CABAS (m.) a frail for raisins or figs. 
Cabas de figues, a frail of figs.  

CABESTAN (m.) machine pour tirer des fardeaux, the Cap­
stane of a Ship.  

CABINET (m.) lieu retiré & secret, a closet. 
Cabinet, où l'on tient des cho­
ses precieuses, a Cabinet for jew­
els, &c. 
Cabinet de verdure, ou de Jar­
din, fait de branches d'arbres, an harbour.  

CABLE (f.) grosse corde de Navire, a cable, or great rope.  

CABOCHON (m.) piece de Relief relevée en rond en fa­
çon de tête, a piece of sculpture in the fashion of a head.  

CABRER son Cheval, le faire cabrer, le faire lever sur les piés de derriere, to make a horse prance, or rise up upon his two hinder feet. 
Au lieu de donter ce Cheval, vous le cabrerez, instead of ru­
ling that horse, you will make him skittish. 
Ce Cheval se cabre d'abord qu'on le monte, that horse rears up on end as soon as one gets upon him. 
Se Cabrer, s'emporter, se dé­
piter, to be transported with an­
ger. 
Se cabrer contre son Maitre, to be resty, or backward in du­
ty.  

CABUS, choux cabus, cab­
bage, headed colewort. 
Laitue cabusse, headed lettuce.  

CACHER, to hide. 
Cacher quêque chose, la met­
tre en quêque lieu caché, to hide a thing. 
Cacher ses vices sous de belles apparences de vertus, to cloak his vices with a fair shew of vir­
tue. 
Cacher quêque chose, la tenir secrete, to conceal a thing, or to keep it secret. 
Pourquoi me cachez vous cela? why do you conceal it to me? Why do you hide it from me? 
Se cacher en quêque lieu, to hide himself somewhere. 
Il ne s'en cache point, he do's it openly, he do's it not in hugger-mugger. 
Caché, hid, or hidden. 
Il est caché sous le lit, he is hid under the bed. 
Il avoit un coûteau caché sous sa robe, he had a knife hid under his gown. 
La Verité est cachée comme sous un Voile, Truth is hidden as it were under a Vail. 
Ces choses ont eté long tems cachées, these things have been long hidden. 
Caché, secret, secret, or private. 
Tenir quêque chose cachée, to keep a thing private. 
Une haine cachée & secrette, a secret hatred. 
Des Vices cachez & couverts, private and secret Vices. 
Cachette (f.) a lurking hole or corner, a secret place. 
En cachette, en secret, privily, secretly, under-hand, in hugger-mugger. 
Des méchancetez qui se font en cachete, wickednesses privily committed. 
Cachot (m.) prison obscure, a dark prison, a hole. 
Cachet, avec quoi l'on ca­
chete les Lettres (m.) a Seal, a Signet. 
Le Cachet du Roi, the privy Signet. 
Cacheter une Lettre, to Seal a Letter. 
J'ai oublié de cacheter ma Let­
tre, I forgot to seal my Letter. 
Cacheté sealed.  

CACOPHONIE (f.) mau­
vais son, cacophony, an ill (harsh, or unpleasant) sound in words.  

CADASTRE, an ancient Rent-roll, Register, or Survey, specifying what Lands be by Ro­
turiers, and thereby subject unto the Kings Taille.  

CADAVRE (m.) a carcass, or dead body.  

CADEAU (m.) grosse lettre, a great (or capital) letter. 
Faire des cadeaux, cd. faire des choses specieuses mais inuti­
les, to do specious things but of no use at all. 
Cadeau, sorte de festin, a sort of feast or banqueting.  

CADENAT (m.) a padlock. 
Cadenacer quêque chose, la fermer au cadenat, to shut a thing with a padlock. 



CADENCE (f.) cadence.
Danser en cadence, observer en dansant la cadence des vio­
lons, to observe the cadences of the Musick in dancing. 
La cadence d'une periode, the cadence of a period. 
Donner de la cadence à son discours pour donner de l'agré­
ment à ses Auditeurs, to observe his cadences in a discourse to please his Auditors, to keep true periods. 
Son discours a une agreable cadence, his discourse hath a very agreeable cadence. 
Tous ces mots ont une même cadence, all these words have the same cadence. 
Cadencé; as,
Une periode cadencée, an ex­
act (a true) period.  

CADET (m.) le plus jeune des freres, the youngest brother. 
Il est mon cadet, he is my young­
er brother. 
Cadette (f.) la plus jeune des Soeurs, the youngest sister.  

CADETTE (f.) pierre de ta­
ille pour paver, a square stone to pave withall. 
Cadetter, to pave with square stones.  

CADIS (m.) sorte d'étoffe, a kind of woollen stuff.  

CADRAN (m.) a diall.  

CADUQUE, perissable, ca­
duke, feeble. 
Il est fort caduque, he is very feeble. 
Biens caducs, vaquans, escheated goods. 
Le mal caduc, the falling sick­
ness. 

† CAFARD. V. Hypocrite.  

CAGE (f.) a cage. 
Oiseau de cage, a cage-bird. 
Mettre un oiseau en cage, to put a bird in a cage. 
Cageoler, ou Cajoler, to prat­
tle, or jangle, like a Jay in a cage. 
Cajoler, flater de parole, to ca­
jol, to flatter, coxe, or fawn on. 
Cajoler une femme, to court a woman, or make love to her, to en­
deavour to win her by flattering discourses. 
Cageolé, ou Cajolé, flaté ca­
joled, coxed, flattered, or fawned on. 
Cageoleur, Cajoleur, causeur (m.) a prattler, a great and idle prattler, one that like a Jay in a cage jangles much to little pur­
pose. 
Cajoleur, flateur, a flatterer, a coxer. 
Cajoleur de femmes, a lover of the sexe, one that is alwayes prat­
ling with (or courting of) wo­
men. 
Cageolerie (f.) babil, a prat­
ling. 
Cajolerie, flaterie, flattery, cox­
ing. 
Cajolerie d'amour, making of love.  

CAGOT, ou hypocrite, an hypocrite, a dissembler. 
Cagoterie (f.) hypocrisy.  

CAHUETE (f.) cabane, a cottage.  

CAILLE (f.) sorte d'oiseau, a quail.  

CAILLER, faire cailler quê­
que chose, to curd, curdle, or turn into curds, to coagulate. 
Le baume fait cailler le lait, balsam turns the milk into curds. 
Se cailler, devenir caillé, to curd, or curdle, neut. 
Caillé, curded, curdled, or tur­
ned into curds, coagulated.  

CAILLOU (m.) a flint­
stone.
 
* Cajoler, &c. V. under Cage.  

CAISSE (f.) a chest, or cof­
fer. 
Caisse de Marchand ou Ban­
quier, une Caisse où l'on tient l'argent, a cash. 
Caisse de tambour, the barrel (or wood) of a drum. 
Caisse, ou tambour, a drum. 
Battre la caisse, battre le tam­
bour, to beat the drum. 
Battre la caisse, lever des trou­
pes, amasser des Soldats, to beat the drum in order to raise Souldi­
ers. 
Caisse de mort, a coffin. 
Cassette (f.) petit coffre, a lit­
tle shallow box or case. 
Cassetin (m.) où les Impri­
meurs mettent leurs lettres, the Case where Printers keep their letters. 
Cassolette (f.) a little box (or casket) to put sweet or precious things in. 
Caissier (m.) faiseur de ca­
isses, a chest (or coffer) maker. 
Caissier, qui a soin de la Cais­
se d'un Banquier, a Cash-kee­
per.  

CAL (m.) durillon, peau en­
durcie, a thick and unsensible skin, hardned by much labour. 
Callosité (f.) callosity, or the brawny hardness of the skin.  

CALABASSE (f.) bouteille de courge, a bottle made of an empty'd gourd.  

CALADE (f.) a pavement made of square stones.  

CALAMENTE (f.) sorte d'herbe, Calamint, the name of an herb.  

CALAMINE (f.) pierre mi­
nerale, a yellowish mineral or stone, whereby copper is turned in­
to brass.  

CALAMITE (f.) petite gre­
nouille verte, a kind of little frog living among green corn. 
Calamite, espece d'aimant, a kind of load-stone.  

CALAMITE (f.) calamity, misery, adversity. 
Soûfrir toute sorte de calami­
tez, to suffer all manner of cala­
mity.  

CALCEDOINE (f.) sorte de pierre precieuse, chalcedony, a kind of onyx stone.  

CALCINER, to calcine, or to calcinate, to burn unto dust (or reduce unto powder by fire) any metal or mineral. 
L'Or se calcine avec le mêlan­
ge de trois parties de sel, Gold is calcined with the mixture of three parts of salt. 
Calciné, calcined, calcinated, burnt to dust, reduced by fire unto powder. 
Calcinement (m.) a calcining, or reducing of metals unto powder by the fire, a purifying of metals or minerals by fire.  

CALCONS. V. Caleçons.  

CALCUL (m.) supputation, a calculation, computation, rec­
koning, an account, or casting of accompts. 
Calcul, pierre, ou gravelle, the stone in the bladder, or (more pro­
perly) in the reins. 
Calculer, supputer, to com­
pute, reckon, or calculate. 
Calculé, supputé, computed, reckoned, calculated. 
Aiant calculé toute la depense, having computed all the char­
ges. 
Toutes choses bien calculées, all things rightly computed.  

CALE (f.) Cale de Navire, le fond (le plus bas) d'un Va­
isseau, the hold of a Ship.

CALECHE (f.) sorte de  



Carosse ouvert, a Charret.  

CALECONS (m) drawers, such drawers as men wear under their breeches.  

CALEMAR (m.) étui de plumes, a thing to put pens in.  

CALENDES (f.) le premier jour de chaque mois selon les anciens Romains, Calends, the first day of every month according to the old Romans. 
Calendrier (m.) a Calender, an Almanack.  

CALENDRE (f.) sorte de petite alouëte sans crête, a kind of lark. 
Calendre, ver rongeant le blé, the corn-devouring mite. 
Calendrer des toiles, les lis­
ser, les polir. V. Lisser.  

CALER les Voiles d'un Na­
vire, to strike sail. 
Caler voile, ou se soûmettre, to yield, or to submit.  

CALFEUTRER un Navire, to caulk a Ship, to stop or fill the rifts or chinks thereof with ockam or tow. 
Calfeutré, caulked. 
Calfeutreur de Navires (m.) a Caulker of ships. 
Calfeutrement (m.) the caul­
king of a ship.  

CALIBRE (m.) étendue d'une chose en grandeur & grosseur, the size, greatness, or bigness of a thing. 
Ces poutres sont d'un même ca­
libre, these beams are of the same size. 
Calibre, diametre d'une piece d'artillerie, the bore of a great gun. 
Canon de gros calibre, a Can­
non of a wide bore.  

CALICE (m.) a chalice, or cup to drink in.
 
* Callosité. V. Cal.  

CALME, tranquille, calm, still, quiet. 
Calme (m.) bonace, a calm, a quiet and still time on the Sea without tempest or storm. 
Calme de l'esprit, tranquillity of mind. 
Calme de la conscience, peace of conscience. 
Calmer quêque chose, la ren­
dre calme, to calm a thing, to ap­
pease, or pacify it. 
La tempête étant passée la Mer se calme, as soon as the storm is over the Sea is calm. 
Calmer les esprits, to pacify the spirits of men. 
Calmé, rendu calme, calmed, appeased, pacify'd.  

CALOMNIE (f.) calumny, slander, false accusation, forged im­
putation, or spightfull detraction. 
Repousser une calomnie, to clear himself of a scandalous reproach. 
Calomnier quêcun, to calum­
niate, slander, or accuse one false­
ly. 
Calomnié, calumniated, slan­
dered, or falsely accused. 
Calomniateur (m.) a calum­
niator, slanderer, false accuser. 
Calomnieusement, calumni­
ously, slanderously.  

CALOTE (f.) a black cap, such a Cap as some men wear un­
der their hats.
 
* Calvitie. V. Chauve.  

CAMAIL (m.) a black or pur­
ple ornament worn by a Pontifical Bishop about his rochet, and reach­
ing as low as the bending of his arm.  

CAMARADE (m.) a cam­
rad, comrad, or chamber-fellow.  

CAMARD, CAMUS, flat-nosed, one that hath a flat nose. 
Camus, ou decontenancé, asha­
med, out of countenance. 

† CAMAYEU (m.) Sardoine, the precious stone called a Sardo­
nix.
Camayeu, Image toute d'une couleur, tableau en camayeu, a kind of picture all of one colour without mixture.  

CAMBRER, vouter un lambri, to arch a cieling. 
Cambré, arched. 
Cambrure (f.) a building arch­
wise, the bowing, or bending of an arch or vault.  

CAMELEON (m.) sorte d'animal, a Camelion, a kind of beast living (as it is said) by the air, and turning himself into all colours, saving white and red. 
Il est plus changeant qu'un ca­
meleon, he is more variable than a camelion. 
Cameleon, sorte d'herbe, an herb whereof be two kinds, the one white and the other black. The white is full of prickles in manner of little thistles, growing by the ground without any long stalk, and used for a fullers teazel. The black is the common thistle, with a great long stalk, wherewith they do curd the milk, to make cheese withall.  

CAMELINE (f.) sorte d'herbe, the herb cameline, or trea­
cle mustard, an herb with a stalk like fennel, and leaves like mad­
der, the juice whereof is good for sores in the mouth.  

CAMELOT (m.) chamlet. 
Camelot de soie, silk chamlet. 
Camelot à ondes, water cham­
let. 
Cameloté, tissu en façon de camelot, wrought chamlet-like.  

CAMISADE (f.) attaque d'une Place avant le jour, a Ca­
misado, a sudden assaulting or surprisall of the Enemy. So term­
ed, either because the Souldiers that execute it most commonly wear shirts over their armour, or take their enemies in their shirts. 
Donner une Camisade à une Ville, to attack a Town on a sud­
den, and before day light.  

CAMISOLE. V. Chemiset­
te.  

CAMOMILLE (f.) sorte d'herbe, the herb Camomill.  

CAMP (m.) logement d'une Armée en campagne, a Camp, or a Field wherein an Army is lodg­
ed, or the Army lodging in the field. 
Planter (établir, asseoir) le Camp aupres d'une Ville, to pitch a Camp, to incamp. 
Lever le Camp, to discamp. 
Donner le signal pour lever le Camp, to give warning for the making ready of all carriage at the removing of an Army. 
Camp volant, a flying Army, an Army of light horse, or light-arm­
ed footmen, kept for (and imploy­
ed in) rodes. 
Camp retranché & fortifié, an intrenched and fortify'd camp. 
Camp fermé & arrêté, a forti­
fy'd, settled, or standing Camp. 
Maitre de camp, a Camp-Ma­
ster. 
Marêchal de Camp, a Camp-Marshal. 
Camper en quêque lieu, to incamp in some place. 
Nous campames pres d'une Riviere, we incamped near a River. 
Campé, incamped. 
Campement (m.) an incamp­
ing, or pitching of a Camp. 
Campagne (f.) plaine, a plain, field, level ground. 
Une rase (ou plaine) campa­
gne, an open field, or campaign. 
La Campagne, les Chams, the Country.  



Demeurer à la campagne, to live in the Country. 
Une Maison de Campagne, a Country-house. 
Il est allé en sa Maison à la Campagne, he is gone to his Country house. 
Mettre en campagne (armer) de tous cotés, to arm on every side, to send an Army to the field. 
Le Roi se mettra en campa­
gne sur le commencement du Printems, the King will take the field at the beginning of Spring. 
Une piece de Campagne, a field-piece. 
Il mene trente pieces de Cam­
pagne, he carry's with him thirty field-pieces. 
Campagne, expedition, Voiage de Guerre, a Campagne, or ex­
pedition of War. 
Faire une Campagne, to be in a Campagne. 
Commencer la Campagne, to o­
pen the field, to begin the cam­
pagne. 
Finir la Campagne, to make an end of the Campagne. 
A l'âge de vint cinq ans il avoit dêja fait dix Campagnes, he was but five and twenty years of age when he had been already in ten Campagnes. 
Cette Campagne nous a reussi, we had good success in this Cam­
pagne. 
Campagnard (m.) one that lives in the Country, or one that loves a Country life.  

CAMPANELLE (f.) herbe & fleur, the blue-bell flower.
 
* Camper, Campement. V. Camp.  

CAMPHRE (m.) sorte de gomme, a gum called camphire.  

CAMUS. V. Camard.  

CANAILLE (f.) Canaille de gens, rascals, rascally people.  

CANAL (m.) tuiau, a chan­
nel, conduit, or pipe. 
Canal de riviere, the channel of a river. 
Canal de cheminée, the tunnel of a chimney. 
Canal, pour conduire ou détour­
ner l'eau, a trench (ditch, or fur­
row) to convey water. 
Canal de terres labourées, pour en faire écouler les eaux, a fur­
row. 
Un Canal portant bateau, a Canal, a Ditch so broad and deep withal, that boats may go upon 't from one place to another. 
Faire canal (en termes de ma­
rine) cingler en haute Mer, to put off to Sea. 
Nous côtoierons le Rivage, & puis nous ferons canal, we shall pass by the Coasts, and then put off to Sea. 
Caneler des colomnes, to chan­
nel pillars. 
Canelé, channelled. 
Colomne canelée à droites lign­
es, a pillar channelled straight. 
Colomne canelée de biais, a pil­
lar channelled byas. 
Canelure (f.) gutter work, a chamfring, channelling, or small furrow made in stone or tim­
ber. 
Le creux de la canelure, the channel, furrow, hollow gutter, or strake in rabating of pillars. 
L'arrête de la canelure, le bord relevé entre les deux creux, the ridges, or those parts in wrought or imbowed pillars which rise up between the two channels.  

CANCER (m.) un des douze Signes du Zodiaque, Cancer, one of the twelve Celestiall Signes. 
Cancer, ou Chancre, a Cancer, or a Canker. 
Cancre. V. Ecrevisse.  

CANARD (m.) un canard apprivoisé, a drake. 
Un canard sauvage, a mallard, or wild duck. 
Canarder quêcun, tirer sur lui un coup de fusil, to shoot at one. 
Cane (f.) a duck, the female of a drake or mallard. 
Marcher comme une cane, to waddle as a duck. 
Faire la cane devant quêcun, faire le chien couchant, to be full of capping and crouching.  

CANDEUR (f.) sincerité, sincerity, candor, integrity.  

CANDI, sucre candi, sugar candy.  

CANDIDAT (m.) preten­
dant à quêque Charge, Candida­
te, that stands for an Office.
 
* Cane, sorte d'oiseau. V. Ca­
nard.  

CANE, a Cane, V. Canne.  

CANELLE (f.) arbrisseau odoriferant, cinnamon, a shrub so called. 
Canelle, l'écorce de cet arbris­
seau dont on se sert pour assai­
sonner des viandes, the rind of that shrub, which is the spice we call cinamon. 
Canelle, robinet, a tap, or a fau­
cet.

* Caneler, Canele, & Canelu­
re. V. Caneau.  

CANEPIN (m.) peau d'ar­
bre fort delié, the inner rind of the bark of the linden tree, and the outward of the coat of the birch tree, written on in old time instead of paper.  

CANETILLE (f.) purl. 
Canetille d'or & d'argent, gold and silver purl. 
Chamarré de canetilles, set (wrought, edged) with purl.  

CANEVAS (m.) sorte de toi­
le, canvas.  

CANICULE (f.) the dog-star, a sign in the heavens. 
Caniculier, ou Caniculaire; as, 
Les Jours Caniculiers, the dog days.  

CANNE (f.) roseau, a cane, or reed. 
Le neud de la canne, the knot of a cane. 
L'entre deux des neuds de la canne, the space between two knots of a cane. 
Une canne nouëuse, a knotty cane. 
Lieu planté de cannes, a place where canes grow. 
Une Canne, bâton de canne, a cane, used for a stick.  

CANON (m) any instrument or thing that is long and hol­
low. 
Canon d'arme à feu, the barrel of a gun. 
Canon de mors de bride, a can­
non bit for an horse. 
Canon, piece d'artillerie, a can­
non, or great gun. 
La bouche (ou l'ame) d'un Ca­
non, the mouth of a canon. 
La lumiere d'un canon, le petit trou par où l'on donne le feu, the touch-hole of a cannon. 
Fondre, faire un canon, to found a cannon. 
Charger un canon, to charge a great gun. 
Branquer un Canon, le mettre en batterie, to level a great gun. 
Tirer (décharger) un canon, to shoot off (or discharge) a great gun. 
Un coup de canon, a cannon shot.



Le Canon flanquoit la brêche, the Cannon was levelled against the breach. 
Battre une Ville à coups de ca­
non, la canonner, to batter a Town with Cannon shot. 
Abbattre les murailles d'une Place à coups de canon, to beat down the Walls of a Town with Cannon bullets. 
Etre à la portée du Canon, to be within cannon shot. 
Volée de Canon, a gun. 
Il salua nòtre Canon de dix vo­
lées du sien, auxquels il fut répondu de trois du notre, he gave us ten guns, and we returned three. 
Canonner, battre à coups de cannon, to batter with Cannon shot. 
Canonier (m.) a Gunner. 
Canoniere (f.) a loop-hole, or port - hole for a piece of Ordi­
nance.  

CANON (m.) decret, ordon­
nance, a Law, Rule, Decree, Ordi­
nance. 
Le Droit Canon, les Decrets de l'Eglise, the Canon Law, the Ca­
nons of the Church. 
Canonial, canonicall. 
Heures canoniales, the Canonical houres. 
Canonique, legitime, canoni­
call, which is according to rules. 
Chanoine (m.( a Canon in a Cathedrall Church. 
Chanoinie (f.) Canonicat (m.) dignité, office de Cha­
noine, Canonship, or a Canons place in a Cathedrall Church.  

CANONISER quêcun, to canonize one, to make him a Saint, to receive (or put) him into the Catalogue of Saints. 
Canonisé, canonized. 
Canonization d'un saint (f.) a canonizing, or canonization of a Saint.  

CANOT (m.) sorte de petit bâreau à l'Indienne, a Canon, or Indian boat.  

CANTARIDE (f.) mouche venimeuse, Cantharides, a ve­
nomous green fly, which breeds in the top of the ash and olive tree.  

CANTIQUE (m.) a song, a spirituall song. 
Les Cantiques de Salomon, the Song (or the Canticles) of Solo­
mon.  

CANTON (m.) coin de rue, a corner (or cross way) in a Street. 
Canton de Suisse, a Canton of Swisserland, a Precinct or Circuit of a Territory, wherein there be di­
vers good Towns and Villages. 
La Suisse a treize Cantons, quatre desquels sont Prote­
stans, sept Catholiques Ro­
mains, & deux mêlés de Pro­
testans & de Catholiques, Swis­
serland hath thirteen Cantons, four whereof are Protestants, seven Ro­
man Catholicks, and two mingled of Protestants and Roman Catho­
licks. 
Se Cantonner, se mettre en un coin, to run into a corner. 
Se Cantonner, se retirer en quêque Place pour s'y defen­
dre, to betake himself to any strong hold or place of de­
fence. 
Se Cantonner, se détacher de la Sujettion deuë à un Souve­
rain, to sever themselves from the body of a State, to erect a new State apart.  

CAP (m.) promontoire, a Cape, a Promontory, a neck of land shooting forth into the Sea. 
Le Cap de bonne esperance, the Cape of good hope. 
De pié en cap, from top to toe. 
Armé de pié en cap, armed from top to toe.  

CAPABLE, qui peut conte­
nir, that may hold, receive, or con­
tain. 
Un lieu capable de dix mille personnes, a place fit to receive ten thousand men in it. 
Capable, digne, propre à quêque chose, able, capable, fit for some­
thing. 
Un homme capable de gouver­
ner un Roiaume, one that is a­
ble enough to govern a Kingdom. 
Cet homme a un esprit capable de toutes choses, that mans ge­
nius is capable of any thing. 
Se rendre capable, to capacitate himself, to make himself capa­
ble. 
Dire des choses que le Peuple est capable d'entendre, to utter things which the common sort of People can understand, to sit his discourse to the meanest capaci­
ty's. 
Il n'est pas capable de cette Charge, he is incapable of that Office. 
Un homme de bien n'est pas ca­
pable de mentir, a good man can­
not ly. 
Capable, docte, an able, or learned man. 
Capacité (f.) étendue d'un lieu, the spaciousness, or extent of a place. 
La Capacité d'une sale, the spa­
ciousness of a Hall. 
Capacité, portée, capacity, abili­
ty. 
Cela surpasse ma capacité, that exceeds my capacity. 
Selon la capacité de mon esprit, according to my poor apprehensi­
on.  

CAPARASSON (m.) orne­
ment de Cheval, caparison, a horses furniture. 
Caparassonner un Cheval, to caparison a horse, to furnish him with a caparison.  

CAPE (f.) sorte de manteau, a course kind of cloak. 
Cape, manteau à capuchon, a short and sleeveless cloak or gar­
ment that (in stead of a cape) hath a capuch behind it. 
Cape, que les femmes mettent sur leurs têtes, a hood, or a large and square piece of water-chamlet or the like, wherewith women preserve their heads from wind and rain. 
Capeline (f.) chapeau sem­
blable à ceux des Cardinaux, a broad brimmed hat to keep one from Sun-burning. 
Capeline, chapeau de femme à large bord & petite couppe, a womans broad brimmed hat with a little crown. 
Capeline de fer, an iron scull, such as was used by Souldiers in old time. 
Homme de capeline, d'executi­
on, de courage, a man of action, full of courage, fit for an enterprise, a brave fellow.  

CAPENDU (m) espece de pomme, a certain apple which is somthing less, but more delicious than the pippin, a short start.  

CAPILOTADE (f.) a capilo­
tade, or stewed meat of veal, capon, chicken, and partridge minced.  

CAPITAINE (m.) Capitaine de gens de Guerre, a Captain, Leader, or Commander of a Com­
pany of Soldiers. 
Lieutenant du Capitaine, the Captains Lieutenant. 
Capitaine de Cavalerie, Captain of a Troop of Horse. 
Capitaine d'Infanterie, Captain of a Foot Company.



Capitaine des Gardes du Roi, Captain of the Kings Guards. 
Lors qu'il est question de fuir il est toûjours le Capitaine, in time of slight he is still the formost. 
La Charge de Capitaine, the place of a Captain. 
Capitane, Capitanesse (f.) Navire Capitanesse, an Admi­
ral Galley.  

CAPITAL, digne de mort, capital, worthy of death or infa­
my. 
Un crime capital, a capital crime. 
C'est un crime capital de se tai­
re en cette occasion, it is a ca­
pitall crime to say nothing in this occasion. 
Il est vôtre Enemi capital, he is your mortal Enemy. 
Les Lettres Capitales, the Ca­
pital Letters, the great Letters. 
Capital, ou principal (m.) the principal. 
Le Capital & l'Interet, the Prin­
cipall and Interest.  

CAPITON, (m.) soie qui n'est point torte, raw silk.

* Capitulaire. V. Chapitre.  

CAPITULER, to capitulate, or agree upon articles. 
Capituler pour la reddition d'une Place, to capitulate (or agree upon articles) for the surrender of a Place. 
Capituler à son avantage, to make good terms for himself by capitulation. 
Capitulation (f.) capitula­
tion. 
Se rendre par Capitulation, to surrender by capitulation. 
Les Articles de la Capitulation, the Articles of the Capitulation. 
Accepter les Articles de la Ca­
pitulation, to agree (to stand) to the Articles of the Capitulation.  

CAPORAL, Coporal ou Corporal (m.) chef d'une Esco­
uäde d'hommes de pié, a Corpo­
ral of a Foot Company.  

CAPOT, au jeu de piquet, Capot, in the game called picket, which is when a man loses every trick.  

CAPRE (f.) sorte de fruit, capers, a fruit so called. 
Caprier (m.) arbrisseau por­
tant des capres, a Caper-shrub.  

CAPRICE (m.) boutade d'un homme bizarre, a fancy, fro­
lick, caprichio, fantasticall con­
ceit, sudden will, desire or purpose to do a thing for which one hath no apparent reason. 
Agir par caprice ou par bouta­
de, suivre son caprice, to act by fancy. 
Caprice, legereté, bizarrerie, lightness, levity, inconstancy. 
N'admirez'vous point le capri­
ce de la fortune? do not you won­
der at Fortunes inconstancy? 
Caprice, opiniâtreté, stubbor­
ness, pervicacy, pertinacity, headi­
ness. 
Caprice, ou boutade d'esprit, en fair de discours ou de com­
position, a flash of wit. 
Capricieux, boutadeux, ca­
pricious, humorsome, fantasticall, giddy headed. 
Capricieux, inconstant, uncer­
tain, mutable, unconstant. 
Capricieux, opiniâtre, stubborn, testy, or heady.  

CAPRICORNE (m.) un des Signes du Zodiaque, Capri­
corn, one of the twelve Celestiall Signs. 

* Caprier. V. Capre.  

CAPRIOLE (f.) a caper in dancing. 
Caprioler, faire (ou passer) des caprioles, to cut capers.  

CAPTIEUX, captious, deceit­
full, crafty, full of craft and de­
ceit.  

CAPTIF (m.) Captive (f.) a captive, a slave, one that hath lost his liberty. 
Captiver, to captivate. 
L'Eloquence captive les esprits, eloquency captivates the minds of men. 
Captiver la bien veuillance de quêcun, to captivate (or get) ones affection. 
Se Captiver, se soûmettre à qûeque chose, to ty himself to a thing. 
Je ne saurois me captiver à lire cela, I cannot confine my selfe to that reading. 
Captivé, captivated. 
Captivité (f.) esclavage, capti­
vity, thraldom, bondage. 
Tirer (delivrer) quêcun de cap­
tivité, to deliver one from bondage or captivity.  

CAPTURE (f.) capture, or a thing taken.  

CAPUCHON (m.) the hood of a cloak, also a capuch, which is a Monks cowl or hood. 
Capuchin (m.) a Capuchine Friar, wearing neither shirt nor breeches.  

CAQUE (m.) a cag, containing the fourth part of a muid, a bar­
rel or vessel where salt meats, pitch, rosen, &c. are usually carried or kept in.  

CAQUET (m.) babil, prat­
tling, babling, tittle tattle. 
Abbattre le caquet à quêcun, to make one hold his tongue, to stop his mouth. 
Caqueter, to prate, prattle, tat­
tle, or chatter. 
Caqueteur (m.) qui a beau­
coup de caquet, a pratler.  

CAR, for.  

CARABINE (f.) a carabine, a sort of fire-gun. 
Carabin (m.) an Arquebuzier armed with a murrain and breast-plate, and serving on horseback.  

CARACOL (m.) as, Faire le caracol, to cast them­
selves (as horsemen do sometimes) into a round or ring. 
Caracoler à l'entour de quê­
que chose, to wheel about some­
thing.  

CARACTERE (m.) lettre, a character, letter, or writing fi­
gure. 
Les caracteres de l'alphabet, the letters of the alphabet. 
Caractere, marque, a mark, or sign. 
Le Caractere d'un Chrêtien, the character of a Christian. 
Il est Ambassadeur, il faut ren­
dre les honneurs deus à son Ca­
ractere, he is an Embassador, he must be received according to his Character. 
Caractere, charme, sortilege, a magicall character or figure.  

CARAQUE (f.) sorte de grand Vaisseau, Carrack, or Carrick, a kind of great Ship.  

CARAT (m.) a Carrat. Among Goldsmiths and Mintmen it is the third part of an ounce, among Jewellers and Stone-cutters but the nineteenth part. Eight of them make but one sterlin, and a sterlin is the four and twentieth part of an ounce.  

CARAVANE (f.) troupe de Marchands allans de compa­
gnie dans les deserts du Levant; a Caravan, or Company of Mer­
chants travelling together through the Desarts of the Levant. 
Caravane, course sur Mer des nouveaux Chevaliers de Malte, a Sea-expedition of the new Knights of Maltha.



Faire ses caravanes, to make such Expeditions.  

CARAVELLE (f) Vaisseau de Mer rond, qu'on appelle à Oreilles de Lievre, parce que ses Voiles y ressemblent de loin, a Carvell, the name of a lit­
tle Ship.

* Carbonade. V. Charbon.  

CARCAN (m.) collier, a carknes, or collar of gold. 
Carcan de pilori, an iron-chain or collar, wherein an Offender is ty'd by the neck to a Post, and in that posture exposed to the publick view.  

CARCASSE (f.) a dead bo­
dy. 
Carcasse, squelete, a skeleton.  

CARDE (f.) instrument pour carder, a card, to card wool with­
all. 
Carder de la laine, to card wooll. 
Cardé, carded. 
Cardeur (m.) cardeur de laine, a wooll-carder. 
Cardement (m.) travail de Cardeur, the carding of wooll.  

CARDIAQUE, potion car­
diaque, a cordiall, a drink com­
forting the heart.  

CARDINAL, cardinal, chief, principal, or of the first rank. 
Vent Cardinal, a cardinal wind, one of the four principal winds, viz. East, West, North, or South. 
Les Vertus Cardinales, the Car­
dinal Virtues. 
Les Vertus Cardinales sont la Prudence, la Justice, la Force, & la Temperance, the Cardinal Virtues are Wisdom, Justice, For­
titude, and Temperance. 
Cardinal (m.) a Cardinal of the Church of Rome. 
Il a eté fait Cardinal; il a eu le chapeau de Cardinal, he was made a Cardinal, he has got a Cardinals cap. 
Cardinalat (m.) dignité de Cardinal, Cardinalship, the Dig­
nity or Office of a Cardinal.  

CAREME (m) Lent. 
Carême entrant, carnaval, Car­
naval, or Shrove-Tuesday.  

CARENE, le fond d'un Va­
isseau, the keel (or bottom) of a Ship. 
Fait en façon de carene, made like the keel of a Ship. 
Mettre un Vaisseau en carene pour le radouber, to careen a Ship in order to repair her.  

CARESSES (f.) témoi­
gnage d'affection, caresses, or making much of one, a friendly in­
tertainment, or kind usage. 
Il m'a fait beaucoup de cares­
ses, he has made much of me, he caressed me very much. 
Attirer (gagner) quêcun par caresses, to win one by caresses. 
Caresses, flateries, blandish­
ment, hugging, flattery. 
Caresser quêcun, lui témoi­
gner de l'affection, to caress one, to make much of him, to intertain him friendly, or to use him kindly. 
Caresser quêcun, le flater, to fawn upon one, to hug him. 
Caressé, caressed, made much of, friendly intertained, or kindly used.  
CARILLON (m.) a chi­
ming (or musick) of bells. 
Carillonner, to chime, to make a musick of bells.  

CARLINE (f.) sorte d'her­
be, the carline, or carline thi­
stle.  

CARLINGUE (f.) base du mât d'un Navire, the stest of a mast, the piece of timber where­
into the foot enters.  

CARME (m.) Religieux du mont Carmel, a Carmelite, which is an Order of white Fri­
ars. 
Carmes dechaussés, discalceated Friars. 
Carmelite (f.) Religieuse du même ordre, a she Carmelite.
 
* Carnacier, Carnation, Car­
naval. V. Chair.  

CAROBE (f.) partie de l'once du marc, a small weight (among Mintmen and Gold-smiths) making but the 24th part of an Ounce.  

CAROLUS (m.) espece de monnoie, a piece of coin so cal­
led.  

CAROSSE (f.) a Coach. 
Marchepié (montoir) de Ca­
rosse, the step of a Coach, where­
by one steps into it. 
Siege dans le Carosse, a Seat in a Coach. 
Carosse à deux chevaux, a Coach and two horses. 
Carosse à quatre chevaux, a Coach and four horses. 
Carosse à six chevaux, a Coach and six horses. 
Monter en carosse, to step in a Coach. 
Aller en Carosse, to go in a Coach. 
Il m'est venu trouver en caros­
se, he came to see me in a coach. 
Un Cheval de Carosse, a Coach-horse. 
Celui qui conduit le carosse, un Cocher, a Coach-man. 
Un Cheval de carosse, un lour­
daut, a great booby, a great sot. 
Remise de carosse, a Coach-house. 
Carossier (m.) faiseur de Ca­
rosses, a Coach-maker.  

CAROTE (f.) herbe & ra­
cine, the carrot, root or herb.  

CAROUGES (f.) sorte de fruit, carobs, or carob-beans, the fruit of the carob-tree. 
Carougier, ou Caroubier (m.) sorte d'arbrisseau, the Ca­
rob tree.  

CAROUSEL (m.) a Car­
rousel, a charret Race, or a shew of Charrets, &c.  

CAROUSSE (f.) beuverie à l'Allemande, a carouse of drink. 
Presenter une carousse, to drink a great glass to one. 
Faire carousse, to drink off a huge glass of wine. 
Faire carousse avec ses Amis, to play the good fellow with his friends, to drink stoutly.  

CARPE (f.) sorte de poisson, a carp, a fish so called.  

CARQUAN. V. Carcan.  

CARQUOIS (m.) a quiver, for arrows. 
Prendre à son côté son carquois, to hang his quiver by his side.  

CARRABINE. V. Carabine.  

CARRAQUE. V. Caraque.
 
* Carreau, Carrefour, Carre­
ler, Carrelure, & Carrure. V. under Carrer.  

CARRER, to square, or to make square. 
Se Carrer, piaffer, to square it, to look stately (surly, or big) on't. 
Voiez vous comment il se car­
re? do you see how he squares it? 
Se carrer, tenant les mains sur chaque cöté, to set his hands a kembol. 
Carré, squared, or made square. 
Un homme carré, renforcé, a square (or well set) man. 
Un Carré, une figure quar­
rée, a square, or a figure four-square. 
Un Carré plat, a flat square. 
Un Carré solide, a solid square. 
Un Carré barlong, carré long, plus long que large, an oblong square.  



Carré en lozange, a lozange square, a rhombus. 
Il a dix piés en carré, it is ten foot square. 
Carreau (m.) petit carré, a little square. 
Carreau, plinte en la base d'une colomne, the square (or plinthe) in the basis of a pillar. 
Carreau, au jeu de cartes, a di­
amond at cards. 
Le Roi des carreaux, the King of Diamonds. 
Carreau, coussin, a cushion. 
Assorti de carreaux, furnished with cushions. 
Carreau à se mettre à genoux, a cushion to kneel on. 
Carreau à s'accouder, a cushion to lean on. 
Carreau de Jardin, a bed in a Garden. 
Carreau, piece de metal dont on fair une espece de monnoie, a coping (or planchet) of metal before it be rounded, or coined. 
Carreau, foudre, thunder-bolt. 
Lancer le carreau, to dart his thunder-bolt. 
Carreau de brique, a square brick. 
Couché (étendu) sur les car­
aux, lying upon the ground. 
Il l'étendit sur les carreaux d'un coup d'epée, he runned him through, and killed him upon the spot. 
Carrefour (m.) a place where many ways do meet, or where two streets do cross. 
Carreler, paver de carreaux, to pave with bricks. 
Carreler des souliers, y mettre des semelles, to sole a pair of shoos. 
Carrelé, pavé de carreaux, paved with bricks. 
Souliers carrelés, old shoo's with a pair of new soles. 
Carrelure (f.) carrelure de pavé, a pavement with bricks. 
Carrure (f.) l'étendue du quarré, the squareness of a thing. 
La base de cette Colomne à trois piés de carrure, the pede­
stal (or basis) of this Column is three foot square.  

CARRIERE (f.) lice, lieu de la course, carreer, a place for horses to run in. 
Courir depuis le commence­
ment de la carriere jusqu'au bout, to run from the beginning of the Carreer to the end of it. 
Barre de carriere, d'où l'on commence de courir, the lists, the beginning of an horse race bar­
red in. 
Le bout de la carriere, the end of the carreer, a mark in the field whereunto horses run. 
Courir en la carriere, to run a carreer. 
Prendre bien sa carriere, courir avec addresse, to manage his carreer well. 
S'arrêter en la carriere, to stop in his carreer. 
Fournir sa carriere, son cours, to run his full career. 
Donner carriere à son cheval, to give his horse the bead. 
Se donner carriere, s'étendre en quêque chose, to inlarge him­
self upon any subject. 
C'est ici que je me donnerois carriere, & que j'étendrois vo­
lontiers mon discours sur un si beau sû jet, here I could inlarge my self upon so noble a subject.  

CARRIERE de pierre (f.) a Quarry of stones. 
Carrier (m.) qui travaille en la carriere, a Quarry-man, a worker in quarries.  

CARRILLON, Carrillon­
ner. V. Carillon.  

CARROSSE, Carrossier. V. Carosse.  

CARROTE. V. Carote.  

CARROUGE, Carrougier. V. Carouge.  

CARROUSEL, & CAR­
ROUSSE. V. Carousel, Carousse.
 
* Carrure. V. Carrer.  

CARTE (f.) carte blanche, a blank. 
Donner à quêcun carte blanche, lui donner à choisir, to leave a thing to ones choice. 
Vous en avez la carte blanche, you have your choice. 
Le Roi donna la carte blanche à ses Deputez, the King gave his Deputies a full power to act as they thought fit. 
Cartes à jouër, cards to play with. 
Jouer aux cartes, to play at cards. 
Un Jeu de cartes, a pack of cards. 
Un Jeu aux cartes, a game at cards. 
Etre le premier en carte, to be to play first, or to be the first that's dealt unto at cards. 
Un faiseur de cartes, a Card-ma­
ker. 
Carte de Geographie, a Map, a Geographicall map. 
Carte universelle de tout le Monde, a generall Map of all the World. 
Cartel (m.) cartel de defi, a challenge in writing. 
Il lui envoia un cartel, he sent him a challenge. 
Carton (m) past board. 
Cartulaire, livre de papier, a great paper book.  

CARTILAGE (m.) a gristle, or tendrel as of the ear or nose, a white substance wholly void of sense, being so much softer than a bone how much it is harder than a ligament or ligature. 
Cartilagineux, cartilaginous, gristly, full of tendrels or gristles.  

CARTOUCHE (f.) piece d'Architecture, a cartridge, or roll in Architecture. 
Cartouche, pleine de bales de mousquet & de ferraille dont on charge les Canons, a Car­
touch, or full charge for a great gun.
 
* Caruncule. V. Chair.  

CAS (m.) accident, a case, hap, chance, or adventure, a thing, or matter. 
C'est un cas impreveu, 'tis an un­
expected chance, or a sudden ac­
cident. 
Par cas fortuit, by chance. 
Posez le cas que cela soit, put the case (suppose) it be so. 
En cas que cela soit, in case it be so. 
En ce cas là je serois bien en peine, if it were so, I should be much troubled at it. 
En tout cas je suis pret, howe­
ver (or whatsoever happens) I am ready. 
C'est un cas étrange & fune­
ste, it is a strange and fatal case. 
Ce n'est pas grand cas que ce­
la, that's no great matter, that is no matter of any great conse­
quence. 
C'est plus grand cas que tu ne penses, it is a greater business than thou takest it to be. 
Cas, ou crime, crime, offence, fact. 
Voila mon vrai cas, that's my very case. 
Avouër le cas, to confess the fact. 
Cas privilegié, qui rend celui qui l'a commis justiciable à tout Juge, & qui le fait déchoir de  



tout Privilege, an offence (or a crime) that makes one liable to any Judge, and deprives him of all Priviledges. 
Cas de Conscience, a Case of Conscience. 
Cas, estime, account, or esteem. 
On ne fait point de cas de la Vertu, Virtue is slighted, or made no account of. 
On fait grand cas de ce jeune homme, that young man is in great esteem. 
Je fais plus de cas de Ciceron que de tous les autres Orateurs, I value Tully above all other O­
ratours. 
Casuel, casual, accidental, un­
certain, hapning by chance. 
C'est une chose casuelle, it is a casualty. 
Parties casuelles, the Seal of Of­
fices, or, the Revenue which the King makes thereof. 
Casuellement, casually, acci­
dentally, by chance. 
Casuiste (m.) a Casuist, one that writes of the Cases of Consci­
ence.  

CASAQUE (f.) a coat, a mans coat. 
Mettre sa casaque, to put on his coat. 
Tourner sa casaque, to turn his coat. 
Tourner casaque, prendre un Parti contraire, to be a Turn-coat, to change from one Side or Party to another. 
Casaquin (m.) petite ca­
saque, a short-coat.  

CASCADE, ou Cascate (f.) chûte d'eau, a fall of water.  

CASEMATE (f.) a case­
mate, a loop (or loop-hole) in a fortify'd wall.  

CASQUE (m.) armure de tête, a cask, or casket, a kind of head-piece.  

CASSE (f.) écorce aroma­
tique, the drug or spice called Cassia. 
Voix Casse. V. Cassé.  

CASSER, rompre quêque chose, to break, to break in pie­
ces. 
Casser un verre, to break a glass. 
Casser la tête à quêcun, to break ones head. 
Il s'est cassé la tête en tom­
bant, he has broke his head by a fall. 
Casser une Loi, to null (or ab­
rogate) a Law, to make it void. 
Casser les privileges de quê­
cun, to take away ones Privile­
ges. 
Casser un Testament, to make void a Will. 
Casser quêcun aux gages, le priver de son Office, to turn one out of service. 
Casser une Compagnie de Sol­
dats, to casheer a company of Soul­
diers. 
Cassé, rompu, broke, broken, broke (or broken) in pieces. 
Cassé de vieillesse, decay'd, (spent, worn, broken) with age. 
Cassé de travaux, broken with labour. 
Un verre cassé, a broken glass. 
Une tête cassée, a broken head. 
Une Loi cassée, annullée, a Law that is nulled, or abrogated. 
Cassé, privé de son Office, turn­
ed out of service. 
Soldats cassés, reformés, casheer­
ed Souldiers. 
Une voix casse, enroüée, a weak, hoarse, or whizzing voice. 
Cassant, frail, brittle, easy to be broken. 
Une étoffe de soie cassante, a fretting silk, or silk stuff. 
Cassation (f.) annullement, a cassation, nulling, or abroga­
ting. 
Cassade (f.) tromperie, a cheat, or deceitful trick. 
Donner une cassade à quêcun, to play one a trick, to cheat him. 
Casse-museau, (m.) a cake much like a cheese cake. 
Casse-noix (m.) a nut-crack­
er. 
Cassonade. V. Castonade. 
Cassure (f.) blessure, a bruise. 
Casseron (m.) poisson volant, a fish having his head between his hinder part and his belly, and ha­
ving two bones, one like a knife, the other like a quill, whereof he is called a Calamary, a Sea-cut, or Cuttle-fish.  

CASSIDOINE (f.) pierre minerale dont on fait de preci­
euses vaisselles, Cassidony, a sort of mineral stone, brittle, but shi­
ning like fire.
 
* Cassolette. V. under Caisse.  

CASTAGNETE (f.) Casta­
nietto, or finger-knacker.  

CASTAGNEU (m.) petit plongeon, a little diver, or di­
dapper; called also an Arse-foot; because his feet do joyn close to his arse.  

CASTONADE (f.) powder-sugar, especially such as comes from Brasil.  

CASTOR (m.) animal am­
phibie, a beaver. 
Un Castor, ou chapeau de ca­
stor, a beaver, a beaver-hat. 
Castorée (f.) medicament, a kind of oyly liquor contained in two pouches which cleave unto ei­
ther side of bevers groin, both male and female.
 
* Casuel, Casuellement, & Casuiste. V. Cas.  

CATALOGUE (m.) de­
nombrement, a catalogue, or list.  

CATAPLASME (m.) a ca­
taplasm, or poult is, a soft or moist plaister.  

CATARACTE (f.) écluse, a violent fall of waters from a high and steep place. 
Cataracte en l'œil, a web in the ey.  

CATASTROPHE (f.) a ca­
tastrophy, or a fatal end of som­
thing.  

CATECHISER, to cate­
chize. 
Catechiser quêcun, lui enseigner la Doctrine Chrêtienne, to cate­
chize one, to instruct him in the Christian Faith. 
Catechisé, catechized. 
Catechisme (m.) explication des mysteres de notre Foi, a Ca­
techism, or exposition of the my­
steries of Christianity. 
Faire le Catechisme aux enfans & aux pauvres ignorans, les ca­
techiser, to teach children and poor ignorant people the principles of Religion. 
Un catechisme, un Livre des principes de la Foi, a Catechism, a Book concerning the principles of the Christian Faith. 
Catechiste (m.) celui qui cate­
chise, he that teacheth and cate­
chizeth, a catechizer. 
Catecumene, celui qui est instruit, he that is taught and ca­
techized.  

CATHERRE (m.) defluxi­
on, a catharre, a rheume. 
Catherre coulant sur les yeux, the watering (or dropping) of the eyes, by means of a rheum issuing out thereat. 
Catherre coulant sur le nez, a catharre (or a rheume) running out at the nose. 



Catherre bouchant le nez, & enroüant le gosier, a rheum (or raw humour) falling down into the nose, stopping the nostrils, taking away the sense of smel­
ling, hurting the voice, and cau­
sing the cough. 
Catherreux, rheumatick, trou­
bled with (or subject to) rheum.  

CATHOLIQUE, Catholick, universal, general. 
L'Eglise Catholique, the Ca­
tholick Church. 
La Foi Catholique, the Catho­
lick Faith. 
Un Catholique, ou Catholique Romain, a Roman Catholick, or a Papist.  

CATOPTRIQUE (f.) par­
tie de l'Optique, Catoptrick, part of Perspective. 
La Catoptrique traitte du Raion reflêchi, & donne les regles & les causes des reflexions diffe­
rentes, selon la diversité des Corps où elle se fait, Catoptrick treats of the reflected beam, gives the rules and shews the causes of the various reflexions according to the variety of the bodies where the same is made. 
La Catoptrique traite en parti­
culier de toute sorte de Mi­
roirs, des Plains, des Convexes, des Concaves, des Parabo­
liques, des Ellyptiques, des Hy­
perboliques, des Miroirs ar­
dens, Catoptrick treats in par­
ticular of all sorts of Glasses, whe­
ther plain, convexe, or concave, of parabolicks, ellypticks, hyperbolicks, and burning glasses.  

CATIR, presser & serrer fort la tissure du drap qu'on trava­
ille, to close, settle, or thrust hard together, in weaving. 
Catir, toile bien catie, close linnen cloth.  

CAUCHEMAR (m.) acci­
dent qui arrive à ceux qui dor­
ment, lors qu'ils s'imaginent qu'on les étoufe, the Night­
mare, a disease so called.  

CAUDATAIRE (m.) porte­
queuë de manteau ou de ro­
be, a train-bearer, one that bears up the train of a great per­
son.  

CAUDEBEC (m.) sorte de Chapeau que l'on fait à Cau­
debec, Ville de Norman­
die, a Caudebec, a sort of hat so called from Caudebec a Town of Normandy where such Hats be made.  

CAVE (f.) cellier, a cellar. 
Une Cave à vin, a wine-cellar. 
Une Cave à biere, a beer-cel­
lar. 
Cave, adj. as; 
Veine cave, the vena cava, or hollow vein. 
Caverne (f.) a den, cave, or cavern. 
Caverne de bêtes sauvages, a den (or cave) of wild beasts. 
Cavité (f.) cavity, or hollow­
ness.  

CAVESSON (m.) bride for­
te, a bridle bit. 
Cavesson à brider un cheval, a barnacle used for an unruly horse.  

CAUSE (f.) cause, occasion. 
Cause efficiente, formelle, ma­
terielle, finale, an efficient, for­
mal, material, final cause. 
L'Oisiveté est la cause (la source) de tous les maux, Idle­
ness is the cause of all evils. 
Vous étes la cause de ma dou­
leur, you are the cause, (or the occasion) of my grief. 
Nous avons eté cause qu'on a fait la Paix, we caused the Peace to be made. 
Je voudrois bien savoir la cause de son depart, I would fain know the reason (or the cause) of his go­
ing away. 
Cause, raison, cause, reason. 
Il a eté battu, & non sans cause, he was beaten, but not without a cause. 
C'est sans cause qu'il me frappe, he strikes me without a cause. 
Je le soûfre pour plusieurs causes, I suffer it for many rea­
sons. 
A cause de, for, because of. 
A cause de l'amour que j'ai pour vous, because of the love I have for you. 
A cause de cela, because of that. 
Cause civile, procez, a Civil Cause, or Suit in Law. 
Cause criminelle, a criminal cause. 
Cause bien fondée en droit, a just cause. 
Cause mal fondée en droit, an unjust cause. 
Tel est condamné qui a bonne Cause, a good Cause often speeds but badly, right sometimes is con­
demned as wrong. 
Presenter sa Cause à un Avocat, to retain a Counsel upon his Cause. 
Consulter (ou faire consulter) sa Cause, to go to Counsel about his Cause. 
Plaider sa Cause, to plead his Cause, to bring it before the Court. 
Gagner sa Cause, emporter gain de Cause, to carry the Cause, to have Judgment given on his side. 
Donner Cause gagnée à sa Par­
tie, to give up the Cause. 
Perdre sa Cause, to be cast in his Cause. 
Condamner quêcun sans co­
noissance de cause, to condemn one without hearing. 
Cause mise en rôle, a Cause en­
tred. 
Cause appelée à tour de rôle, a Cause called for in course. 
Cause appelée par Placet hors de role, a Cause called for out of course, by the Judges pleasure or fa­
vour. 
Cause plaidée en pleine Audi­
ence, a Cause heard in fall Court. 
Cause plaidée à huis clos, a Cause that hath a private hear­
ing. 
Causer quêque chose, la pro­
duire, to cause a thing, to be the cause or the occasion of it. 
La secheresse cause la sterilité, drought causes dearth. 
Causer, babiller, to prate, or prattle. 
Vous ne faites que causer, you do nothing but prattle. 
Causé, caused. 
Causeur (m.) Causeuse (f.) a pratler, an idle talker. 
Causerie (f.) a prating, prat­
ling, or idle talking.
 
* Caustique. V. under Cautere.

† CAUTELE (f.) finesse, craft, wile, or subtilty.
Cauteleux, fin, cautelous, or crafty. 
Cauteleusement, finement, cautelously, craftily.  

CAUTERE (m.) Caustic, ce qui fait le Cautere en brûlant, a cauter, a searing hot iron. 
Cautere, brûlure, plaie faite par la brûlure, the cauterized part of the body. 
Cautere actuel, an actual cau­
ter, a cauter that burns actually & incontinently, as scalding oyl, red hot metal, wood through-burnt, &c.
Cautere potentiel, ou Cautere de soie, a potential cauter, any  



caustick or burning medicine, salve, or compound. 
Cautere à bouton, the button cauter, smooth, and beaded like a button, fit to cauterize a part whereof the skin is only to be open­
ed for an issue. 
Cauteriser, to cauterize, sear, burn, or close up with fire or fire­
hot instruments, irons, ointments, medicines, &c. 
Cauterisé, cauterized. 
Cauterisation, (f.) a cauteri­
zing, or cauterization. 
Caustique, caustick, burning, scalding, scorching the skin.  

CAUTION (f.) répondant, a bail, a security. 
Donner caution, to give secu­
rity. 
Prendre caution, to take secu­
rity. 
Cautionner, se rendre cauti­
on (répondre) pour quêcun, to bail (or be bound) for one, to become surety (or enter into bail) for him. 
Cautionné, bailed. 
Cautionnement (m.) the bail­
ing of one.  

CAYER (m.) a piece (or par­
cel) of a written book divided in­
to equal parts. 

  
C E
C E, this, that, it.
Ce Livre est à moi, this book is mine. 
Ce n'est pas ce qu'il nous faut, that is not the thing we want. 
Ce dont je parlois, that which I was speaking of. 
C'est a dire, that is to say. 
Ce m'est tout un, it is all one to me. 
Est ce ainsi tout de bon? is it so indeed? 
Ce, he, or she. 
C'est un homme qui n'a point de Vice, he is a man given to no Vice. 
C'est une honnête femme, she is an honest woman.
But sometimes Ce, though singu­
lar, is joyned to a plural termina­
tion of the Verb Etre, and then it must be made by They; as,
Ce sont d'étranges gens, they are strange people. 
Sont ce des gens civils ou non? are they civil people or no? Otherwise Ce may be thus ren­
dred; as,
Ce me semble, methinks. 
A ce que je vois, as far as I see. 
Ce n'est pas à lui que je parle, I don't speak to him. 
Ce n'est pas que je doute de sa fidelité, not that I do question his fidelity. 
Ce n'est pas que je ne veuille bien tout ce que vous voulez, not but that I agree to you in what you will.
Lastly, Note, that Ce is put be­
fore words that begin with a con­
sonant, or with h pronounced, as in natural French it is. Whereas before a vowel, or with h unpro­
nounced (as in words derived from the Latine) Ce is turned into Cet, from whence comes the fe­
minine Cette; as,
Cet étourdi, that heedless man. 
Appeles moi cet homme là, call that man to me. 
Cette maison lá est fort belle, that's a very fine house.
In the plural Number Ce, Cet, and Cette are turned into Ces; as,
Ces Livres (ces Livres ci) sont à moi, these books are mine, or my own. 
Voiez vous ces hommes tout couverts de poussiere? do you see those men covered all over with dust? 
J'admire la beauté de ces fem­
mes, I do admire the beauty of those women. 
Ceans, ici dedans, dans ce ce lieu, here, in here, within, at home, hither. 
Il est ceans, he is here. 
Il sort de ceans, he is just gone from hence. 
Le Maitre de ceans, the Master of the house. 
Ceci, this. 
Ceci n'est pas à mon gré, this is not to my content, this do's not please me. 
Cela, that, it. 
Cela n'est pas de bonne grace, that is not (it is not) handsom. 
Celui ci, Celle ci, this. 
Celui là, Celle là, that. 
Celui qui, he that. 
Celle qui, she that. 
Ceux ci, Celles ci, these. 
Ceux là, Celles là, those. 
Ceux qui, Celles qui, they that.  

CEDER, ne pas resister, to yield, to yield up. 
Il faut ceder à la raison, one must yield to reason. 
Ceder la place à quêcun, to give place to one. 
Pourquoi lui cederois je la place? why should I give him place? 
Je ne lui cede en rien, I am not behind him in any thing, I am as good a man as he every way. 
Ce Capitaine à part, il ne le cede à personne, set aside that Captain, he yields to no man a­
live. 
Ceder son droit à un autre, to give up his right to another, to part with it, to give it another, or to make it over to him. 
C'est un homme qui ne veut ri­
en ceder de son droit, he is a man that will not part with a jot of his right. 
Je vous cede cette loüange, I yeeld you this praise, or this com­
mendation. 
Ceder, s'accommoder au tems, to be a time-server. 
Cedé, yeelded, yeelded up, grant­
ed. 
Cession (f.) yielding up, or gi­
ving over. 
Faire cession de biens, lors qu'on n'est pas solvable, to give over his Estate or Goods to his Creditors, as a cessionary bank­
rupt.  

CEDRE (m.) the cedar tree. A tree having leaves like Juniper, berries (like myrrh) yellow, sweet, and pleasant to eat: It beareth all times of the year new fruit and old, and the leaf never falleth. 
Huile de cedre, the juyce (or oyl) of cedar-tree. 
Gomme de cedre, the rosin that runs out of the cedar-tree.  

CEDULE (f.) a Schedule, a note (or bill) under ones hand. 
S'obliger par cedule à un Cre­
ancier, to give a note under his hand for a debt. 
Prêter de l'argent sur une ce­
dule, to lend mony upon a bill of a mans hand. 
Demander quêque dette en vertu d'une cedule, to demand a debt by virtue of a bill. 
Agir contre quêcun sur une ce­
dule, to prosecute one upon a note of his hand.  

CEINDRE, to gird, to inviron.
Ceindre son epée, to gird his sword about him.  



Ceindre de murailles une Ville, to wall a Town. 
Ceint, girt, begirt, invironed, beset. 
Ceinture (f.) a girdle. 
Quitter sa ceinture en signe de cession de biens à son Creanci­
er, to break, to fall bankrupt, to shut up his shop. Which Phrase is come from a Custom of old, when men wore their gowns close girt a­
bout them. For in those times Bankrupts were forbidden wearing of girdles, that the decay of their estate being made notorious, their deceitful fetches might be preven­
ted. 
La Veuve posant ses clefs, sa bourse, & sa ceinture sur la fosse de son mari, témoigne qu'elle n'accepte pas l'hoirie, pour evi­
ter le payement des dettes, the Widow laying her keys, purse, and girdle upon her husbands grave de­
clares thereby that she renounces her title to her husbands goods, that she may not be liable to pay his debts. 
Ceinturon (m.) a wast-belt. 
Ceinturier (m.) qui fait des ceintures, a girdle-maker. 
Cengle (ou Sangle) de Che­
val, a girth for a horse. 
Cengler un Cheval, to gird a horse. 
Cenglé, girt.  

CELADON (m.) verd de Mer, Sea-green.  

CELEBRE, renommé, famo­
us, renowned, eminent. 
Un Medecin celebre, a famous (an eminent) Physitian. 
Ses actions l'ont rendu celebre, he has made himself famous by his actions. 
Un Lieu celebre, un Lieu fre­
quenté, a Place much haunted, fre­
quented, or resorted to. 
Celebrer, to celebrate, or solem­
nize with great assembly's of peo­
ple. 
Celebrer une Fête, to celebrate (or to keep) a Feast. 
Celebrer (dire) la Messe, to say Mass. 
Celebré, celebrated. 
Celebration, (f.) a celebra­
ting, celebration, or solemni­
zing. 
Celebration de Fête, the cele­
bration (or keeping) of a Feast.  

CELER, cacher quêque cho­
se, to hide, or conceal a thing, to keep it secret. 
Celé, hidden, concealed, or kept secret.  

CELERITE (f.) vitesse, prom­
titude, celerity, speed, hast, or swiftness.
 
* Celeste. V. Ciel.  

CELIBAT (m.) celibacy, single life, the state or condition of an unmarry'd person. 
Garder le Celibat, vivre dans le Celibat, to live unmarry'd, or to live a single life. 
Qui vit dans le Celibat, an un­
married (or single) man, a batche­
lour.  

CELLIER (m.) acellar, or store­
house. 
Cellier, où l'on tient le vin, a wine cellar. 
Cellier, où l'on tient le bois, a by - place where the wood is kept. 
Cellerage (m.) droit Seigneu­
rial, qui se leve sur le Vin mis au Cellier, a Duty paid for the lay­
ing of wine into cellars. 
Cellerier (m.) qui a soin des provisions de bouche d'un Mo­
nastere, he that hath the charge of provisions in a Monastery.
 
*Celui, & Celle. V. Ce.  

CEMETIERE. V. Cimetie­
re.  

CENDAL (m.) espece de camelot, a kind of chamlet.  

CENDRE (f.) ashes. 
Reduire en cendres, to reduce into ashes. 
Maison reduite en cendres, a house burn't down, burned to a­
shes. 
Jour des Cendres, Ash-wednes­
day. 
Cendré, de couleur de cen­
dre, ash coloured. 
Cendrée (f) vase à affiner l'or & l'argent, composé de cen­
dre de lessive & d'os brûlés & calcinés, a kind of Vessel used for the refining of gold and silver. 
Cendré d'Orfevre, residu des materiaux 
en la cendrée, the a­
shy bits of metal and dross found af­
ter a melting in a Goldsmiths fur­
nace. 
Argent de cendrée, fine purify'd silver (of XI. d. eighteen grains fine­
ness) which the Finers make at first into wedges, and mark them with their puncheons, thereby un­
dertaking for the goodness and va­
lue thereof. 
Cendrée d'azur, poudre blan­
châtre qui se fait en broyant & lavant l'azur, the whitest kind of azur. 
Cendrée, marjolaine sauvage, wild marjerom. 
Cendreux, couvert de cen­
dres, ashy, or full of ashes. 
Cendrier (m.) lieu où l'on met les cendres, a place to keep a­
shes in, a corner to throw them in. 
Cendrier, soûfleur de cendres, a blower of ashes.  

CENE (f.) the Lords Supper. But take notice, that the word is not much used but by the Prote­
stants of France. 
Le Sacrement de la S. Cene, the Sacrament of the Lords Sup­
per. 
Prendre (recevoir) la Cene, to receive the Communion.
 
* Cengle, & Cengler. V. Cein­
dre.  

CENS (m.) Cense (f.) rente Seigneuriale, a Cens, a rent of as­
sise, quit rent, old rent, or chief rent. 
Chef-cens, droit-cens, premier­
cens, the first, capital, or chief rent. 
Sur-cens, imposé apres le chef­
cens, a Cens raised upon a Cens, a se­
cond rent or Cens created upon the alienation of Land Censuel, as when a Tenant Censter passes away his Estate, with reservation of a Rent or Cens to himself besides that which was formerly due, and is still to be paid unto the Lord. 
Gros-cens, cher-cens, a great cens or rent. 
Menu cens, plus seigneurial & plus noble que le gros, a small cens. 
Cens à quête ou cherchable, que le Seigneur doit demander & faire prendre chez les Vas­
saux, a Cens which must be de­
manded by the Lord Censuel (or his Deputy) of the Tenant or detainer of the Inheritance that yields it, therein different from that Cens which is payable at a certain day and place. 
Censable, fonds censable, a Land or ground which may be charged with Cens, or for which Cens is due. 
Censier (m.) one that pay's a quit rent (or chief rent) for the Land he holds, one that holds by the title of Cens, a fee farmer.
Censif, ou Censable, Cer sive, held by the title of Cens, or for  



which Cens is due. 
Cense, the same as Cens. 
Censuel, appartenant à cen­
se, belonging to Cens. 
Cense, crû, tenu, estimé, reck­
oned, thought, esteemed, account­
ed. 
Les personnes de vòtre rang sont censées de la Cour, persons of your quality are look't upon as Courtiers. 
Censeur (m.) Magistrat Ro­
main, a Censor, or Roman Magi­
strate. 
L'Office du Censeur Romain étoit double; le premier, de fai­
re le denombrement du Peuple, & de dresser un état des biens que chacun possedoit: the Ro­
man Censors Office was twofold? the first to number the People, and to value every mans estate. 
L'autre Office du Censeur étoit de censurer les fautes, & de les corriger, the other Office of the Censor was to censure ill manners, and punish misdemeanors. 
Censeur, repreneur, a comptrol­
ler. 
Censeur de Livres, a critick of books. 
Censure (f.) Office, ou di­
gnité de Censeur, the Office of a Censor. 
Censure, châtiment du Censeur, the punishment inflicted by the Censor. 
Censure, jugement que l'on porte des ouvrages d'autrui, the judgement one gives upon another mans works. 
Censure, reprehension, a censure, reproof, or rebuke. 
Censure Ecclesiastique, Ecclesi­
asticall Censure. 
Censurer, reprendre quêcun, to censure, controul, or rebuke one. 
Censurer, condamner, to cen­
sure, or condemn. 
Censurer un Livre, to censure (or find fault with) a book. 
Censuré, repris, censured, comptrolled, or rebuked. 
Censuré, condamné, censured, or condemned.  

CENT (m.) a hundred. 
Cent hommes, a hundred men. 
Cent à cent, cent de rang, ou cent de front, a hundred a breast. 
Deux cens, trois cens, quatre cens, cinq cens, two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, five hundred. 
Cent fois, deux cent fois, trois cent fois, a hundred times, two hundred times, three hundred times. 
Centaine (f.) a hundred, the number (or proportion) of an hun­
dred. 
Par centaines, by hundreds to­
gether. 
Il donne des écus à centaines, he gives away hundreds of crowns to­
gether. 
Centenaire, of a hundred, con­
taining the number of a hundred. 
Centenier (m.) a Centurion, a Captain (or Commander) of an hundred Souldiers. 
Centiéme, hundredth. 
Centinodis (m.) herbe à cent neuds, centinody, knot-grass. 
Centumvir (m.) du Corps des cent & cinq Juges parmi les Romains, one of the hundred and five Roman Judges, chosen to hear great matters among the people. Three of them were chosen out of every Tribe. 
Centurie (f.) a Century, or a hundred of.  

CENTAURE (m.) a Cen­
taure, a feigned Monster, half a man and half a horse.  

CENTRE (m.) a center, the very midst or point in the middle of any round thing.  

CEP (m.) cep de vigne, a Vine. 
Cep, entrave, stocks for male­
factors.  

CEPENDANT, mean while, mean time, in the mean while, or in the mean time. 
Cependant, toutefois, neverthe­
less, yet for all that.  

CEPHALIQUE, belonging to the head. 
Veine cephalique, the cephalick vein, or head-vein.  

CERCELLE (f.) sorte d'oiseau, a water-fowl called a Teal. 

† CERCHER. V. Chercher.  

CERCLE (m.) a circle, a hoop for a cask. 
En forme de cercle, circlewise. 
Cercles d'une Sphere, the Cir­
cles of a Sphere. 
Un demi-cercle, a half circle, or a semi-circle. 
Cercle, Assemblée, an Assembly, or a company of men standing or sitting round. 
Les Cercles d'Allemagne, cer­
tains Païs confederez, the Cir­
cles of Germany. 
Circulaire, rond, circular, round, orbicular. 
Circulation (f.) a circulati­
on.  

CERCUEIL (m.) biere, a bier, or coffin. 
Porte-cercueil, one that carry's the dead body's to the grave.  

CEREMONIE (f.) forma­
lité, ceremony, or formality. 
Faire des ceremonies, to make ceremony's. 
Sans ceremonies, without cere­
mony's. 
Je traite mes amis sans ceremo­
nie, I receive my friends without ceremony. 
Les Ambassadeurs furent rece­
us avec la Ceremonie ordinai­
re, the Embassadors were recei­
ved with the usuall ceremony. 
Maitre des Ceremonies, a Ma­
ster of Ceremony's. 
Les Ceremonies d'une Eglise, the Ceremony's (or the Rites( of a Church. 
Ceremonial (m.) Livre de Ceremonies, a Ritual, or a Book of Ceremony's. 
Ceremoniel; as,
La Loi Ceremonielle, the Ce­
remoniall Law. 
Ceremonieux, homme plein de Ceremonies, un faiseur de complimens, a ceremonious (or complimentall) man.  

CERF (m.) bête sauvage, a stag, a red deer, a hart. 
Cerf volant, espece d'escar­
bot, the great horn-beetle, or bull-fly. 
Corne de Cerf, harts horn. 
Langue de Cerf, sorte d'herbe, harts tongue, an herb so called.  

CERFEUIL (m.) sorte d'herbe, chervil, a well known herb. 

CERISE (f.) sorte de fruit, a cherry. 
Cerisier (m.) l'arbre qui porte les cerises, a cherry tree. 
Cerisaye (f.) lieu planté de Cerisiers, an Orchard of Cherry trees.  

CERNEAU d'une noix (m.) the kernel of a nut. 
Cerner une noix, to take out the kernel of a nut.  

CERRE (m.) sorte d'arbre, the holm-oak. 
Cerre, cicerole, legume, chich­
lings.  

CERTAIN, asseuré, vrai, certain, sure, true, or doubtless. 



Je suis certain que cela est ain­
si, I am certain (I am sure) it is so. 
La chose n'est pas bien certaine, on n'en est pas bien certain, the thing is not very sure, there is no great certainty of it, or assurance of it. 
On le tient pour certain, it is said for certain, no body doubts of it, no man denieth it. 
La Victoire nous est certaine, we are sure of a Victory. 
Faire une chose à certain tems, à certains jours, à certaines heures, to do a thing at a certain time. 
Un certain m'a dit, a certain man told me. 
Une certaine femme, a woman, a certain woman. 
Certaines personnes me veu­
lent mal, certain (or some) per­
sons wish me evil. 
Certainement, asseurément, certainly, assuredly, sure, or sure­
ly. 
Certainement il se trompe fort, certainly he is much mista­
ken. 
Certainement, avec certitude, with a true knowlege. 
Certes (a word scarce to be u­
sed in familiar discourse) truly. 
Certifier, asseurer quêque chose, to certify a thing, to assure, or to avouch it. 
Certifié, certify'd, assured, or avouched. 
Certificat (m.) a certificate, a passeport. 
Certitude (f.) asseurance d'une chose, certainty, assurance.  

CERVEAU (m) the brain.
Un homme de grand cerveau, un homme fort sage & prudent, a man that hath a good brain, a wise (discreet, or rational) man.
Il a le cerveau mal timbré, he has a wormin his head, he is crack­
brained.
Cervelet (m.) le petit cer­
veau, the little brain, the hinder part of the brain next to the nape of the neck. It makes but a tenth of the whole, and is divided from the rest by dura & pia mater. 
Cervelle (f) cerveau, the brain, or hinder part of the brain wherein the Memory is lodged, the seat of memory. 
Cet homme n'a point de cer­
velle, c'est un étourdi, that man has no brains, he is a rash, heed­
less, and inconsiderate man. 
Il a la cervelle renversée, he is out of his wits. 
Mettre (ou tenir) quêcun en cervelle, le tenir en peine, to a­
muse a man. 
Tenir quêcun en cervelle, ou en son devoir, to keep one in aw, to keep him under. 
Cervelat (m.) an excellent kind of dry and thick sausage, eat­
en cold in slices.  

CERVOISE (f.) sorte de bo­
isson, a kind of strong drink.  

CERUSE (f.) blanc de plomb, blanc d'Espagne, Ce­
ruse, or white lead, wherewith women paint. It differs from Li­
thargy (called also white lead) in that Lithargy is made of the gros­
sest lead as it is in the mine, where­
as this white lead is made of lead refined out of the mine.
 
* Ces. V. Ce.  

CESSE, sans cesse, uncessant­
ly, always, without ceasing, rest­
ing, discontinuance, or intermis­
sion. 
Cesser, to cease, forbear, stop, leave off, discontinue, give over.
Cesser de faire quêque chose, se reposer pour un tems, dis­
continuer sa besongne, to rest a while, to hold back for a time, to surcease, intermit, or discontinue his work. 
Je ne laisse pas de faire quêque chose, lors mêmes que je cesse de travailler, I am still a doing something or other, even when I left my work. 
Je ne cesse de le presser, I am alwayes urging of him. 
Cesser de combattre, to give over the fight, to leave off the combat. 
La Guerre cesse en hiver, War finds a stop in Winter. 
La douleur cesse, la cause en étant ôtée, the pain goes away when the cause is taken away. 
Cessez de vous étonner, cease (or leave off) your astonish­
ment. 
Cessation (f.) a cessation, cea­
sing, or leaving off for a time. 
Cessation d'armes, a cessation of arms. 
Cessation de plaids, the vacati­
on, or time out of term.
 
* Cession. V. Ceder.
Cet, Cette. V. Ce.  

CETERAC (m.) herbe me­
decinale, the herb citarch, wal-fern, stone-fern, scale-fern, finger-fern, or miltwast.  

CEVADERE, ou Civadiere (f.) voile du mât de prouë, the sprit-sail of a Ship.

  
C H
CHAAS. V. Chas.  

CHABLIS (m.) abbatis d'arbre de haute fûtaie, wind­
falls, the trees or branches of trees, which the wind hath over­
thrown. 
Arbre de chablis, a tree over­
thrown by the wind.  

CHABOT (m.) sorte de po­
isson, a gull, bull-head, or millers thumb.  

CHACUN, every man, every one, every body. 
Chacun se flate, every one flat­
ters himself. 
Chacun agrée ce qui est à lui, every man likes his own things best. 
Chacun a son avis, every one has his opinion, so many men so many minds. 
Chaque, every. 
La Nature a donné à chaque Animal des Armes pour se de­
fendre, Nature has given every living creature Armes for his de­
fence. 
Il vous faut prendre garde que chaque chose soit mise en sa place, you must see that every thing be laid in its right place. 
Il a donné à chaque Soldat trois écus, he has given every Souldier three crowns. 
Il pese chaque mot, he weighs every word.  

CHAGRIN (m.) fâcherie, trouble, heaviness, anguish, vex­
ation, perplexity. 
Cela me donne du chagrin, that vexes (that troubles) me. 
Je veux vous delivrer de tous vos chagrins, I will bear you out of all your troubles. 
Le chagrin me ronge, I am trou­
bled with correding cares. 
Chagrin, melancolie, ou hu­
meur fâcheuse, melancholy. 
Quel chagrin vous a saisi? what care has seized (what care has pos­
sessed) you? 
Chagrin, dont on fait des boë­
tes de môntre & des manches de coûteau, chagrin.  



Chagrin, adj. sâcheux, me­
lancholy, sad, morose, fretful. 
La vieillesse me rend chagrin, old age makes me fretful. 
Je suis devenu tout chagrin, rien ne me plait, I am grown most melancholy, nothing at all pleases me. 
Comme tous les vins ne s'aigris­
sent pas pour étre vieux, le grand nombre d'années ne rend pas tous les hommes chagrins, as all wines don't grow sower for being old, so a great age do's not make all men morose. 
Chagriner quêcun, le fâcher, le rendre chagrin, to vex, grieve, or trouble one. 
Pourquoi le chagrinez vouz? why do you vex him? 
Se chagriner, to fret, to vex him­
self.  

CHAINE (f.) chaine de fer, a chain. 
Mettre quêcun à la chaine, l'enchainer, to bind one (or ty him) in chains. 
Chaine d'argent, a silver chain. 
Chaine d'or, a gold chain. 
Chaine en tissure, ordissure de filet, qui se met le long du mé­
tier de Tisseran, the woof of cloth, the thread which in wea­
ving runs over-cross it. 
Chainette (f.) petite chaine, a little chain. 
Chainette d'acier, dont on se sert pour les montres, a steel chain. 
Chainon (m.) anneau de chai­
ne, a link of a chain.  

CHAIR (f.) flesh, meat. 
Couleur de chair incarnat, car­
nation colour. 
Couper jusqu'a la chair vive, to cut to the quick. 
Chair de mouton, de beuf, d'agneau, &c. mutton, beef, lamb, &c. 
Chair bouïllie, rôtie, fricassée, boyled, rost, fry'd meat. 
La Chair des poissons & des fruits, the fleshy part of fishes and fruits. 
La Chair, la Concupiscence, the fl sh, or concupiscency. 
Les plaisirs de la Chair, the plea­
sures of the flesh, carnal plea­
sures. 
La Chair fait la Guerre à l'Es­
prit, the Flesh warrs against the Spirit. 
Chaircuitier (m.) cuiseur de chair & vendeur de chair cui­
te, a Cook that sells meat ready dressed. 
Carnacier (m.) grand man­
geur de chair, a great flesh-ea­
ter. 
Carnation (f.) terme de Peinture, a picture drawn na­
ked, the representation of a naked body in a picture. 
Carnaval (m.) Shrovetide. 
Carnaval, rejouïssance de Car­
naval, Carnaval, or feasting in Shrovetide. 
Caruncule (f.) a little piece of flesh. 
Charnel, carnal. 
Un homme charnel, a carnal man. 
Plaisirs charnels, carnal plea­
sures. 
Charnellement, carnally. 
Charnier (m.) lieu où l'on ti­
ent la chair, a Larder, wherein flesh hangeth to be kept. 
Charnier, lieu des ossemens des morts, a Charnel house, a Place wherein dead bodies are laid, or their bones kept. 
Charnu, fleshy, full of flesh. 
Les parties charnues du corps, the fleshy parts of the body. 
Un homme charnu, a fleshy man, corpulent, or thick. 
Fruit charnu, fleshy fruit. 
Charnure (f.) brawn, fleshi­
ness, fulness of flesh, carnosity. 
Charongne (f.) a carrion, or stinking carcass, a putrify'd flesh. 
Puant comme charongne, that stinks like a carrion.  

CHAIRE (f.) a Pulpit. 
Monter en chaire, to get up into the pulpit.  

CHAISE (f.) a chair. 
Chaise à dos & à bras, a chair with back and elbows, a great chair. 
Chaise, pour se faire porter, a Chair, or a Sedan. 
Aller en chaise, to go out in a chair. 
Porteur de chaise, a Chair-man.  

CHAISNE. V. Chaine.  

CHALAND (m.) a customer, one that buyes constantly in the same shop. 
Acquerir (se faire) des cha­
lans, to get (to draw in) custo­
mers. 
Perdre ses chalans, to lose his customers. 
Ses chalans commencent à le quitter, his customers begin to leave him. 
Chalandise (f.) custom, or u­
sual trading unto one shop.  

CHALCEDOINE. V. Calce­
doine.  

CHALEUR (m.) heat, warmth, hotness. 
Une grande chaleur, a great heat. 
La chaleur s'accroit, the heat increases. 
La chaleur s'abbat, s'addoucit, the heat begins to abate. 
Les grandes chaleurs de l'Eté, the great heats of Summer. 
Les chaleurs sont grandes, il fait bien chaud, it is very hot weather. 
Le plus fort de la chaleur, the greatest heat, the greatest degree of heat. 
Ce sont des sablons infertiles, qui étant une fois échaufez par le Soleil rendent une chaleur si cuisante qu'on y chemine com­
me sur du feu, they are infertile Sands, which being heated by the Sun yield so scorching a heat that one goes upon them as it were upon coals of fire. 
Brûlant de chaleur, burning hot. 
Chaleur d'esprit, ardency (or fervency) of mind, fiery affection, or vehement passion. 
Avec chaleur, avec ardeur, ar­
dently, fervently, vehemently. 
Chaud, qui est chaud, warm, or hot. 
Un fer chaud, a red-hot iron, a marking (or searing) iron. 
Il a les piés chauds, il est à son aise, he lives well, he wants for nothing, he is warm, or well li­
ned. 
Une fievre chaude, a feaver, a hot feaver. 
Tomber de fievre chaude en haut mal, to fall out of the frying pan into the fire. 
A la chaude, avec precipitation, rashly, unadvisedly, with more hast than good speed. 
Battre la chaude (en termes de monnoie) batre sur l'enclume des lingots fortans de la fonte, to beat ingots just coming out of the font. 
Chaud (m.) chaleur, heat. 
Avoir chaud, to be hot. 
Avoir grand chaud, to be very hot. 
Brûler de chaud, to be burning hot.



Il fait chaud, it is hot, it is hot weather. 
Le chaud s'augmente, the heat increases. 
Le chaud s'abbat, the heat de­
creases, or abates. 
Chaudement, hotly. 
Chaudement, promtement, in hast. 
Il lui en porta chaudement la nouvelle, he went forthwith to tell him of it. 
Vous y étes allé un peu trop chaudement, de le battre de la façon, you banged him too fierce­
ly, too furiously. 
Chaudiere (f.) a great kettle, a cauldron. 
Chaudron, ou Chauderon (m.) a kettle. 
Chaudronnier (m.) a Copper­
smith, or kettle-maker. 
Chaudronnier, radoubeur de chaudrons & autres vaisseaux de cuivre, a Tinker. 
Chaufer quêque chose, to warm (or heat) something. 
Chaufer le lit, to warm the bed. 
Se chaufer aupres d'un bon feu, to warm himself near a good fire. 
Chaufer le four, to heat the o­
ven. 
Chaufé, warmed, heated. 
Chaufage (m.) provison de bois pour se chaufer, fewel, or stuff to heat with. 
Droit de Chaufage en une Fo­
rêt, droit d'y prendre sa provi­
sion de bois, a certain quantity of Fuel due unto divers Officers of the French Kings Woods, but deny'd by the last King unto some of them. 
Chaufage, Chaufement, the warming (or heating) of a thing. 
Chauffe-cire (m.) Officier de la Chancelerie, a Chafe-wax (an Office in the Chancery.) 
Chauffe-lit (m.) bassinoir, a warming pan. 
Chauffe-panse (f.) chemi­
née basse, a sort of chimney.  

CHALIT (m.) le bois d'un lit, a bed-stead, a trundle-bed.  

CHALOUPE (f.) Shallop, a sort of large-boat.  

CHALUMEAU (m.) tui­
au de plante, the stem of an herb. 
Chalumeau, flute de Berger, a Shepheards pipe of straw.  

CHAMADE (f.) son de trompette, the sounding of trum­
pets, a call or summon by the sound of trumpets. 
Sonner la chamade pour parle­
menter, to sound a parly.  

CHAMAILLER, to strike (or slash) with swords or other weapons upon armour or armed men. 
Chamaillis (m.) the resound­
ing of strokes or blows, or the clashing sound of blows in a battel or skirmish of armed men.  

CHAMARAS (m.) sorte d'herbe, water-germander, or scor­
dion.  

CHAMARRE (f.) a kind of loose and light gown, also a stud­
ded garment. 
Chamarrer un habit, to lace a sute all over. 
Chamarré, laced thick all o­
ver. 
Chamarrure (f.) a thick la­
cing.  

CHAMBRE (f.) a room, a chamber. 
Chambre, où l'on couche, a bed­
chamber. 
Chambre, où l'on mange, a di­
ning room. 
Une Arriere-chambre, a back chamber, a withdrawing cham­
ber. 
Chambre garnie, a room fur­
nished. 
Compagnon de chambre, qui demeure en même chambre qu'un autre, a bed-fellow. 
Un homme (un Valet) de cham­
bre, one that waits upon his Ma­
ster in his chamber, a Chamber­
man, or Valet de chamber. 
Une fille de chambre, a cham­
ber-maid. 
Une Robe de chambre, a Cham­
ber Gown, a Night-gown, or a Morning-gown. 
Un Pot de chambre, a Chamber­
pot. 
Vivre en chambre, vivre à ses pieces, & non à la table d'au­
trui, to live privately in a lodg­
ing. 
Travailler en chambre, en par­
ticulier, & non publiquement en boutique, to work in a cham­
ber, and not keep shop. 
Chambre, le lieu où la Justice s'exerce, a Court of Justice, or the Room where 'tis usually kept. 
Chambre, signifiant les per­
sonnes qui composent un Corps de Justice, & qui s'assemblent en un Lieu pour l'y exercer, the Officers, Counsellors, or Com­
missioners that belong to a Court. 
Chambre du grand Conseil, the great Council Chamber. 
Chambre du Conseil privé, the privy Council Chamber. 
Grand-Chambre du Parle­
ment, the great Parliament Cham­
ber. 
Chambre de la Tournelle, où se jugent les Causes criminelles, a Parliamental Court for criminal Causes, wherein the Judges of the other Courts do sit by several turns. 
Chambre des Enquêtes, A Court of Inquest. There are several of them in the Parliament of Paris, for the examination and trial of civil causes and appeals, by Wit­
nesses and other evidences. 
Chambre des Requêtes, the Court of Requests. There be two of them, the one of good antiquity, the other (consisting of two Presi­
dents, and eight Counsellors, &c.) erected in the year 1580. 
Chambre des Contes, the Court of Accompts, or of the Exchequer. 
Chambre de la Cour des Aides, the Room wherein the Court of Aids is kept. 
Chambre des Monnoies, a So­
veraign Court, wherein the cur­
rentness, weight, and value of mo­
nies are examined, and the dis­
orders, faults, and offences of Mint-men, Coyners, Clippers, &c. punished. 
Chambre des Vacances, an Or­
dinary Court kept every Vaca­
tion by certain select Judges, for the determination of petty cau­
ses. 
Chambre de l'Edit, ou Cham­
bre my-partie, a Court of Ju­
stice established in divers good Towns of France, in favour (and for the righting) of them of the Reformed Religion, whereof the one half of the Judges are Pro­
testants, and the other half Pa­
pists. 
Chambre Ardente, a Chamber (or Court) wherein those of the Protestant Religion have been cen­
sured, and adjudged unto the fire.
Chambre des grands Jours, an extraordinary Sessions, called by virtue of the Kings Commission or Letters Patents, directed unto certain Judges of the Parliament (within the Precincts whereof it  



is to be held) and appointing them what place they shall sit in, how long they shall sit, what Causes they shall deal in, how far they shall proceed in them. The Peers of France have also their Grands Jours, which they hold once or twice a year, for the execution of their highest Jurisdiction, and for the hearing of Appeals from their own inferiour Courts. 
Les deux Chambres de la Cour de Parlement d'Angleterre, the two Houses of our Court of Parlia­
ment. 
Chambre, espace vuide, creux qui se fait dans une piece de fonte, lors que la matiere ne coule pas egalement, a void space, or a hole made in a piece as it is founding, when the metal doth not run equal. 
La Chambre d'une Mine, le lieu où l'on met la poudre, the hole (or void space) in a Mine where they put the barrels of pow­
der. 
Chambrette (f.) petite cham­
bre, a little chamber, a small room. 
Chambriere (f.) a chamber-maid, a house-maid. 
Chambellan (m.) a Chamber­
lain. 
Le Grand Chambellan de France, the Great Chamberlain of France.  

CHAMEAU (m.) sorte d'a­
nimal, a Camel. 
Le Chameau Medois a deux bosses sur le dos, the Camels of Media have two bunches upon their backs. 
Le Chameau d'Arabie a une seule bosse sur le dos, & une à la poitrine, sur laquelle il s'ap­
puie, the Camels of Arabia have but one bunch upon the back, and one at their breast, which bunch they lean upon. 
Chameau moucheté, autre e­
spece d'Animal ressemblant de la tête au vrai Chameau, mais du reste du Corps au Cheval & au Beuf, a beast whose head is like a Camels, but the rest of his body most like a horses and an oxes. 
Pâture de chameaux, sorte de jonc odorirerant, the reed (or rush) called Sauinant.  

CHAMOIS (m.) Chevre sau­
vage, a Shamois, or wild goat. 
Chamois, peau de chamois, shamois, or shamoy leather.  

CHAMP (m.) terre qu'on cultive, a field. 
Champ labouré, mais où il n'y a rien encore de semé, land plowed or tilled, but unsown. 
Champ labouré, & où l'on a semé du blé, land plowed and sown. 
Champ qu'on seme toutes les années, a field which beareth e­
very year, that is sown or delved e­
very year. 
Champ qu'on laisse reposer une année, ou de tems en tems, fal­
low ground, or lay-land. 
Champ de franc aleu, exent de toutes redevances, a free te­
nure field that payeth no rent. 
Champ obligé à redevances, a field that payeth tribute, or rent, &c. 
Champ payant dîmes, a field whereof tythe is raised. 
Champ bien tenu, bien cultivé, a field that is well kept. 
Champ inculte, abandonné, an untilled, unmannured, or unhus­
banded field. 
Un Champ épuisé, qui ne peut plus porter, a field that is worn, made barren with much bearing, and that can bear no more. 
Champ maigre, sterile, a lean and barren soil. 
Champ fertile; ou de grand rapport, a field bringing forth much corn. 
Les Chams, la Campagne, the fields, or the Country. 
Un homme des Chams, a Coun­
try man. 
Il ressent son homme des Chams, he looks like a Country­
man, he shews his Country breed­
ing by his carriage. 
Aller aux Chams, to go into the country. 
Etre aux Chams pour s'y diver­
tir, to live in the Country for his recreation. 
Le sejour qu'on fait aux Chams, an abiding in the Coun­
try. 
Donner la clef des Chams à quêcun, to dismiss one, to send him away, or give him his liberty. 
Gagner les Chams, to run away. 
Champ de bataille, Champ de Combat, a field, or the place of a field fight. 
Se presenter au Champ de ba­
taille, to come into the field to fight. 
Demeurer Maitre du Champ de bataille, to win the field, to get the victory. For he that af­
ter a Battel keeps the field, though he have lost the more men, is held the Master. 
Champ, occasion (matiere, sû­
jet) de môntrer ce que l'on sait faire, a fair opportunity to give a proof of his skill. 
Sur le champ, d'abord, sans de­
lai, presently, immediately, incon­
tinently, forthwith, out of hand, at that very instant. 
Harangue faite sur le champ, a Speech made in promptu, without any premeditation. 
A tout bout de champ, à tout moment, still, ever, ever now and then, ever and anon. 
Champ de l'Ecu, en termes de blazon, the field of a Coat of Arms. 
Champart, en termes de Droits Seigneuriaux, Terrage (m.) Field rent, half or part of the twelfth part of a Crop due by bargain or custom unto a Land­
lord, and taken off the ground for him before the Farmer lead any. 
Champartier, terroir cham­
partier, qui doit le droit de champart, a land that is liable to such a rent. 
Champartir, ou Champarter, prendre ce droit, to divide a field (or the crop thereof) by even or due parts, to lay out unto every one his portion therein. 
Champêtre, of (or belonging to) the Country. 
Vie champêtre, a Country-life. 
Homme champêtre, one that lives a Country life. 
Champignon (m.) a mush­
room, or toad-stoal.  

CHAMPION (m.) a Cham­
pion, one that fights a publick com­
bat in his own, or another mans quarrel. 
C'est un valeureux Champion, un vaillant Soldat, he is a stout Champion, or a valiant souldier.  

CHANCE (f.) les points qui se rencontrent au premier jet de dez, the turning of the dice. 
Chance, jeu de dez, a game at dice called hazard. 
Chance, bonheur ou malheur, good luck, or ill luck. 



La chance est tournée (de bi­
en mal) fortune is changed. 
Chanceler, en marchant, to reel, stagger, make indentures. 
Chanceler en son opinion, to waver in his opinion. 
Il chancele, il craint, he wavers, he is afraid. 
Chanceler, se couper en par­
lant, to faulter in his speech, to speak timorously and faultringly, as though one were afraid.  

CHANCELIER (m.) a Chancellor. 
Le grand Chancelier de France, the Lord high Chancel­
lor of France. He is in France, as the Lord Chancellor here, the principal Magistrate of the King­
dom; and is in his Judgements exempted from the Jurisdiction or censure of Parliaments, as the Chancellor of England uncontrou­
lable by the Common Law. On him depends the ordering and dis­
position of Justice, the establish­
ment of good and sacred Laws, the reformation of superfluous, and a­
brogation of unprofitable Edicts, and the putting down of all Offices that be offensive to the People, or chargeable to the State. He hath the keeping of the Kings great Seal, and by the virtue thereof ei­
ther passes, or may put back such Letters Patents and Writs as are presented unto him. 
Chancelerie (f.) la Cour de Chancelerie, the Chancery, or Chancery Court. 
Chancelerie particuliere de chaque Parlement de France, a particular Chancery of every Court of Parliament in France.  

CHANCRE (m.) sorte d'ulcere, a canker. 
Chancreux, cankered.  

CHANDELE (f.) a candle. 
Chandele de suif, a tallow can­
dle. 
Faire des chandeles de suif, to make tallow candles. 
Vendre des Marchandises à la chandelle allumêe, to sell Com­
modities by the inch of candle. 
Le Jeu ne vaut pas la Chandele, it will not quit cost, there will be nothing got by him that deals in it. 
Chandele de glace, an isickle, ice hanging at the eaves of hou­
ses. 
Chandelier (m.) chandelier de table, a candlestick. 
Chandelier de Sale, à plusie­
urs branches, a hanging candle­
stick. 
Chandelier, faiseur & vendeur de chandeles, a Chandler, maker or seller of candles. 
Chandeleur (f.) la fête de la Chandeleur, ou de la Purifica­
tion de la Sainte Vierge, Can­
dlemas, Candlemas day, the Puri­
fication of the Blessed Virgin.  

CHANFREIN (m.) cane­
lure de Colomne, a channel, fur­
row, hollow-gutter, or strake in rabating of pillars. 
Le bord relevé entre deux chanfreins, the ridg that stands out betwixt two gutters. 
Chanfrein, piece de bride sur le front du cheval, the front-stall of a horses bridle.  

CHANGE (m.) échange, an exchange. 
Faire change d'une chose avec une autre, to make an exchange of one thing for another. 
Vous ne perdrez rien au chan­
ge, you will loose nothing by the bargain. 
Change (en termes de Venerie) comme quand on prend un Cerf pour un autre, a wrong Deer in hunting. 
Donner (bailler) le change à quêcun, se jouër de lui, to co­
zen (or gull) one. 
Prendre le change, se laisser tromper, sans y prendre garde, to suffer himself to be cozened, cheated, and deluded. 
Change, Office de Changeur, a Bank of Exchange. 
Lettre de change, a bill of ex­
change. 
Envoier mille écus à Rome par lettre de change, to send a thou­
sand crowns to Rome by bill of ex­
change. 
J'ai receu une lettre de change de cent écus pour prendre en cette Ville, I have received a bill of exchange of one hundred crowns to be paid in this Town. 
Change, gain de Banquier, fai­
sant tenir de l'argent pour quê­
cun en un autre lieu, the change, the Bankers gain that returns mony for one in another place. 
Change revenu de l'argent mis a profit, the use of mony. 
Je vous rendrai le change, la pareille, I shall requite you for it, or render like for like, I shall be e­
ven with you. 
Changer, faire échange d'une chose avec une autre, to change, barter, or make an ex­
change of one thing for another. 
Changer de l'étain pour du cu­
ivre, to change tin for copper. 
Tel change qui ne gagne pas, many change for the worse. 
Changer une pistole, to change a pistol. 
Changer l'état d'une chose, y apporter de la nouveauté, to al­
ter a thing. 
Changer sa maniere de vivre, to change his manner of living. 
Changer, transformer, to turn, convert, change, or transform. 
Changer un homme en bête, to turn (to transform) a man into a beast. 
Changer, neut. to change, or to alter, neut. 
La Mode des habits change tous les jours, the fashion of clothes changes every day. 
Il vous faut changer de moeurs, you must mend your mannors. 
Je vous ferai bien changer de note, I shall make you turn over a new leaf. 
Il a bien changé, he is much al­
tered'he is quite another man. 
Changer de couleur, d'avis, de volonté, & de religion, to change his colour, opinion, mind, religion. 
Changer d'habit, to change his habit, to put on another sute of clothes. 
Changer de place, to take ano­
ther place. 
Changer de discours, to change his discourse. 
Changer de visage & de dis­
cours, selon le sentiment & la volonté d'autrui, to frame both his countenance and discourse ac­
cording to another mans opinion and pleasure. 
Un homme facile à changer, an uncertain man, one that is apt to change his mind. 
Un homme resolu à ne point changer, a resolute man, a man resolved never to change. 
Souvent les amitiez se changent en grandes inimitiez, it often falls out that friendship is turned into great enmity. 
Changé, changed, altered, turn­
ed. 
Il est tout changé, il est tout autre qu'il n'étoit, he is much altered, or transformed, he is quite another man.



Ma joie s'est changée en tri­
stesse, my joy is turned into grief. 
Changeant, inconstant, fickle, unconstant. 
C'est un esprit changeant, he is a fickle, or uncertain man, he is a meer weather-cock. 
Couleur changeante, changeable colour. 
Changement (m.) a change, alteration, or vicissitude. 
Les Etats, aussi bien que les Saisons, ont leurs changemens, States as well as Seasons have their vicissitudes. 
L'Ambition cause de grands changemens dans un Etat, Am­
bition causes great alterations in a State. 
La Vertu n'est point sujette au changement, Virtue is not in the least Subject to change, 
Changement legereté, fickle­
ness, levity, or unconstancy. 
Changeur (m.) Banquier, a Banker, he that makes gain by changing of mony, or letting it out to usury.
 
* Chanoine, & Chanoinie. V. Canon.  

CHANSON (f.) a song, a ballad. 
Chanson lugubre, a mournfull song. 
Chanson gaillarde, a merry song. 
Chanson à boire, a drinking song. 
Dire toûjours la même chanson, to sing the same song, or, to say the same thing over and o­
ver. 
Elle lui chantera cette chanson aux oreilles toute sa vie, she will upbraid him with it all his life time. 
Chant (m.) a song, or singing, as,
Le Chant des Pseaumes; the singing of Psalms. 
Commencer le chant d'un Pse­
anme, to tune a Psalm. 
Un chant melancolique, a me­
lancholy song. 
Un chant agreable, a pleasant song. 
Plain chant, plain song. 
Chanter en plain chant, to sing plain song. 
Chanter, to sing. 
Il y a peu de gens qui sachent bien chanter, there are but few people that can sing well. 
Chanter de la voix seule, sans instrument, to sing with the voice only, without any instrument. 
Chanter & jouër ensemble d'un Lut, to sing and play together upon the Lute. 
Chanter le Te Deum, rendre graces à Dieu avec solennité pour quêque heureux Succez, to sing Te Deum, to give God so­
lemn thanks for some happy Suc­
cess. 
Tel chante qui n'est pas joieux, many a man sings that is full of sorrow. 
On chante hardiment quand on on n'a rien à perdre, Who sings so merry a note as he that cannot change a groat? Which answers the Latin verse, Cantabit vacuus coram Latrone Viator. 
Chanter devant la Victoire, to triumph before the Victory. 
Chanté, sung. 
C'est bien chanté, that's well sung. 
C'est bien chanté (dans un sens Ironique) well said. 
Chanteur (m.) qui chante vo­
lontiers & souvent, a singer, one that sings much. 
Un grand chanteur, a great singer. 
Une Chanteuse, a singing wo­
man. 
Chantre (m.) a Chanter. 
Chantre, Maitre du Choeur, a Chanter in a Quire. 
Chanterelle (f.) la corde la plus deliée d'un Instrument, the treble string of a violin, or the smallest of any musicall Instru­
ment.  

CHANTEAU (m.) a corner-piece, a piece broken off from the corner or edge of a thing.  

CHANTIER (m.) bucher de bois, a Wood-mongers or Timber-sellers Yard, a Wood-pile. 
Chantier, échalas de Vigne, a Vine-supporting pole or stake, whe­
ther it stands upright, or lie as a cross-bar overthwart. 
Chantier de Cave, a stand in a Cellar. 
Chantelage (m.) droit Sei­
gneurial à prendre sur le Vin des Vassaux mis sur les Chantiers de la Cave, a certain fee due unto some Lords, and taken out of Wines laid upon stands in the Cellar.  

CHANVRE (m.) sorte de plante, hemp. 
Tiller le chanvre, to shale hemp. 
Cheneviere (f.) a hemp-close. 
Chenevotes, the sticks of shaled hemp.  

CHAOS (m.) a chaos, or con­
fusion of things.  

CHAPE (f.) Chape d'Eglise, a Church-mans Cope.  

CHAPEAU (m.) a hat. 
Chapeau à grandes ailes, a broad-brimmed hat. 
Chapeau de castor, a beaver. 
Chapeau de paille, a straw hat. 
Chapeau de Cardinal, a Car­
dinalls Cap. 
Chapeau de fleurs, a garland of flowers. 
La coupe d'un Chapeau, the crown of a hat. 
Les ailes d'un chapeau, the brim of a hat. 
Chapelier (m.) a maker, or seller of hats. 
Chaperon (m.) habillement de tête, a hood. 
Chaperon de Magistrats & Do­
cteurs, such a Hood as some Ma­
gistrates and Doctors wear on their shoulders on solemn days. 
Chaperon de femme, a kind of ornament which women wear to cover their heads. 
Chaperon d'oiseau de proie, a faulcons hood. 
Chaperonniere (f.) l'herbe chaperonniere, lag-wort, or butter-bur. 
Chapiteau (m.) chapiteau de colomne, the chapter (top, or head) of a pillar.  

CHAPELLE (f.) a Chappel, an Oratory. 
La Chapelle du Roi, the Kings Chappel. 
Chapelain (m.) a Chaplain. 
Chapelain du Roi, one of the Kings Chaplains.  

CHAPELET (m.) beads. Dire le Chapelet, to say prayers by the beads.  

CHAPITRE (m.) Chapter. Le Chapitre d'un Livre, the Chapter of a book. 
Chapitre d'Eglise, des Chanoi­
nes, a Chapter (or Assembly) of the Dean, Prebends, Canons, and other Officers of a Cathedrall Church. 
Chapitre (ou Assemblée) de Religieux, a Chapter (or Assem­
bly) of Monks. 
S'Assembler en Chapitre, to meet in the Chapter. 
Chapitre, reprimende, peni­
tence  



qui se donne dans le Cha­
pitre, a check, or reproof of the Chapter, or a punishment inflicted by the same. 
Chapitrer, reprendre quê­
cun, to check, or reprove one. 
Chapitrer, donner le chapitre au coûpable, to correct one by or­
der of the Chapter. 
Chapitré, repris, checked, re­
proved. 
Chapitré, puni, châtié, correct­
ed, chastised, or punished. 
Capitulaire (m.) qui a voix en Chapitre, a Member of the Chapter.  

CHAPLER du pain, en ôter la croûte, to chip bread. 
Chaplures de pain (f.) chip­
pings of bread.  

CHAPON (m.) a capon. 
Un chapon gras, a fat capon. 
Engraisser un chapon, to fat­
ten (or cram) a capon. 
Chapon de Vigne, taillé fur le cep pour planter, a young bud of a Vine, cut off to be trans­
planted. 
Chaponner, to cut cocks, or make capons. 
Chaponné, made a capon.
 
* Chaque. V. Chacun.  

CHAR (m.) a Carr. 
Char de Trionfe, a Triumphal Charret. 
Char de parade des Dames Romaines, a hanging Waggon, such as Gentlewomen and Ladies were carried in, a Coach. 
Char ordinaire des Dames Ro­
maines, a Chariot. 
Chariot (m.) Charrete (f.) a Cart, a Waggon. 
Mangeur de Charretes ferrées, a terrible Swaggerer, or Swash-buckler, one that will kill all he sees, and eat all he kills. 
Charretée (f.) a cart-load. 
Charetée de bois, ou d'autre chose, a cart-load of wood, or the like. 
Charretier, ou Chartier (m.) a Carter; a Carr-man, a Wag­
goner. 
Il jure comme un Charretier, he swears like a Carter, or (ac­
cording to the English saying) like a Tinker. 
On dit, qu'il n'est si bon Char­
retier qui ne verse, the best Cart may overthrow, as the say­
ing is. 
Charrier quêque chose, to carry (or convey) a thing by a cart or waggon. 
Charrié, carry'd (or convey'd) by a cart or waggon. 
Charriage (m.) carriage. 
Charroi (m.) the same. 
Charron (m.) faiseur de Char­
retes, a Cart-wright, a Waggon-maker. 
Charrue (f.) the Plough. 
Le manche de la Charrue, the Plough-tail, or handle. 
Le soc de la Charrue, the Plough-share. 
Charge (f.) fardeau, a load, or a burden. 
Charge, devoir, obligation, com­
mission, duty, place, or imploy­
ment. 
Donner charge à quêcun d'une chose, to charge one with a busi­
ness, to commit a thing to his care, to give it him in charge. 
S'acquitter dignement de sa Charge, de son Office, to ac­
quit himself well of his Imploy­
ment. 
Prendre la charge de quêque chose, s'en charger, to take a thing upon himself. 
Je ne me charge de rien, I will take nothing upon me. 
Charge, Magistrature, Dignité, a great Place, Office, or Dignity. 
Posseder les premieres Charges de la Ville, to have the first Of­
fices or places of Authority in a Town or City. 
Il faut donner les Charges aux plus sages, the most sober and rational men are the fittest for great Places. 
Charges, frais, expences, dis­
bursements. 
Un Revenu de mille écus, char­
ges faites, the Revenue of a thou­
sand crowns clear. 
Etre à charge à quêcun, lui causer de la depense, to be chargeable to one, to put him to charges. 
Charge, attaque de l'Enemi, a Charge given upon the Enemy. 
Sonner la Charge, to sound the Charge. 
Aller à la Charge des Enemis, to go to charge. 
Revenir à la Charge, to return to the Charge. 
La Charge d'un fusil, mous­
quet, &c. the charge of a gun. 
Charge, accusation, charge, ac­
cusation, imputation, or fault laid to the charge of one. 
Charger, to load, to burden. 
Charger un Navire, to load a ship. 
Charger toutes les Voiles, to clap on all the sails. 
Charger quêque chose sur ses épaules, to take a thing and lay it upon his shoulders. 
Charger de viande l'estomac, to surcharge his stomack with meat. 
Charger quêcun de plusieurs crimes, to charge one with several crimes. 
Se justifier d'une faute, & en charger un autre, to clear him­
self of a fault, and charge another therewith. 
Charger l'Enemi, lui courre sus, to charge (assault, or set on) the Enemy. 
Charger un fusil, to charge a gun. 
Le charger à bale, to charge it with a bullet. 
Charger quêcun d'une affaire, lui en donner la charge, to give one charge of a thing, or to charge him with it. 
Il m'a chargé de vous aller voir de sa part, he has charged me to wait on you from him. 
Se charger d'une affaire, to take a thing upon himself. 
Se charger de la faute d'un au­
tre, to take upon himself another mans fault. 
Chargé, loaded, or laden. 
Chargé de viande, surcharged with meat. 
Chargé d'années, full of years. 
Je me suis chargé de ses dettes, I took his debts upon me. 
Un fusil chargé, a gun char­
ged. 
Couleur chargée, a very deep colour. 
Chargeoir (m.) chargeoir de poudre à mesurer la charge d'un fusil, &c. the thing out of which one charges a gun.  

CHARBON (m.) coal. 
Charbon de pierre, Sea-coal. 
Charbon de bois, char-coal. 
Charbon de bois menu, small coals. 
Charbon ardent, a glowing coal. 
Charbon éteint, a quenched fire-brand. 
Charbon de Peintre à dessiner, a piece of charcoal used by Pain­
ters to design withall. 
Charbon, ulcere enflammé, a plague sore, or carbuncle. 
Charbonner, noircir avec du charbon, to blacken with a coal.



Charbonné, blackened with a coal. 
Charbonnier (m.) faiseur ou vendeur de charbon de bois, a Coal-man, one that makes or sells char-coals. 
Charbonniere (f.) lieu où l'on fait le charbon, the place where char-coals are made. 
Charbonniere, lieu où l'on tient le Charbon, a Coal-house. 
Carbonade (f.) a carbonado, a rasher on the coals. 

† CHARCUTER, gâter une be­
songne, faute d'intelligence, to spoil a work for want of skill. 
Charcutier (m.) qui gâte une besongne par ignorance, he that spoils a work through his unskil­
fulness.  

CHARDON (m.) a thistle. 
Chardon benit, holy thistle, or blessed thistle. 
Chardon de nôtre Dame, Our Ladies thistle, white thistle, or milk thistle. 
Chardon à carder, a Fullers thi­
stle. 
Chardonneret (m.) sorte d'oiseau, a gold-finch, or thistle-finch. 
Chardonnerette (f.) sorte d'herbe, the thistly (or prickly) ar­
tichoak. 
Chardonniere (f.) lieu plein de chardons, a plot of thistles. 
Chardouse (f.) sorte d'herbe, a white herb full of prickles, in manner of little thistles, growing by the ground without any long stalk, commonly called Chamæ­
leon albus, or alba.  

CHARENSON (m) ver qui ronge les blés, the (corn-devou­
ring) mite, or weevil.
 
* Charge, & ses derivés. V. un­
der Char.

* Chariot. V. under Char.  

CHARITÉ(f.) vertu Theo­
logale, Charity, love. 
Charité, aumône, a charity, an alms. 
Charitable, charitable, boun­
tiful to the poor, liberal to the nee­
dy, merciful to those in misery, good unto all. 
Charitablement, avec amour, charitably, lovingly, bountifully. 
Charitablement, liberalement, charitably, or liberally.  

CHARIVARI (m.) huée & sonnerie qu'on fait à la porte de ceux qui se remarient, a foul and disgraceful noise made by a crue of people under the window of an old man newly married to a young wanton, in mockery of them both. 
Charivari, tintamarre de gons faisans la débauche, a rout of drunken folks. 
Ils ont fait toute la nuit un é­
trange charivari, they made a terrible rout all night long.  

CHARLATAN (m.) ven­
deur de drogues en public, a Mountebank, a Quack. 
Un Charlatan, un enjoleur, qui trompe en flatant, a flatterer, a dissembler, a cheat. 
Charlatanerie (f.) cousening or gulling speech, a high commen­
dation of a trifle to make it the more saleable.  

CHARME (m.) enchante­
ment, a charm, or inchantment. 
Charme, attrait, a charm, or at­
tractive power. 
Charme se dit des Beautés qui agissent par une vertu occulte & magique, Appas de celles qui attirent, Charme (in the French Tongue) is said of such Beauty's as act by a secret and ma­
gical power, Appas of attractive Beauties. 
Charme, sorte d'arbre, a kind of oak, plane-tree, or maple. 
Charmer, enchanter, ensor­
celer quêcun, to charm, inchaunt, or bewitch one. 
Il avoit charmé l'epée de son Enemi, he had charmed his Ene­
my's sword. 
Charmer, gagner par cares­
se, ou autrement, to charm, or to win one, to draw him on, or to bewitch him with demonstrati­
ons of kindness or otherwise. 
Se laisser charmer au Vice & au Plaisir, to give himself over to Vice and to pleasures. 
Le chant charme l'oreille & la beauté la veuë, as Musick charms the ear, so doth Beauty the sight. 
Si la Vertu se rendoit visible, ses attraits charmeroient & raviroi­
ent tout le Monde, if Virtue did make her self visible, her beauty would charm all the World. 
Charmé, charmed, inchaun­
ted, or bewitched. 
Charmeur (m.) enchanteur, a Charmer, or Inchaunter.
 
* Charnel, Charnellement, Charnier, Charnu, Charnure, & Charongne. V. Chair.  

CHARPENTE (f.) bois de charpente, ou gros bois à bâtir, timber. 
Charpente, ouvrage de gros bois, a frame of timber for a house, &c. 
Charpenter, to work Carpen­
ters work. 
Charpentier (m.) a Carpen­
ter. 
Charpenterie (f.) ouvrage de Charpente, Carpentry, Carpen­
ters work. 
Charpenterie, ou l'Art de Char­
pentier, a Carpenters Trade. 
Charpenterie, boutique de Charpentier, a Carpenters Shop or Yard.  

CHARPIR de la laine ou du lin, to towse wool or flax, to pull asunder the thick locks thereof. 
Charpis, filamens de linge usé, down of Linnen. 
Charpis pour faire du feu, tin­
der.
 
* Charrete, Charretée, Char­
retier, ou Chartier, Charrier, Charriage, Charroy, & Char­
rue. V. Char.  

CHARTRE (from the Latin Charta) a Charter. 
Chartres d'une Communauté, the Charter of a Corporation or Commonalty. 
Chartre (from Carcer) a Prison, or the darkest or worst room in a Prison, the hole, or dungeon. 
Chartre, maladie de langueur, a kind of a Consumption (and that Metaphorically from such as ha­
ving been long pent up in a close Prison look for the most part most pitifully on it.)  

CHARVI. V. Chervi.  

CHAS, ou Chaas, intervalle entre deux poutres d'un bâti­
ment, the space between beam and beam in a building. 
Chas, cole dont le Tisseran fro­
te la chaine de fil tendue sur son métier, the Weavers starch. 
Chas, desir que la Vache a du mâle, the lust of kine after the bull. 
Vache en chas, a cow that lusts after the bull.  

CHASCUN. V. Chacun.  

CHASSE de Reliques (f.) a Shrine for a Relick. 
Chassis d'un tableau, d'une Carte de Geographie, ou d'au­
tre chose semblable, a frame of wood for a picture, map, or the like.  



Chassis de papier, Chassis, or paper windows.  

CHASSE (f.) Chasse aux bêtes, hunting. 
La Chase est l'apprentissage de de la Guerre, & les premieres leçons d'un jeune Soldat, Hunt­
ing is the prenticeship of War, and the first step to Souldiery. 
Chasse aux oiseaux, fowling. 
Chien de chasse, a grey hound. 
Chasse, venaison, gibier, game. 
Faire bonne chasse, to meet with plenty of game. 
Chasse, fuite, chase, or flight. 
Donner la chasse à l'Enemi, to put the Enemy to flight, to pursue (or give chase unto) them. 
Chasse, au Jeu de paume, a chase, at Tennis. 
Il y a deux chasses, there be two chases. 
Marquer les chasses, to mark the chases. 
Gagner la chasse, to win the chase. 
Chasse, fugue de musique, a musicall fugue. 
Chasse-coquin (m.) a bea­
dle. 
Chasse-marée (m.) a Rippier, one that carries Sea-fish about the country to be sold. 
Chasse-marée, lieu où l'on gar­
de ce Poisson, the place where such fish is kept. 
Chasser, étre à la chasse, to hunt, or be a hunting. 
Chasser une bête sauvage, to hunt a wild beast. 
Chasser aux oiseaux, to fowl, or be a fowling. 
Chasser quêcun d'un lieu, to chase one, drive him (or put him) away, to expell, reject, cast him off. 
On le chassa avec des sifle­
mens & des paroles injurieuses, he was hissed out, or exploded. 
Chasser l'Enemi, le mettre en fuite, lui donner la chasse, to put the Enemi to flight, or to be in pursuit of them. 
Chasser un chien de la maison, to put a dog out of the house. 
Chasser les mouches, to drive away the flies. 
Chassé, chased, pursued, hunt­
ed after, put to flight, driven a­
way, rejected, cast off, or expel­
led out of. 
Chasseur (m.) chasseur de bêtes courantes, veneur, an hunter, an huntsman. 
Chasseur aux oiseaux, a fowler, a bird-catcher.  

CHASSIE (f.) blearedness, or blear-eyedness, a dropping, water­
ness and running of the eys, with pain shooting and redness. 
Chassieux, blear-eyed, having dropping and watery eys.
 
* Chassis. V. Chasse de Reli­
ques.  

CHASTE, chast, honest. 
Chasteté (f.) chastity, hone­
sty. 
Chastement, chastly, honest­
ly.  

CHASUBLE (f.) a Chasuble, a fashion of Cope that's open only in the sides, and is worn at Mass both by the Priest (who hath it round) and his assistants, Deacon and Sub-deacon, who have it square in the bottom.  

CHAT (m.) a cat, a puss. 
Chat sauvage, a wild cat. 
A bon Chat bon Rat, bien atta­
qué bien defendu, two men well met or matched. 
Il m'a jetté le Chat aux jam­
bes, he has hindred me, he has been a very great hindrance to me. 
L'herbe au Chat, cats mint. 
Chat-huant (m.) oiseau de nuit, an Owl, a Scritch-Owl. 
Chaton (m.) petit chat, a kitling, or young cat. 
A chatons, à quatre pates, upon all four. 
Chaton, jetton de certains ar­
bres en façon de queuë de chat, the Catkins, Cattails, aglet-like blowings or bloomings of nut-trees, &c. 
Chaton d'une bague, the beazil, or head of a ring, wherein the stone is set.  

CHATAGNE (f.) a chesnut, or chestnut. 
Grosse châtagne, marron, the great chestnut. 
Bogue (ou bourre) de châtagne, the uttermost pill (or rough) shell of chesnuts. 
Chatagne d'eau, sorte d'herbe, water-nut, saligot, or water-cal­
trop. 
Châtagnier (m.) a Chesnut-tree. 
Châtagneraie (f.) lieu plan­
té de Châtagniers, a Plot of Chesnut-trees. 
Châtain (m.) couleur de châtagne, chesnut colour.  

CHATEAU (m.) forteresse, a Castle, a Fort, or fortify'd House. 
Faire des Châteaux en Espa­
gne, to build Castles in the Air, to promise himself great (but dif­
ficult) matters. 
Châtelet (m.) petit Château, a little Castle, Fort, or Hold. 
Châtelet, Siege de Justice à Paris, a Court of Justice in Pa­
ris. 
Châtelain (m.) Seigneur Ju­
sticier aiant Château, a Lord Castellain, the Lord or Owner of a Castle, or of a fortify'd House. 
Châtelain, Juge en la Jurisdi­
ction du Seigneur Châtelain, the Judge of a Castle, or of a Town that hath or has had a Ca­
stle in it. 
Châtelainie (f.) the Tenure, or Honour af a Castleship, the Estate, Jurisdiction, or Dignity of a Lord Castellain. 

† CHATEMITE, dissimulé, a dissembler, an hypocrite.
 
* Chat-huant. V. Chat.  

CHATIER, punir, to chastise, punish, or correct. 
Qui bien aime bien châtie, he that loves truly payes home when he punishes. 
Châtié, puni, chastised, puni­
shed, or corrected. 
Etre châtié de sa faute, to be cha­
stised for his fault. 
Vous serez châtié de vôtre Pere, your Father will correct you, or, you shall be corrected by your Father. 
Châtiment (m.) chastisement, punishment, correction. 
Un châtiment severe, a severe punishment. 
Je ne laisserai pas cette faute sans châtiment, I shall not let that fault go unpunished.
 
* Chaton. V. Chat.  

CHATOUILLER, to tic­
kle. 
Chatouiller quêcun pour le fai­
re rire, to tickle one to make him laugh. 
Il se chatouille pour se faire ri­
re, he is fond or wanton, he forges idle jeasts for himself to laugh at, if others will not. 
Chatouiller par ses discours les oreilles de quêcun, to tickle ones ears by discourse, to stater him, to please him with fair words. 
Chatouillé, tickled.
Il fut si bien chatouillé qu'il en mourut, he was so well tickled that  



he died of it, he was tickled to death. 
Chatouillé, slatté, flattered, plea­
sed with praise. 
Chatouillement (m.) a tick­
ling, a stirring, a pleasant mo­
ving. 
Les chatouillemens de la Chàir, the pleasures of the Flesh. 
Chatouilleux, qui ne peutsoû­
frir qu'on le chatouille, ticklish. 
Chatouilleux, dangereux, tick­
lish, or dangerous.  

CHATRER, to geld, spay, or cut off the stones. 
Châtrer un agneau, to geld a lamb. 
Châtrer les ruches des abeilles, en oter les gaufres de miel, to take the honey out of the bees hives. 
Châtrer les arbres fruitiers, les trouër par le pié pour en tirer l'humeur nuisible, to pierce fruit­
full trees at the foot, thereby to make them void the ill humours which are in their stock and bran­
ches. 
Châtrer un cep de Vigne, cou­
per les rejettons qui croissent par le pié, to cut off the superflu­
ous buds or twigs that grow at the Vines foot. 
Châtré, gelt, or gelded. 
Châtrure (f.) the art (or man­
ner) of gelding.

† CHAUCHER, fourrer de­
dans en pressant, to thurst in hard.
 
* Chaud, Chaudement, Chau­
diere, Chaudron, Chaudronier. V. Chaleur.

* Chaufer, Chaufé, Chaufage, Chaufement, Chauffe-cire, Chaufferir, & Chauffe-panse. V. under Chaleur.

* Chaufour, Chaufournier. V. Chaux.  

CHAUME (f.) paille de blé, straw, or the stem of corn.  

CHAUSSEE, digue (f.) a Causey.  

CHAUSSER, Chausser ses souliers, to put one his shoo's. 
Chausser quêcun, to help one to put his shoo's on. 
Chausser quêcun, étre son Cor­
donnier, to serve (or furnish) one with shoo's, to be his shoo-maker. 
Chausser les éperons à quêcun, le presser, le mal mener, to re­
duce one to straits, to do him an ill turn, or bad office. 
Chaussé, shod. 
Etre mal chaussé, to be ill shod. 
Chausses, (f.) hose, breeches, or a pair of breeches. 
Chausses à la Suisse, Swiss bree­
ches. 
Chaussos à l'Espagnole, Spanish breeches. 
Chausse-pié (m.) a shooing horn. 
Chausse-trape (f.) a caltrop, an iron engine of War made with four pricks or sharp points, whereof one (howsoever it is cast) ever stands upward. 
Chausson (m.) a sock. 
Une paire de chaussons, a pair of socks. 
Chaussure (f.) tout ce qui sert à couvrir les piés, any thing that serves to cover ones feet.  

CHAUVE, bald, bald-pa­
ted. 
Chauve-souri (f.) a batt. 
Chauveté, (or rather) Calvi­
tie (f.) baldness.  

CHAUX (f.) chaux vive, lime. 
Fuser la chaux, to slake lime. 
Une muraille à chaux & à sable, a wall done together with lime mingled with sand. 
Chaufour (m.) four à chaux, a lime kill. 
Chaufournier (m.) qui fait la chaux, a lime maker, or lime bur­
ner.  

CHEF (m.) tête, head. 
Il n'a pas fait cela de son chef, he did not do it of his own head. 
Vous ajoûtez cela de vôtre chef, you add that of your own ac­
cord. 
Mettre à chef une entreprise, to drive a business to a head. 
Gouverneur en chef, a chief (or principal) Governour. 
Fief en chef, a Fief held in capi­
te. 
Blaspheme en premier chef, a blasphemy, an opprobrious & horri­
ble reviling of God. 
Crime de leze Majesté en pre­
mier chef, a Treason against the Person of his Prince. 
Chef d'oeuvre, a master-piece, a piece of rare workmanship. 
Chef d'oeuvre d'un Apprentif pour passer Maitre en son Art, a triall piece of work of an Ap­
prentice when he comes to be Ma­
ster. 
Le Chef d'une Assemblée, the chief man (or head man) of an As­
sembly. 
Chef d'Armée, a Head, or prin­
cipall Commander of an Army. 
Chef d'une entreprise, the Au­
thor or the chief manager of a De­
sign.  

CHELIDOINE (f.) sorte d'herbe, the herb Celandine.  

CHEMIN (m.) a way. 
Le grand chemin, the high way, the kings high way: a road. 
Chemin battu, frequenté, a bea­
ten way. 
Chemin fourchu, rencontré de deux chemins, a way having two paths. 
Chemin racourci, a short way a­
bout. 
Chemin écarté, a long way a­
bout. 
Chemin libre & facile, an easy way. 
Chemin fermé, a way that cannot be passed, or gone through. 
Chemin large & découvert, a broad and open way. 
Chemin étroit, a narrow way. 
Chemin dangereux, a dangerous way. 
Un beau chemin, a good way. 
Un mauvais chemin, a bad way. 
Chemin bouëux, chemin rompu par les eaux, a dirty way, a deep way. 
Chemin dont on ne se peut tirer, dont on ne peut sortir, par où nul ne sauroit passer, a way so very deep that none can travel it. 
Chemin rude, pierreux, a hard and stony way. 
Chemin glissant, a slippery way. 
Chemin glacé, chemin tout couvert de neige, a frosty way, a way covered with Snow. 
Chemin embarassé de brossail­
les, a way full of thorn bushes. 
Chemin qui mene à la Ville, a way that leads into the Town. 
Un chemin tournoiant, a win­
ding way. 
Se mettre en chemin, to begin his journey. 
Prendre (ou aller) le droit che­
min, to go the right way. 
Suivre le grand chemin, to keep the high way, to follow the beaten road. 
Poursuivre son chemin, to go on in his way. 
Prendre (tenir) le même chemin, to go the same way.
S'égarer (s'écarter) du chemin,  



to go from the right way. 
Demander le chemin pour al­
ler en quêque lieu, to ask the way to some place. 
Montrer à quêcun le chemin, to shew one the right way. 
Remettre en chemin celui qui s'en étoit egaré, to put one into the right way. 
Fraier le chemin, to go before, or to shew the way. 
Reprendre son chemin, to come again into the right way. 
On peut aller de France en Ita­
lie par deux chemins, one may go from France to Italy two severall ways. 
Aller à moitié chemin, to go half way. 
Il se fait un chemin à part, il ne suit point le grand chemin, he takes a particular course, he do's not follow the common way? 
Voiez vous le chemin qu'il prend pour se rendre le Mai­
tre? do you see what course he takes to become Master? 
Socrate disoit, qu'il n'y avoit point de chemin plus court, ni de moien plus aise pour acquerir de la gloire, que de tâcher d'étre tel qu on voudroit étre estimé, Socrates used to say, that there was no shorter way, or better course to get fame, than to indeavour to be such as one would be thought to be. 
S'ouvrir (se fraier) le chemin, se faire voie en quêque lieu, to make way for himself. 
Cheminer, to go, to walk. 
Chemineur (m.) grand che­
mineur, one that go's very much a foot.  

CHEMINEE (f.) a Chim­
ney. 
Canal de cheminée, the tunnel of a Chimney. 
Manteau de cheminée, the man­
tle tree of a Chimney. 
Ramonneur de Cheminée, a Chimney-sweeper.  

CHEMISE (f.) chemise d'homme, a shirt, a shift. 
Chemise de femme, a smock, shift, or change. 
Chemise blanche d'homme, a clean shirt. 
Chemise blanche de femme, a clean smock. 
Chemise sale, a foul shirt, or a foul smock. 
Nud, en chemise, that has nothing but his shirt on. 
Chemisette (f.) a wast-coat.  

CHENE (m.) sorte d'arbre, an oak. 
Chênaie (f.) bôcage de Che­
nes, a grove of Oaks.
 
* Cheneviere. & Chenevote. V. Chanvre.

* Chenet, Chenil, ou'Chenin. V. Chien.  

CHENILLE (f) a palmer, or canker-worm. 

† CHENU, blanc, qui a les che­
veux blancs, gray, hoary, or white-headed.
Chenure (f.) hoariness, white­
ness, or grayness of old age. 

† CHEOIR. V. Choir.  

CHER, de grand valeur, dear. 
Cela est trop cher, that's too dear. 
Les choses sont cheres quand elles sont rares, things are dear when the same are scarce. 
L'Honneur & la Vie sont les deux choses que nous avons de plus cher? Reputation and Life are the two dearest things we have. 
Cher, aimé cherement, dear, or dearly beloved. 
Mon cher Ami, my dear Friend. 
Cherir quêcun, l'aimer com­
me un cher Ami, to cherish one, to love him dearly, tenderly. 
Cheri, cherished, dearly belo­
ved. 
Cherement, affectueusement, dearly, intirely, tenderly. 
Cherté (f.) dearness, dearth, scarcity, want of. 
Cherté de vivres, dearness of vi­
ctualls.  

CHERCHER, chercher quêque chose, to seek, search, or look for somthing. 
Je l'ai cherché par tout, mais je n'ai pû le trouver, I have looked for it every where, but I could find it no where. 
Chercher la Verité, to seek for the Truth. 
Ne chercher que ses Interets, to mind nothing but his Pro­
fit. 
Chercher des détours to seek out by-ways. 
Cherché, sought, searched, or lookt for. 
Chercheur (m.) celui qui cherche, a seeker, searcher, or he that looks for a thing.  

CHERE (f.) traitement de table, cheer, or diet. 
Faire bonne chere, to live well, to keep a good table. 
Faire bonne chere, se réjouir, to make great cheer, to be mer­
ry. 
Un homme qui se plait à la bonne chere, qui fait toûjours bonne chere, a man that loves to live plentifully. 
Faire bonne chere à quêcun, to give one a good treat, to intertain him kindly and plentifully. 
Pauvre chere, mauvaise chere, maigre chere, pitifull, poor, or course cheer. 
Faire pauvre chere, to live bare­
ly, feed meanly, make but poor or course cheer. 
Faire pauvre chere à quêcun, to intertain one but poorly, to make him pitifull cheer.

* Cherir, Cherement, & Cher­
té. V. Cher.  

CHERUBIN (m.) a Cheru­
bin, one of the holy Orders of An­
gels.  

CHERVI (m.) sorte d'her­
be, the herb skirret, or sker­
wort.  

CHESNE. V. Chêne.  

CHETIF, poor, paultry, piti­
full. 
Chetivement, poorly, pitiful­
ly.  

CHEVAL (m.) a horse. 
La tête d'un Cheval, the horses head. 
L'encolure d'un cheval, the neck of an horse. 
Le crin d'un Cheval, the mane of a horse. 
Les piés d'un cheval, the feet. 
Un fer de cheval, a horse-shoo; also a small pulse so called. 
Queuë de cheval, a horses tail, also an herb so called. 
Cheval hongre, châtré, a gel­
ding. 
Cheval étalon, cheval de ha­
ras, a stallion. 
Cheval nain, a nag. 
Cheval de selle, a saddle horse. 
Cheval de service, a great horse, a horse of service. 
Cheval de course, coursier, a race horse. 
Cheval de prix, a stately fine horse. 
Cheval de change, ou de main, a led horse. 
Cheval de parade, a stately horse.



Cheval de poste, a Post-horse. 
Cheval de Guerre, Cheval d'Armes, a War-horse. 
Cheval de relais, a stage-horse. 
Cheval de louage, a hackney-horse. 
Cheval de trait, ou d'attelage, a draught horse. 
Cheval de charrete, a cart horse. 
Cheval de Carosse, a Coach-horse. 
Cheval de charge, a sumpter-horse. 
Cheval sort en bouche, qui a la bouche egarée, a hard mouthed horse. 
Cheval qui rue, qui regimbe, a horse that flingeth, striketh, or yer­
keth out behind. 
Cheval de pas, a pacing horse. 
Cheval qui va de grand train, a horse that go's a great pace. 
Cheval ombrageux, a skittish (or a startish) horse. 
Cheval qui bronche, a stumbling horse. 
Cheval de trot, a trotting horse. 
Cheval qui se couche, a horse that is apt to ly down. 
Cheval poussif, a pursy horse. 
Cheval bondissant, a horse apt to bound up. 
Aller à Cheval, to go on horse-back. 
Monter à cheval, to mount, to get upon horse back. 
Etre (se tenir) bien à cheval, to ride with a good grace. 
Se battre à cheval, to fight on horse back. 
Pousser (lancer, piquer) son Cheval, to spur his horse, and to give him the head. 
Descendre de cheval, to get off of his horse. 
Un Etable à Chevaux, a Horse Stable. 
Chevaux, Cavalerie, Horse, Ca­
valry. 
Il avoit mille Fantassins & deux mille Chevaux, he had a thousand foot and two thousand horse. 
Un Chevau leger, a light horse. 
Une Compagnie de Chevaux legers, a Company of light horse. 
Un Cheval marin, a Sea horse. 
Cavalle (f.) Jument, a Mare. 
Cavalier (m.) homme de Cheval, a horseman. 
Cavalier, homme vaillant, a gallant, noble, or worthy man. 
Cavalier, Plateforme, lieu ele­
vé pour loger l'Artillerie, a high Platform to plant great pieces on. 
Battre en Cavalier, to beat down the Walls of a Town with Can­
nons planted upon a high Plat­
form. 
Cavalerie (f.) gens de Che­
val, horsemen, horse, or caval­
ry. 
General de Cavalerie, a General of the horse. 
Capitaine de Cavalerie, a Cap­
tain of a Troop of Horse. 
Compagnie de Cavalerie, a Troop of horse. 
Cavalcade (f.) a Cavalcade, or Riding. 
Chevalet (m.) Chevalet de bois, a wooden horse. 
Chevalet de lut, de viole, & de semblables instrumens, dont il soûtient les cordes, the bridge of a Lute, Viol, &c. 
Chevalier (m.) Chevalier d'un Ordre de Chevalerie, a Knight, one of the Order of Knight hood. 
Creer (faire) un Chevalier, to dub (or make) a Knight, to Knight-one. 
Chevalier du S. Esprit, a Knight of the Order of the holy Ghost. 
Chevalier de S. Michel, a Knight of the Order of St. Mi­
chael. 
Chevalier de Malthe, a knight of Maltha. 
Chevalier du Guet, the Captain of the Watch. 
Chevalerie (f.) Ordre ou Dignité de Chevalier. Knight­
hood. 
Chevaucher, to swive. 
Chevaucheur (m.) a swiver. 
Chevaucherie (f.) a swiving.
 
* Chevelu, & Chevelure. V. Cheveu.  

CHEVET (m.) traversin de lit, a boulster. 
Chevet, la plus haute partie du lit, the beds head. 

† CHEVETRE. V. Licoû.  

CHEVEU, hair, the hair of a mans or womans head. 
De longs cheveux, long hairs. 
Des cheveux courts, short hair. 
Se peigner les cheveux, to comb his head. 
Se friser les cheveux, to curl his hair. 
Fer, avec quoi l'on frise les cheveux, a curling iron. 
Boucles de cheveux, hair-curls. 
Laisser croître ses cheveux, to let his hair grow. 
Agencer ses cheveux, to put his hair in order. 
Faire les cheveux à quêcun, to cut ones hair. 
Se faire faire les cheveux, to get his hair cut. 
Chevelu, hairy, or full of hair. 
Chevelure (f.) longue cheve­
lure, long hair.  

CHEVILLE (f.) a peg, or pin of wood. 
Pour chaque trou il a une che­
ville, for every fault he hath an excuse, for each objection an an­
swer, for any mischief a remedy, help, or evasion. 
Cheville du pié, the ankle­
bone. 
Cheville dans un Vers, mot qui ne signifie rien, & qui ne sert qu'a remplir la mesure du vers, a botch in a verse. 
Cheviller quêque chose, to peg or pin somthing, to fasten it with pegs, or joyn it with pins. 
Chevillé (en termes de Venerie) furnished, set, or pinned. 
Tête de Cerf bien chevillée, a Stags head well furnished. 
Chevillure (f.) cornichons de perche de Cerf, the broches of a Deers head, all the pegs above the two lowest.  

CHEVRE (f.) sorte d'ani­
mal, a she goat. 
Etable à chevres, a Goats sta­
ble. 
Berger de Chevre, a Goat-herd. 
Barbe de Chevre, a goats beard. 
Pié de Chevre, sorte de base, a lever pointed like a goats foot. 
Chevreau (m.) a kid. 
Chevrotin (m.) peau de che­
vreau, kids leather. 
Chevreter, to kid, or bring forth young kids. 
Chevreuil (m.) Chevre sau­
vage, a wild goat. 
Chevrefeuille (f.) sorte d'ar­
brisseau, the Wood-bind, or Ho­
ney suckle.



Chevron (m.) a rafter.
 
* Cheute. V. Chûte, under Choir.  

CHEZ, at, to. 
Monsieur, je vous prie de ve­
nir souper chez moi, Sir, I de­
sire you, to take a supper at my house. 
Se porte-t-on bien chez vous? are all well at your house? 
Je m'en allois chez vous, I was a going to your house. 
Je m'en vai chez mon frere, I am a going to my brothers house. 
De chez; as,
Il sort de chez sa Soeur, he is just gone from his Sisters house.  

CHEZE (f.) étendue de terre hors du Fossé autour d'une Maison noble tenue en fief, a certain space of ground lying next without the ditches of a Noblemans Castle.  

CHICANE, Chicanerie, en matiere de procez (f.) litigious (or crafty) pleading, the perplexing of a Cause with tricks, or the peste­
ring thereof with subtile (but im­
pertinent) words. 
Chicaner, en fait de procez, to spoil or perplex a Cause with crafty, base, and litigious plea­
ding. 
Chicaner, contester pour une chose de neant, to wrangle about a trifle. 
Chicaner quêcun, to exasperate a man by wrangling and cavil­
ling. 
Chicaneur (m.) qui use de chicane en fait de Procez, a wrangling Atturney, a Pettifogger, a busy (crafty, litigious, and ver­
ball) follower of Causes. 
Chicaneur, qui se plait a plai­
der, a litigious man, a man that loves to bring others to trou­
bles. 
Chicaneur dans ses discours, one that loves in discourse to be ever contradicting.  

CHICHE, taquin, niggardly, near, miserable, pinching, sparing, hard, strait-handed. 
Un homme chiche n'est jamais riche, the niggard is never (in his opinion) rich. 
Le depensier prodigue ce que le chiche épargne, that which the miser spares the waster spends. 
Un Chiche, a wretch, pinch-penny, penny-father, one that would not part with the paring of his nails. 
Chiche, pois chiche, sorte de le­
gume, chich-pease, a pulse that's somwhat less than the ordinary small pease. 
Chicheté (f.) niggardliness, misery, hardness, pinching. 
Chichement, miserably, nig­
gardly, hardly, covetously, with a strait (or close) hand.  

CHICOREE (f.) sorte d'herbe, the herb called Succo­
ry.  

CHIEN (m.) sorte d'animal, a dog. 
Chien de chasse à poil, any hound. 
Chien à plume, de chasse de bête de plume, a Spaniel. 
Chien courant, ou allant, a great hound, a buck-hound. 
Chien couchant, a setting dog. 
Chien quêtant, chien limier, a bloud-hound, or lime-hound. 
Chien de Village, un mâtin, a mastif dog. 
Chien de Berger, a Shepheards dog. 
Chien de Boucher, a Butchers dog. 
Chien de Demoiselle, a lap-dog, a little dog. 
Un Chien enragé, a mad dog. 
Chien échaudé craint l'eau froide, the scalded dog fears even cold water, or (as the English has it) a burnt child dreads the fire. 
Un Chien hargneux, a toû­
jours les oreilles déchirées, a common brabbler comes by many a knock, quarrelsom lads are seldom without black eyes, broken pates, or scratched faces. 
Chien qui abboie ne mord pas, the dog that barks much bites but little, a great prater is a weak per­
former. 
Chien sur son fumier est hardi, a Dog (or, according to the English, a Cock) is valiant on his own dung­
hill. 
Deux Chiens ne s'accordent point à un os, two dogs never agree about a bone. 
A méchant chien court lien, a froward our must be ty'd short. 
Quand un Chien se noie chacun lui offre à boire, when a Dog is a drowning every one offers him drink. 
Pendant que les Chiens s'entre-grondent le Loup devore la Brebis, while Churchmen brab­
ble Satan feeds on Souls. 
Entre Chien & Loup, in twi­
light, when a man can hardly dis­
cern a Dog from a Wolf. 
Chien de Mer, a Sea-Dog. 
Chien d'arme à feu, the Snap-haunse of a gun. 
Langue de Chien, sorte d'her­
be, the herb Dogs-tongue, Hounds-tongue, or Hounds piss. 
Chienne (f.) a bitch. 
Chiennée, ou Mort aux Chi­
ens (f.) sorte d'herbe, the herb Dogs-bane, or meadow-saffron. 
Chien-dent, dogs grass, couch-grass, or quitch grass. 
Chenet (m.) landier, a dog, or little and iron to hold up the wood. 
Chenil, Chenin (m.) lieu où l'on tient les Chiens, a dog-ken­
nel. 
Chiennerie (f.) a nasty trick.  

CHIER, to shite, to scum­
mer. 
Chieur (m.) a shiter, he that shites. 

† CHIFLER. V. Sifler.  

CHIFFON (m.) a little clout, rag, or piece of over-worn stuff.  

CHIFFRE (m.) marque a­
rithmetique, a cypher, a figure, or number. 
Chiffre, caractere secret, a strange character, figure, or form of writing, not easily understood by any but him that invented it, and such as he has acquainted with it. 
Chiffre, ou enlassement de let­
tres, a Cypher, or two letters standing for a name, and joyned together with a flourish. 
Chiffrer, conter en chiffrant, to calculate, or examine an ac­
count by cyphering. 
Chiffrer une Lettre, l'écrire en des caracteres secrets, to write a Letter in cyphers, to express his meaning in strange and unknown characters. 
Chiffré, calculated, or exami­
ned by cyphering. 
Lettre chiffrée, écrite en chif­
fres, a Letter written in cyphers, or in strange and unknown cha­
racters. 
Chiffreur (m.) one that calcu­
lates, or examines an account by cyphering.

CHIGNON (m.) le chignon  



du coû, the nape of the neck.

† CHIMAGREE. V. Cima­
grée.  

CHIMERE (f.) Monstre fa­
buleux, Chimera, a fictitious Monster so called. 
Chimere, sottise, ou folle ima­
gination, a Chimera, an idle con­
ceit or fancy. 
Chimerique, imaginaire, chi­
merical, imaginary, that has no other being but in mens fancy.  

CHIORME, ou Chiourme (f.) forçats de Galere, the whole company of Slaves or Rowers in a Galley.  

CHIPOTER, chicaner, bar­
guigner, to wrangle (dodge, or hag­
gle) about a small trifle.  

CHIQUENAUDE (f.) a fil­
lip. 
Donner une chiquenaude à quêcun, to fillip one.  

CHIROMANCE, ou Chi­
romancie (f.) l'art de deviner par l'inspection de la main, Pal­
mestry, a guessing at ones fortune by the marks or making of his hand. 
Chiromancien (m.) a Palme­
ster, a Fortune-teller.  

CHIRURGIE (f.) Surgery, or the art of Surgery. 
Chirurgien (m.) a Surgeon.  

CHOC (m.) heurtement a­
vec roideur, the dashing, knock­
ing, or violent encounter of bodies one against another. 
Choc de deux Vaisseaux de Mer, a violent running or dash­
ing of two Ships one against an­
other. 
Choc de deux Escadrons, a shock (or an incounter) of two Squadrons fighting one against an­
other. 
Au premier choc, at the first on­
set, or brunt. 
Soûtenir le choc des Enemis, to stand the shook (or sustain the first brunt) of the Enemy. 
Le tonnerre se fait du choc des Nues, thunder is made by the collision or clashing of the clouds together. 
Choquer, heurter rudement contre quêque chose, violently to dash against something. 
Choquer l'Enemi, lui courre sus, to fall impetuously upon the Enemy. 
Les Armées se choquent, the Armies are ingaged, are fighting. 
Ces choses se choquent, these things clash. 
Choquer quêcun, l'offenser, to offend, wrong, injure, or abuse one. 
Ce mot choque mes oreilles, that word grates (or sounds hard to) my ear. 
Je ne choquerai pas vos oreilles, I won't offend your ears. 
Vous choquez son Autorité, you impair his Authority. 
Cela choque la Raison, that's contrary to Reason. 
Cette raison choque ce que vous dites, this reason contradicts what you say. 
Choqué, offensé, offended, wronged, abused. 
Il en a eté fort choqué, il s'en est fort choqué, he was much of­
fended at it.  

CHOCOLAT (m.) choco­
late.  

CHOEUR (m.) le Lieu où se mettent ceux qui chantent dans une Eglise, the Quire of a Church. 
Enfant de Choeur, a young Quiri­
ster, a Singing boy. 
Choeur de Musique, a Company of Singers. 

† CHOIR, ou tomber, to fall. 
Chûte (f.) a fall. 
Chûte d'eau, a fall of water. 
La Chûte d'Adam, Adams fall.  

CHOIN (m.) pierre de vive roche, qui peut étre polie com­
me le marbre, a certain stone ta­
ken out of a rock, which may be polished as marble.  

CHOIS (m.) pouvoir d'ac­
cepter ou de refuser quêque chose, choice. 
Faire chois de quêque chose, to make choice of a thing. 
Faire chois des mots en écri­
vant, to pick out the choicest words in writing. 
Si j'en avois le chois, if it were in my choice. 
Je vous donne le chois, I give you to chuse. 
Je le laisse à vôtre chois, I leave that to your choice. 
Chois, election, a choice, or ele­
ction. 
Chois des Juges, an election of the Judges. 
Choisir, to chuse, to pick out, to fix upon. 
Quand on emprunte on ne choi­
sit pas, borrowers must not be chusers. 
Il m'a donné la liberté de choi­
sir ce que je voudrai, he has gi­
ven me the liberty to chuse what I please. 
Choisir un genre de vie, to fix upon a course of life. 
Choisir un Magistrat d'entre les Bourgeois, to chuse a Magistrate among the Citizens. 
Il l'a choisi pour Heritier de l'Empire, he has made choice of him to succeed him in the Em­
pire.  

CHOMMER, Chommer les Fêtes, to keep holy dayes, to cease from work on holy dayes.  

CHOPER contre quêque chose, to run against a thing, to stumble at it. 
Choper, faillir, to err. 
Faire choper quêcun, to bring one into an errour. 
Chopement (m.) a stumbling, or running against something.  

CHOPINE (f.) the Parisian half pint, almost as big as our whole one. 
Chopiner, boire souvent, to tipple, quaff, swill, ply the pot, drink all day.
 
* Choquer, & Choqué. V. Choc.  

CHOROGRAPHIE (f.) de­
scription d'une Place, Choro­
graphy, or a description of a Place. 
Chorographique, chorographi­
cal.  

CHOSE (f.) a thing, matter, affair, or business. 
Une chose de grande impor­
tance, a thing of great moment. 
Une chose difficile, a hard mat­
ter. 
Nous devons tenir souvent pour impossibles les choses qui sont fort difficiles, things very diffi­
cult should be lookt upon sometimes as impossible.  

CHOU (m.) sorte d'herbe, colewort. 
Chou cabus, ou pommé, cab­
bage, or white colewort. 
Il en fait ses choux gras, he gets well by it, he makes his advantage of it. 
Rejettons de vieux chous, the young sprouts of coleworts. 
Chou-fleur, colly-flowers.  

CHOUCAS (m.) sorte de Corneille, a Chough, a kind of Raven.  

CHOUETTE (f.) Oiseau de nuit, an Owl.  

CHREME (f.) huile sacrée, crisom, the holy oyl wherewith a  



baptised child is anointed in the Roman Church.
Chrêmeau (m.) a fore-head cloth anointed with holy oyl and put on the head of the child.  

CHRIST, le Redempteur du Monde (m) Christ, the Redeem­
er of the World. 
Chrêtien, Christian. 
L'Eglise Chrêstienne, the Chri­
stian Church. 
La Doctrine Chrêtienne, the Christian Doctrine, the Christian Faith. 
Poire bon Chrêtien, good Chri­
stian pear. 
Un Chrêtien, a Christian. 
Les Chrêtiens & les Infidelles, the Christians and the Infidels. 
Se faire Chrêtien, to turn a Christian, to become a Christi­
an. 
Chrêtiennement, en Chrêti­
en, Christian-like, or like a Chri­
stian. 
Chrêtienté (f.) Christendom. 
Il n'est rien de tel dans toute la Chrêtienté, there is no such thing in all Christendom. 
Christianisme (m.) Christia­
nity, Christian Doctrine or Pro­
fession.  

CHROMATIQUE, Chro­
matick. 
Musique chromatique, Chroma­
tick Musick, an exquisite sort of Musick.  

CHRONIQUE (f.) a Chro­
nicle, a general or yearly Relation of the chief matters hapned in a Country. 
Chroniqueur (m.) écrivain d'Annales, a Chronicler, Annalist, or Historiographer. 
Chronographie (f.) Chrono­
graphy, or a description of the times. 
Chronologie (f.) Chronology, a description, or a numbering of times.  

CHRYSOLITE (f.) pierre precieuse, a Chrysolite, a kind of Jasper of a golden lustre or co­
lour.  

CHUCHETER, to whisper. 
Chucheter à l'oreille de quê­
cun, to whisper in ones ear.
 
* Chûte. V. under Choir.  

CHYLE (m.) le suc auquel se change la viande apres la premiere concoction qui se fait dans l'estomac, the chylus, or white juyce of digested meat, the matter whereof our bloud is made.  

CHYMIE (f.) Chymistry, the art of refining and extracting me­
tals and minerals. 
Chymique, Chymical. 
Chymiste (m.) a Chymist.

  
C I
CI, a Particle sometimes ad­
ded to a demonstrative Pronoun, as, Celui ci, Celle ci. V. under Ce.  

CIBOIRE (m.) vase sacré parmi les Papistes, the box where­
in the Sacrament is put and kept in Popish Churches.  

CIBOULE (f.) petit oignon, a chibbol.  

CICATRICE (f.) a cica­
trice, a scar, a skin bred upon a wound, sore, or ulcer. 
Cicatrice d'un fer chaud, a mark with a hot iron. 
Cicatriser, to cicatrize, skin, or bring to a skin, to scar, or heal up a scar. 
Cicatrisé, couvert de cica­
trices, full of scars, that bears a­
bout him the marks of many wounds.  

CICEROLE (f.) espece de pois, chichling, a sort of pease.  

† CICOREE. V. Chicorée.  

CICUTAIRE (f.) sorte d'herbe, an herb called Mockervil, Kex, or Ass-parsley.  

CIDRE (m.) vin de pom­
me, cider, drink made of ap­
ples.  

CIEL (m.) Heaven. 
Ciel de lit, the testern of a bed. 
Pante de ciel de lit, the vallan­
ces of a bed. 
Cieux, (in the plural number) the heavens. 
Celeste, celestial, heavenly, divine. 
Les Esprits Celestes, the Saints which do inhabit the Heaven.  

CIERGE (m.) a big wax-candle.  

CIGALE (f.) a kind of grass­
hopper; a thick, bread-headed, and mouthless fly, which usually sits on trees, and sings after her screaking fashion both day and night. She lives only by the dew of heaven, which she draws into her by certain tongue-like prick­
les placed on her breast.  

CIGNE (m.) sorte d'oiseau, a Swan.  

CIGOGNE (f.) sorte d'oi­
seau, a Stork.  

CIGUE (f.) herbe venimeuse, an herb much like our hemlock. The juice of it, through extream cold, is poyson, and therefore the Athenians used it to kill men in common executions.  

CIL (m.) poil des paupieres, the hair of the brows. 
Ciller les yeux, to shut his eys. 
Ciller les yeux à quêcun, to blindfold one. 
Ciller l'Oiseau de proie, lui fer­
mer les yeux avec un filet de soie faute de chaperon, to seel a hawk. 
Cillé, blindfolded, seeled.  

CIMAGRÉE (f.) a wry mouth, a grimasse.  

CIMARRE (f.) sorte de manteau de femme, a kind of mantle for women.  

CIMBALE. V. Cymbale.  

CIME (f.) croupe de mon­
tagne, the top of a mountain. 
La Cime d'un arbre, the top of a tree.  

CIMENT (m.) ciment com­
mun de chaux & de sable, mor­
ter, morter made of lime and sand. 
Ciment fait de chaux fusée dans le vin, & pêtrie avec du lard fondu & des figues fraiches, cement, a strong and cleaving morter made of lime slaked in wine, and mixt with melted lard and new figs. 
Cimenter, to cement, to joyn to­
gether with cement. 
Cimenter une amitié par une alliance, to cement a friend­
ship by alliance. 
Cimenté, cemented, or joyned by cement.  

CIMETERRE (m.) sabre, a Simitar, a kind of short and crooked Sword much in use among the Turks.  

CIMETIERE (m.) a Church­
yard. 
La Toux du Cimetiere, the Church yard cough.  

CIMIER (m.) grande piece de chair, comme une longe de Veau, levée sur le dos du Cerf, a great piece of flesh, like a loyn of Veal, taken off of a Stags chine.  

CINGE. V. Singe.  

CINGLER, en navigeant, to sail.  

CINNABRE (m.) couleur  



rouge, cinoper, vermilion, sanguina­
ry. The same is either natural, or ar­
tificiall. The natural is a soft, red, and heavy stone found in mines. The artificial, which is more com­
mon and better coloured, is made of calcinated Sulphur and Quick-silver.  

CINNAME, aromate sem­
blable à la canelle, a sweet smelling spice much like cinnamon.  

CINQ, five. 
Cinq fois, five times. 
Il y a cinq ans, it is five years ago. 
Il a cinq ans, he is five years old. 
Cinq à la fois, five together, or five at once. 
Divisé en cinq, divided into five. 
Vint & cinq, trente cinq, &c. five and twenty, five and thir­
ty, &c. 
Cinq cens, five hundred. 
Cinq mille, five thousand. 
Cinq cent mille, five hundred thousand. 
Cinquiéme, fifth. 
Le Chapitre cinquiéme, the fifth Chapter. 
En cinquiéme lieu, fifthly, or in the fifth place. 
Cinquante, fifty. 
Cinquantaine (f.) the num­
ber of fifty. 
Cinquantenier (m.) com­
mandant à cinquante hommes, a Commander of fifty men. 
Cinquantiéme, fiftieth.  

CINTRE (m.) arcade de bois sur quoi l'on bâtit les vou­
tes, a Centry (or mould) for an Arch, the frame of wood whereon it is built, and whereby it is up­
held in the building. 
Cintrer, to mould an Arch, to build it on (or in the building to uphold it with) a Centry or frame of timber. 
Cintré, moulded as an Arch, or built on a Centry or frame of timber.
 
* Cirage. V. Cire.  

CIRCONCIRE un enfant, to circumcise a child, to cut off his fore-skin. 
Circoncis, circumcised. 
Circoncision (f.) the circum­
cision, or cutting of the fore-skin.  

CIRCONFERENCE (f.) a ci cumference, or compass of a thing.  

CIRCONFLEXE, accent Circonflexe, a circumflex accent.  

CIRCONLOCUTION (f.) a circumlocution, a tedious para­
phrase or description, a going a­
bout the bush in words.  

CIRCONSPECT, prudent, wary, wise, prudent, circumspect, which advisedly considers what he ought (or what he hath) to do. 
Circonspection (f.) circum­
spection, wariness, or due conside­
ration. 
Avec beaucoup de circonspecti­
on, circumspectly, wisely, warily.  

CIRCONSTANCE (f.) a circumstance, that which go's a­
long with the thing, as time, place, person, &c. 
Une chose considerée dans ses circonstances, a thing considered with all its circumstances. 
Circonstancier une affaire, to tell the circumstances of a busi­
ness. 
Circonstancié, circumstanced, furnished with circumstances.  

CIRCONVALLATION (f.) circumvallation. 
Faire la circonvallation d'une Place, to make the circumvalla­
tion of a Place.  

CIRCONVENIR quêcun, le tromper, l'attraper par sur­
prise, to circumvent, or cozen one, to deceive, or intrap him. 
Circonvenu, circumvented, co­
zened. 
Circonvention, tromperie, (f.) circumvention, deceit, or coze­
nage.  

CIRCONVOISIN, neigh­
bouring, near adjoining to. 
Peuples circonvoisins, neigh­
bouring Nations.  

CIRCUIT (m.) a circuit, compass, or going about. 
Les murailles de cette Ville ont trois lieuës de circuit, the walls of this Town are three leagues a­
bout.
 
* Circulaire, & Circulation. V. under Cercle.  

CIRE (f.) wax. 
Cire blanche, rouge, jaune, ver­
te, white, red, yellow, green wax. 
Fait de cire, made of wax. 
Cirer quêque chose, to wax, to sear a thing. 
Ciré, waxed, seared. 
Cirier (m.) ouvrier en cire, a worker in wax. 
Cirure (f.) Cirement (m.) a searing, or doing any thing with wax. 
Cirage (m.) couleur de cire ou d'or, en termes de peinture, a picture of wax, or coloured like wax. 
Ciroines (f.) appareils & ci­
roines, a sear-cloth, any plaister or ointment whereof wax, rosin, or gums, and wine are the principall ingredients.  

CIRON (m.) le plus petit des animaux, a hand-worm.  

CIRQUE (m.) the Cirque, a Place in Rome, wherein the People sate to behold Plays, Games, and publick Exercises. 
Jeux de Cirque, Games of Wrest­
ling and Running, such as were kept among the Romans.  

CISEAUX (m.) cizars, sheers; chisel. 
Cisailler, to clip, to cut with cizars or sheers. 
Cisailler la monnoie, to clip mo­
ney. 
Cisaillé, clipped, cut with ci­
zars or sheers. 
Monnoie cisaillée, clipped mo­
ney. 
Cisailles (f.) rognures en ci­
saillant, the clippings, that which is clipped or cut off. 
Ciseler, to carve (or grave) with a chisel. 
Ciselé, carved (or graved) with a chisel. 
Ciseleure, graveure (f.) chi­
sel-work.  

CISTERNE. V. Citerne.  

CITÉ(f.) Ville, City, Town. 
Citadelle (f.) a Citadel, a strong Fort or Castle that serves both to defend and to curb a City. 
Citoien (m.) a Citizen, a free­
man of a City. 
Recevoir quêcun au nombre des Citoiens, to give one the free­
dom of a Citizen, to make him a freeman of a City. 
Civil, appartenant à Citoien, civil, pertaining to Citizens or City. 
Droit Civil, the Civil Law. 
Guerre Civile, a Civil War. 
Procez Civil, a civil Process. 
Juge Civil, a Judge in the Civil Law. 
Civil, courtois, civil, courteous, mannerly, well-bred. 
Civilité, courtoisie (f.) civili­
ty, humanity, courtesie. 
Faire civilité à quêcun, lui ren­
dre ses civilités, to pay his respects to one.
Recevoir quêcun avec beau­
coup de civilité, to receive one  



with a great deal of civility, to receive him very civilly. 
Civilement, civilly. 
Civiliser quêcun, le rendre civil, to civilize one, or to make him civil. 
Civilisé, civilized. 
Il n'en est pas de même parmi les Nations civilisées, it is not so with civilized Nations. 
Civique, Couronne Civique, a garland of Oak given to him that saved a Citizen, by him that was so saved.  

CITER, a journer, to cite, summon, adjourn, warn, serve with a Writ to appear. 
Citer, alleguer, to quote, or to alledge. 
Citer un Auteur, to quote an Author. 
Cité, ajourné, cited, summon­
ed, adjourned, warned, or served with a Writ to appear. 
Cité, allegué, quoted, alledged. 
Citation (f.) ajournement, a citation, summons, or warning to appear. 
Citation d'un Auteur, the quo­
ting of an Author.  

CITERNE (f.) a Cistern, a Vessel to keep water in.  

CITISE. V.  Cytise.

* Citoyen. V. Cité.  

CITRE (m.) bois odorife­
rant, excellent pour la menu­
serie, a sort of sweet-smelling wood, excellent for Joyners work.  

CITRON (m.) sorte de fruit, a pome-citron, a large sort of sweet limon. 
Citronier (m.) l'arbre qui porte les citrons, a Pome-citron tree. 
Citrouille (f.) a gourd, or a kind of great melon in colour and form resembling a citron.  

CIVETE (f.) sorte d'animal, a Civet-cat. 
Civete, poudre de senteur, ci­
vet.  

CIVIERE (f.) Civiere à bras, a hand-barrow.
 
* Civil, & ses derivés. V. under Cité.  

CIZELER. V. Ciseler.

  
C L
CLABAUDER, to bawl.  

CLAIE (f.) a hurdle.  

CLAIR, luisant, resplendis­
sant, clear, shining, bright. 
Eau claire, ou transparente, clear (or fair) water. 
Crystal clair, clear crystal. 
Voix claire, douce, & reson­
nante, a clear, pleasant, shrill voice. 
Blé clair, ou clair semé, thin corn. 
Une étoffe claire, transparente, fort deliée, a thin stuff. 
Clair, intelligible, clear, plain, intelligible. 
Cela est clair, that's plain, or clear. 
Il n'est rien de plus clair que ses écrits, there is nothing more plain than his writings. 
Clair, subst; as,
Le clair de la Lune, the Moon­
shine. 
Il commence à faire clair, à étre jour, it begins to be day light. 
Je ne vois pas assez clair, I don't see clear enough. 
Clair-voiant, œil clair voi­
ant, one that hath a good eye-sight. 
Un homme chair-voiant, qui a l'esprit bien éclairé, an acute man, one that is quick of judge­
ment and understanding, quick-sighted, or quick-witted. 
Clarté (f.) clarté des choses lumineuses, brightness. 
La clarté du Soleil, the bright­
ness of the Sun. 
Clarté de l'eau, du verre, de l'air, &c. clearness of water, glass, air. &c. 
Clarté des yeux, de la voix, clearness of the eyes, clearness of the voice. 
Clarté d'un discours, the clear­
ness of a discourse. 
Clairement, clearly, plainly. 
Parlez clairement, speak plain. 
Je l'ai prouvé clairement, I pro­
ved it clearly. 
Clarifier, rendre clair & li­
quide, to clarify, or make clear. 
Clarifié, clarify'd, or made clear. 
Clairet, somewhat clear. 
Vin clairet, claret wine. It is commonly made of white and red grapes mingled or growing toge­
ther. 
Clairon (m.) a Clarion, a kind of small, strait-mouthed, and shrill-sounding Trumpet, used com­
monly as a Treble to the ordinary one. 
Sonner du clairon, to sound a clarion. 
Clarine (f.) a little bell. 
Clariné (en termes de bla­
zon) se dit des petites cloches pendues au coû de quêques animaux; as,
Vache clarinée d'azur, a Cow with azure bells about her neck, or, as Blazoners say, the bells a­
zur.  

CLAMER (terme de Droit). V. Exclamer. 
Clameur (f.) cri, a clamour, or out-cry. 
Clameur de haro, grand cri, re­
quête de secours en grand pe­
ril, an out-cry, used in Norman­
dy by such as are outraged, or in some high degree wronged, so that they seem thereby to implore the aid of their Duke Rol, who is re­
ported to have been a most just Prince. And in that case such as are within the hearing thereof must pursue the malefactor, or else pay a fine. 
Clameur de haro en matiere litigieuse, l'appel du Prince à son aide contre sa Partie, a claim or protestation of such as are in possession of Land which others go about to put them from. It must be made before a Ser­
geant, or two Witnesses, and then it is a sufficient Warrant for the holding of the possession.  

CLANDESTIN, clan­
destine, close, privy, secret, hid­
den. 
Clandestinement, privily, se­
cretly, closely, under-hand, in hug­
ger-mugger.  

CLAPIER (m.) lieu où l'on nourrit les Lapins, a clapper of rabbets.  

CLAQUET (m.) Claquet de Moulin, the Clapper (or Clack) of a Mill-hopper.
 
* Clarifier, Clarine, Clarté. V. Clair.  

CLASSE (f.) rang, ordre, a rank, order, or distribution of people according to their several degrees. 
Classe, ordre d'Ecoliers selon leur capacité, a classis, or form of Scholars. 
Classe, le lieu, où l'on enseigne les Ecoliers, a School, or the place where Scholars are taught. 
Classique, Classick, or Classi­
cal.  

CLAVAIRE (m.) Gardien des Titres de la Chambre des Contes, a kind of Receiver or Of­
ficer that looks to the Receit of the Kings Demesn.  



CLAVEAU (m.) Clavelée (f.) maladie de Brebis, the Scab amongst Sheep.  

CLAVESSIN (m.) Epinet­
tes des plus grandes, clari­
cords.

* Clavier. V. Clef.
 
* Clause, & Claustral. V. Clorre.  

CLAYE. V. Claie.  

CLEF, avec quoi l'on ou­
vre & l'on ferme une serrure, a Key. 
Fermer à clef, to lock. 
Je ne tiens rien fermé à clef, I keep nothing locked. 
Clef de poutre, pour l'empê­
cher de se fendre, a brace to hold beams together. 
Clef d'arcade de voute, the Key of an Arch, a knot or scutcheon in the midst of a vault. 
Clef, Ville forte & frontiere, fermant le passage à l'Etranger, a strong frontiere-Town which is (as it were) the Key of the Coun­
try. 
Lyon étoit autrefois une des Clefs de France, Lyons was for­
merly one of the keys of France. 
Clef de Musique, a Cliff in Mu­
sick. 
Prendre la Clef des Chams, to run away, to take his liberty. 
Clavier (m.) clavier à porter les Clefs, a Key-chain, or a chain for Keys, a chain whereat Keys are hanged.  

CLEMENCE, douceur (f.) clemency, meekness, merciful­
ness. 
Avec clemence, patiently, meek­
ly, mercifully. 
Clement, clement, meek, gra­
cious, merciful.  

CLERC (m.) Clerc du Cler­
gé, a Clark of the Clergy. 
Il est passé Clerc, il a pris la tonsure, he has past his Clark­
ship, and received his tonsure. 
Clerc d'un homme de Palais, a Lawyers Clark. 
Clerc de Greffe, a Registers Clark. 
Clerc, peu experimenté, peu intelligent, a novice, one that has no great skill. 
Ton Pere n'est pas grand Clerc, thy father is an illiterate man, a man of little or no knowledge. 
Vous avez fait un pas de Clerc, you made a gross mistake. 
Clergé (m.) le Clergé, les Ec­
clesiastiques, the Clergy, the Church-men. 
Clericature (f.) Clark-ship, or the being in Orders. 
Droit (privilege) de Clerica­
ture, the privilege of the Clergy, which is to be try'd before the Or­
dinary, and not before any temporal Judge. 
Alleguer sa Clericature, pour étre renvoié à son Juge Ecclesi­
astique, to demand the benefit of his Clergy.  

CLIENT (m.) a Client, one that is under another mans Pro­
tection, a Client retaining a Lawyer or Proctor to plead his Cause.  

CLIGNER les yeux, to wink, or twinkle with the eyes. 
Clignement d'yeux, (m.) a winking, or twinkling with the eyes. 
Clin d'œil (m.) the twinkling of an eye. 
Dans un clin d'oeil, en un in­
stant, in the twinkling of an eye, in an instant.  

CLIMACTERIQUE, Cli­
macterical. 
L'Année Climacterique, the Climacterical year, or every se­
venth year of a mans life, till the sixty third year, all very dangerous, but the last most. 
La grande Année Climacte­
rique, la 63. année, the great climacterical year, or the dange­
rous year of 63, at which age divers worthy men have died.  

CLIMAT (m) Clime, or Cli­
mate, a division in the Sky, or Por­
tion of the World, between South and North. 
Un Climat Chaud, a hot Cli­
mate. 
Un Climat froid, a cold Cli­
mate.
 
* Clin. V. Cligner.  

CLINQUANT (m.) clin­
quant d'or, espece de passe­
ment d'or, a thin plate-lace of gold.  

CLIQUETE (f.) Cliquete de Ladre, a Lazers clicket, or clapper. 
Cliqueter, to click, clack, clap, or clatter. 
Cliquetis (m.) clicketing, clat­
tering, noise. 
Cliquetis d'armes, a rustling (or clattering) of arms.  

CLISTERE. V. Lavement.  

CLOCHE (f.) a bell. 
Sonner une cloche, to ring a bell. 
La cloche sonne, the bell rings. 
Carillon de cloches, bell-mu­
sick. 
Cloche, vase à cuire des poires, a little bell-resembling Vessel, wherein pears are stewed or sod­
den. 
Clochette (f.) petite cloche, a little bell. 
Clochette, Campanelle, fleur, the withy wind. 
Clocher (m.) a Steeple, a Church-Steeple. 
Clocher, marcher comme les boiteux, to halt, or limp, to be lame, or go lamely of a leg. 
Clocher devant les boiteux, to halt before a cripple. 
Cette comparaison cloche, this is a lame comparison. 
Cloche-pié; as, 
Aller à cloche-pié, to go halting upon one leg.  

CLOPORTE (f.) espece de ver, the cheeslip.  

CLORRE, fermer à l'en­
tour, to close, inclose, hedge in, or shut up. 
Clorre un Jardin de murailles, to wall a Garden about. 
Clorre un discours, to conclude a discourse. 
Clorre un conte, le terminer, to pass, conclude, or finish an account. 
Clos (m.) lieu fermé, a close, a field inclosed. 
Clos de Vigne, a Vineyard in­
closed. 
Cloison (f.) any thing that in­
closeth, as a hedge, pales, rails, or mud-wall. 
Clause (f.) a clause, period, or conclusive sentence. 
Clause d'une Loi, où est faite expresse mention, de quêque chose, the Clause of a Law where­
in mention is made of some parti­
cular thing. 
Les clauses & les façons de parler ordinaires du Barreau, the language of the Court (I mean the Court of Judicature.) 
Clôture (f.) an inclosure. 
Les Religieuses s'obligent par vœu à garder là clôture, the Nuns are obliged by their Vow to keep within their Cloister. 
Elle a violé la clôture, she has broke her Vow, she has quitted her Cloister. 
Clôture d'un discours ou autre chose semblable, the conclusion of a discourse, or the like.
Cloitre (m.) le Cloitre d'un  



Monastere, a Cloister, a Walk or Inclosure covered over head and invironed with Pillars. 
Cloitre, Couvent de Moines, a Cloister, a Monastery. 
Vivre dans un Cloitre, to live in a Cloister. 
Enfermé dans un Cloitre, Cloi­
stered up. 
Le Cloitre, la Vie Monastique, the Monastick life. 
Cloitrier (m.) Moine Cloi­
trier, obligé à garder le Cloi­
tre, a Cloisterer, or keeper of a Cloister. 
Claustral, Monastick, or Mo­
nastical. 
Vie Claustrale, a Monastick life.  

CLOSSER, comme font les poules, to cluck, like a hen.
 
* Clôture. V. Clorre.  

CLOU (m.) a nail. 
Clou à tête, a tack-nail. 
Clou à crochet, a hook-nail. 
Mettre (ficher, planter) un clou dans une muraille, to knock a nail in the wall. 
Arracher un clou, to take out (or pull out) a nail. 
Clou de girofle, a clove. 
Clouër, to nail, or fasten with a nail. 
Cloüé, nailed. 
Cloutier (m.) faiseur de clous, a Nailer, a Nail-smith, a maker or seller of nails.  

CLYSTERE. V. Lavement.

  
C O
COADJUTEUR (m.) a Co­
adjutor, or fellow helper.  

COASSER, comme les gre­
nouilles, to croak, as a Frog. 
Coässement (m.) cri des gre­
nouilles, the croaking of frogs.  

COC (m.) a cock. 
Le coc chante, the cock crows. 
Le chant du coc, the cock's crow­
ing. 
Un Coc d'Inde, a Turky-cock. 
Il est le Coc de la Paroisse, he is the cock of the Parish. 
Un Coc-à l'âne, a Pamphlet in verses. 
Coquet (m.) qui se plait à faire l'amour aux femmes, a lover of the Sex. 
Coquet, sorte de bateau, a cock-boat. 
Coquete (f.) femme qui prend plaisir à étre cajolée, a woman that loves mens company, a twat­
ling woman.  

COCHE (f.) entailleure, a notch. 
Faire des coches, to make not­
ches.  

COCHE (m.) chariot, a Wa­
gon. 
Coche d'eau, a Passage-Boat for such as travel by water from one Place to another. 
Cocher (m.) Cocher qui mene le Coche, a Wagoner. 
Cocher, qui conduit un Carosse, a Coach-man. 
Cochere, Porte cochere, a Door (or Gate) through which a Coach may go.  

COCHON (m.) a Pig. 
Cochon de lait, a sucking pig. 
Cochon sevré, a weaned pig. 
Gras comme un cochon, as fat as a pig. 
Cochonner, faire des cochons, to farrow, to pig, to bring forth pigs. 
Cochonnier (m.) qui garde des cochons, a feeder (or bringer up) of pigs.
 
* Cocon, the cods of a silk-worm. V. Coque.  

COCTION (f.) coction.  

COCU (m) sorte d'oiseau, a Cuckoo. 
Chanter comme le cocu, to sing like a cuckoo.  

CODE (m.) Code de Droit, a Code, or French Law-book. 
Le Code Louïs, the new Code compiled and published in this French Kings time, whose name it bears.  

CODIGNAC (m.) confiture de coin, a quiddeny, or marma­
lade of quinces.  

COEFFE (f.) a coif, a thing to wear upon the head. 
Coëffe, peau couvrant les inte­
stins, the fat pannicle (or kell) wherein the bowels are lapt. 
Coëffer, to put a coif upon. 
Coëffer quêcun, lui donner une mauvaise teinture, l'ab­
breuver de quêque fausse opini­
on, to possess one with a false o­
pinion. 
Il s'est laissé coëffer à cet igno­
rant, he has suffered himself to be seduced by that ignorant fellow. 
Coëffé, Coeffée, coifed, or that has a coif on. 
Coëffé de quêque opinion, pre­
possessed with an opinion. 
Coëffé de l'amour d'une fem­
me, smitten in love. 
Coeffure (f.) coëffe de fem­
me, a womans coif.  

COEUR (m.) partie de l'a­
nimal, the heart. 
Le cœur bat incessamment, the heart beats continually. 
Mal de cœur, a pain at the heart. 
Avoir mal au cœur, se pâmer, to be fainting, to faint. 
Cette puanteur me fait mal au cœur, that smell makes me ready to faint. 
Le cœur m'en fait mal, j'en res­
sens un grand creve-cœur, it makes my very heart ake. 
Je ne puis voir cette faute sans quêque mal de cœur contre ce­
lui qui l'a commise, I cannot see that fault without some resent­
ment against the author thereof. 
Ces paroles me fendent le cœur, those expressions break my heart. 
Cœur, affection, heart, mind, affection, desire. 
J'ai cette chose grandement à cœur, that sticks very much to my heart, I take it much to heart. 
Je prens à cœur vos Interets, I am concerned for you, I am mind­
ful of your concerns. 
Je n'ai rien tant à cœur que de vous rendre service, I have no greater passion than to serve you. 
Je vous porte dans le cœur, je vous aime tendrement, I bear you in my heart, I have a tender love for you. 
Il possede mon cœur, he has got my heart. 
Avez vouz donc le cœur si dur & si inexorable, qu'il ne puisse étre ni amolli par la compassi­
on, ni flêchi par la priere? but are you indeed so hard-hearted and inexorable, that you can neither be softned by compassion, nor be moved by prayer? 
Cela me tient plus au cœur que vous ne croiez, that sticks more to my heart than you think of. 
Sa femme lui tenoit encore au cœur, his wife had still some share in his affection. 
De gayeté de cœur, de bon cœur, du fond du cœur, with a chearful mind, with a good heart or will, or from the bottom of the heart. 
Je le ferai de bon cœur, I will do it with all my heart. 
A contre-cœur, with an ill will, unwillingly.  



Je ne fais rien à contre cœur, I do nothing with an ill will. 
Cœur, pensée, heart, mind, or thought. 
Dire ce qu'on a dans le cœur, découvrir ses pensées, to tell his mind, or discover his thoughts. 
Il m'a découvert tout ce qu'il avoit sur le cœur, he has reveal­
ed all his mind to me. 
J'ai quêque chose sur le cœur (qui me pese sur le cœur) que je n'ose dire, something lies upon my spirit which I dare not reveal. 
Il conoit le fond de mon cœur, & mes plus secretes pensées, he knows the bottom of my heart, and my most secret thoughts. 
Le cœur me disoir, qu'il arri­
veroit quêque mal, my mind told me that some mischief or other should happen. 
Ouvrir, décharger son cœur à quécun, lui décharger ce que l'on a sur le cœur, to reveal all his whole heart to one. 
Il m'a fâché, je veux lui dire tout ce que j'ai sur le cœur, he has angered me, I will tell him my mind. 
Cœur, courage, heart, or cou­
rage. 
C'est un homme de cœur; he is a stout man, a valiant man, a cou­
ragious man. 
Mòntrez que vous étes hommè de cœur, shew your self a man. 
C'est un homme de peu de cœur, qui n'a point de cœur, he is a man of no courage, he is a faint-hearted man. 
Le cœur lui manque, il a le cœur tout abbatu, his heart fails him, he is altogether dejected, he is faint-hearted. 
Cette pensée lui fit prendre cœur, lui remit le cœur au ventre, releva son cœur ab­
batu, that consideration made him resume his courage, or take heart again, cheered him up, heartned him, incouraged him. 
Un homme qui a le cœur grand, qui le porte haut, a lofty man, a lofty-minded man, one that car­
ries it high. 
Cœur, memoire, heart, or me­
mory. 
Apprèndre une chose par cœur, to learn a thing by heart, or without book, to beat it into his memory. 
Je le sai par cœur, I know it without book. 
Dire des vers par cœur, to say verses by heart, or to pronounce them without book. 
Cœur, le milieu, the heart, or the middle of a thing. 
Le cœur de la France, the heart (the very heart) of France. 
Le cœur de l'Eté, the midst of Summer. 
Le cœur de l'Hiver, the depth (or midst) of Winter. 
Le cœur de l'arbre, the pith of a Tree. 
Cœur, en Blazon, the Numbril point in Heraldry. 
Mon Cœur, mon petit Cœur, my dear heart. 
Cordial, affectueux, cordial, hearty, true, sincere, unfeigned, affectionate. 
Un Ami cordial, a hearty Friend. 
Un Amour cordial, a true (sin­
cere, or unfeigned) love. 
Un Cordial, ou potion Cor­
diale, a Cordial. 
Cordialité (f.) cordialness, hear­
tiness, or heartfulness. 
Cordialement, cordially, hear­
tily, truly, sincerely, unfeignedly, affectionately. 
Courage (m.) hardiesse, cou­
rage, boldness, confidence, valour, stoutness. 
Prendre courage, to take cou­
rage, to pluck up a good heart. 
Perdre courage, to lose courage, to despond, to be discouraged, de­
jected. 
Donner du courage à quêcun, lui inspirer du courage, lui relever le courage, to incou­
rage one, to put him forward, to cheer him up, to set (or spurr him) on. 
Oter (abbattre) le courage à quêcun, to take away a mans cou­
rage. 
Reprendre courage, to resume his courage, or to take heart a­
gain. 
Avoir bon courage, to have a good heart. 
J'ai bon courage, mais les for­
ces me manquent, I have a good heart, but I want strength. 
Faire quêque chose avec cou­
rage, to do a thing cheerfully, or with a good courage. 
Courage, mes enfans, n'aiez point de peur, Cheer up, chil­
dren, be not afraid. 
Courage, Soldats, continuez à donner des preuves de vô­
tre courage, Cheer up, old Soul­
diers, and give new proofs of your valour. 
Courageux, qui a du cou­
rage, couragious, stout, valiant. 
Courageusement, couragiously, stoutly, valiantly.  

COFFIN (m.) petite corbe­
ille, a little basket.  

COFFRE (m.) a trunk. 
Les Coffres du Roi, the Kings coffers. 
Coffre du Corps humain, the bulk (or chest) of the body. 
Coffret (m.) a little trunk. 
Coffretier (m.) a trunk-ma­
ker.  

COGNOISTRE, Cognois­
sance, Cognu. V. Conoitre.  

COIFFE, Coiffer. V. Co­
ëffe.  

COIN (m.) angle, a cor­
ner. 
Jetter une chose en quêque coin, to throw a thing into a cor­
ner. 
Un coin de Rue, a corner of a street. 
Le coin de l'œil, the corner of the eye. 
Un Coin de bois, a wedge to cleave wood with. 
Coin, à marquer monnoie, a coin, or stamp. 
Il est frappé à ce coin, il est ainsi fait, he is stamped with that figure, that's his nature, he is so contrived.  

COIN (m.) sorte de fruit, a quince. 
Huile de fleur de coin, an oyl of the blossoms of quinces. 
Jus de pomme-coin, syrrup of quinces. 
Coignier (m.) l'arbre qui porte les coins, the quince-tree.  

COITRE (f.) a tick, for a bed.  

COL, or Coû, as it is pro­
nounced (m.) a neck. 
Le devant du coû, the throat, or forepart of the neck. 
Le derriere du coû, the hinder part of the neck. 
Tendre le coû au Bourreau, to present (or lay down) his neck to the Executioner. 
Se mettre la corde au coû, to put a rope about his neck. 
Sauter au coû de quêcun, l'em­
brasser, to fall about ones neck, to embrace him.
Sauter au coû de quêcun, pour le fraper, to take one by the neck  



or to beat him. 
Collet (m.) a collar, or neck of a garment. 
Collet de pourpoint, the collar of a doublet. 
Collet de mouton, piece de chair de mouton pres du coû, a neck of mutton. 
Saisir (prendre) quêcun au col­
let, lui mettre la main sur le collet, to take hold of one, or to seize upon him, to take him pri­
soner. 
L'aiant saisi au collet, il le traina en prison, having appre­
hended him he hurried him to pri­
son. 
Prêter le collet à quêcun, lui tenir tête, lors qu'on se bat, to hold out stoutly against his anta­
gonist. 
Colletin (m.) pourpoint sans manche, a Jerkin. 
Collier (m.) ornement de coû, a neck-lace. 
Collier de perles, a necklace of pearles. 
Collier de Chien, armé de clous aigus, a dog-collar, a ma­
stives collar made of leather and full of nails. 
Collier de cheval, an horse-col­
lar whereby he draweth in the cart. 
Colporteur (m.) Mercier por­
tant sa bale pendue au coû, a Pedler, a man that carries his shop about his neck.  

COLATION (f.) Colation hors des repas ordinaires, a Collation, or nuncheon. 
Presenter une colation à quê­
cun, to give one a Collation. 
Faire colation, to eat a colla­
tion. 
Colation, repas du soir des Jours de Jeûne, a fasting day's Supper.  

COLE (f.) cole forte, glue, strong glue. 
Cole de poisson, mouth-glue, water-glue. 
Cole de farine, past. 
Coler, avec de la côle forte, to glue, to glue together. 
Coler avec de la cole de farine, to past together. 
Colé, glued, or pasted. 
Coleur (m.) celui qui cole, a gluer, one that glues. 
Colement (m.) a gluing, or pasting together.  

COLERE (f.) anger, wrath. 
Se mettre en colere contre quêcun, étre en colere contre lui, to be angry with one. 
Il est dans une horrible colere, he is grievous angry. 
Bouffi de colere, swelling with anger. 
S'emporter de colere, se mettre en grande colere, to be transport­
ed with anger. 
Faire mettre en colere quêcun, to provoke one, to provoke him to anger. 
Il se met facilement en colere, il entre aisément en colere, he is soon angry. 
Il m'a écrit en colere, he writ to me in anger. 
Décharger sa colere sur quê­
cun, to vent his spleen, or to dis­
charge his anger upon one. 
Moderer sa colere, to mode­
rate his anger. 
Revenir de sa colere, to come to himself again. 
Sa colere s'est passée, his anger is over. 
Avec colere, par colere, in an­
ger. 
Il ne faut rien faire par colere, nothing must be done in anger. 
Colere, bile, humeur bilieuse, choler. 
Colere, Colerique, qui se met facilement en colere, chole­
rick, apt to be angry.  

COLEUVRE (f.) sorte de de serpent, an adder. 
Coleuvre d'eau, a water-snake. 
Coleuvree (f.) sorte de plante, snake weed. 
Coleuvrine (f.) piece d'ar­
tillerie, a culverin, a piece of ord­
nance so called.  

COLIQUE (f.) sorte de maladie, the cholick. 
Avoir la colique, to be troubled with the chollick.  

COLISÉE (f.) a kind of Am­
phitheater.  

COLLATERAL, collate­
ral, not direct on the one side. 
Heritiers collateraux, collate­
rall Heirs.  

COLLATION (f.) Collati­
on de Benefice faite à quêcun, the conferring of a Benefice upon one. 
Collateur de Benefice (m.) a Patron, or any Officer who hath the bestowing of Benefices.  

COLLATION (f.) compa­
raison, a comparing, or exami­
ning of one thing by another. 
Collation, repas. V. Colation. 
Collationner, to compare, or to examine. 
Collationner une Copie avec l'Original, to examine a Copy by the Original. 
Collationné, compared, exa­
mined.  

COLLE, Coller, &c. V. Cole.  

COLLECTE (f.) a collecti­
on, levy, or gathering. 
Collecte, courte priere, a Col­
lect. 
Collecteur (m.) a Collector. 
Collecteur de Tailles, a Colle­
ctor of Taxes. 
Collectif, collective, that is ga­
thered together into one. 
Collection (f.) collection.  

COLLEGE (m.) Corps de personnes de même profession, a College, or Corporation. 
Le Sacré College, le College des Cardinaux, the Sacred Col­
lege, the College of Cardinals. 
College, Lieu où l'on enseigne, a School, or Colledge, in an Uni­
versity. 
Collegial, Collegiate. 
Une Eglise Collegiale, a Colle­
giate Church. 
Collegue (m.) Compagnon d'Office, qui est de même pro­
fession qu'un autre, ou de même corps que lui, a Collegue, a follow or copartner in Office.
 
*Collet, Colletin, Collier. V. Col.  

COLLINE (f.) a hillock, or little hill.  

COLLOQUER, placer, to settle, or to set out. 
Colloquer (asseoir) la dot d'une fille sur une Terre, to set out Land for a Daughters dowry or portion. 
Colloqué, setled, set out. 
Collocation (f.) settling, or setting out.  

COLLUDER, prevariquer, favoriser sous main sa partie averse, to collude, to make him­
self guilty of collusion or cheat, to betray his cause unto an adversa­
ry. 
Collusion (f.) collusion, fraud, cheat, or double dealing.  

COLOMBE (f.) a hen (or female) pigeon, a dove. 
Le veritable Chrêtien doit a­
voir la prudence du Serpent, & la simplicité de la Colombe, a true Christian ought to have the wisdom of Serpents, and the sim­
plicity  



plicity (or innocency) of Doves. 
Colombier. V. Pigeonnier. 
Colombine (f.) sorte d'herbe, the herb Columbine. 
Coulombin (m.) dove colour.  

COLOMNE (f.) a Column, a Pillar. 
La Colomne doit étre toute d'une piece, a Pillar ought to be all of one piece. 
Le tronc (ou le corps) de la Colomne, the body of a pillar be­
tween the Chapiter and the Base. 
Le plus épais de la Colomne vers la base, the thickest end of the Pillar which is toward the base. 
Le plus mince de la Colomne vers le Chapiteau, the slenderest part of a Pillar, which is towards the chapter. 
Base de Colomne, the base (or basis) of a Pillar. 
Piedestal de Colomne, the pedestal (or foot-stall) of a Pillar. 
Chapiteau de Colomne, the Cha­
piter of a Pillar. 
Architrave, qui se met sur le chapiteau, the architrave of a Pillar. 
Cornice, reposant sur l'archi­
trave, the cornish (or brow) of a Pillar. 
Colomne torse, a wreathed co­
lumn. 
L'espace entre deux Colomnes, the space between two Pillars.  

COLONEL (m.) a Colonel, the Commander of a Regiment. 
Un Colonel de Cavalerie, a Co­
lonel of horse. 
Un Colonel d'Infanterie, a Co­
lonel of Foot.  

COLONIE (f.) a Colony, a Country or City inhabited by Peo­
ple sent thither on purpose from an­
ther Place. 
Faire des Colonies, to plant Colo­
ny's. 
Les habitans d'une Colonie, the people of a Colony. 
Colonie, ceux que l'on envoie pour peupler un Pais inhabité, a Colony, or the men, women, and children which are sent to people a strange Land.  

COLOQUINTHE (f.) sor­
te de plante, the plant called Co­
loquintida.
 
* Colorer, &c. V. Couleur.  

COLOSSE (f) Statue d'une grandeur extraordinaire, a Colosse, or Colossus, a Statue of a vast bigness.  

COLOSTRE (f.) lait caillé dans les tetins d'une femelle un peu avant la naissance de son fruit, beestings, the first milk that comes from the teats of a beast.

* Colporteur. V. Col.  

COMBAT (m.) fight, combat, or battel. 
Combat sur Mer, a Sea-fight. 
Combat sur Terre, a Land-fight. 
Combat de gens à cheval, a fight of horsemen. 
Combat de gens à pié, a fight of foot souldiers. 
Presenter le combat, to offer bat­
tel. 
Accepter le combat, to accept the fight. 
Commencer le combat, to begin the fight. 
Combat opiniâtré, a fierce (or obstinate) fight. 
Combat à outrance, a fight wherein one part is utterly de­
stroy'd. 
Combat singulier, combat de deux personnes, un duel, a pri­
vate fight, duel. 
Vuider un different par le com­
bat, to decide a difference by dint of sword, to fight it out. 
Jamais je ne vis Combat plus mal ordonné que celui là; nous nous sommes lassés tous deux, lui de me battre, & moi d'étre battu: I never saw a fight worse ordered than that was; we wea­
ried one another, for he was wea­
ry to beat me, and I of being bea­
ten. 
Combattre, to fight, to com­
bat. 
Combattre l'Enemi, to fight his Enemy. 
Combatre tête à tête, homme à homme, corps à corps, de per­
sonne à personne, to fight hand to hand, a man against another. 
Combattu, fought. 
Combatant, fighting men. 
Notre Armée etoit composée de trente mille combatans, our Army consisted of thirty thousand fighting men.  

COMBIEN, how, how much, how many. 
Vous voiez combien il est diffi­
cile, you see how hard (how diffi­
cult) it is. 
Combien grand est le déplaisir, how great is the displeasure. 
Combien peu, how few. 
Combien difficilement, how hardly. 
Combien as tu vaillant? how much art thou worth? 
Vous ne sauriez croire com­
bien je vous aime, you cannot imagine how much I love you. 
Combien estimez vous vôtre Cheval? combien voulez vous le vendre? how much do you va­
lue your horse? how much will you sell it for? 
Combien d'argent avez vous? how much mony have you? 
Combien de miel, d'eau, de vin? how much hony, water, wine? 
Combien serez vous à soupé? how many will you be at sup­
per? 
Combien de Chrêtiens trouver­
ez vous qui le fassent? how many Christians will you find that can do it? 
Dans combien de jours viendra­
t-il? in how many day's will he come? 
Combien de tems? how long. 
Combien de tems y a-t-il qu'il est arrivé? how long has he been come? how long is it since his arri­
val?  

COMBLE (m.) faite, the top of a house. 
De fond en comble, from the top to the bottom, topsy-turvy. 
Détruire une maison de fond en comble, to turn a house topsy tur­
vy. 
Ruiner un homme de fond en comble, utterly to undo a man, to be the ruine of him to all intents and purposes. 
Comble, accomplissement, height, or fulness. 
Arriver au comble de ses de­
sirs, to arrive at the height of his desires. 
Il a eté elevé au comble des honneurs, he was raised to the height of honour. 
Ceci est survenu pour comble de malheur, this hapned more­
over to accumulate misfor­
tunes. 
Une Vertu qui est arrivée au comble de sa perfection, a Vir­
tue that is come to the height of its perfection. 
Comble, surcroit, ce qu'on a­
joûte par dessus la juste mesure, a heaped measure, that which is added over and above. 
Comble (adj.) plus que plein, heaped up, or more than full.  



 
Combler, remplir au dessus du bord un boisseau de blé, to heap up a bushel of corn. 
Combler un fossé, to fill up a ditch. 
Combler quêcun de richesses & d'honneurs, to heap riches and ho­
nours upon one, to heap him up with riches and honour. 
Comblé, heaped (or filled) up. 
Comblé de joie ou de tristesse, filled with joy or sadness. 
Comblé de bienfaits, heaped up (or loaden) with benefits. 
Comblement (m.) a heaping, up-filling, or filling up to the top.  

COMBOURGEOIS. V. Con­
citoien.  

COMBUSTIBLE, combu­
stible, soon fired, easy to be bur­
ned. 
Combustion (f.) a combusti­
on. 
Combustion, des ordre, querelle, revolte, combustion, uproar, or tumult. 
Toute la Ville est en combusti­
on, the whole City is in a combusti­
on. 
Mettre tout en combustion, to cause a great combustion.  

COMEDIE (f.) a Play, wherein as in a Glass the image of civil and private living is repre­
sented. 
Comedie, par opposition à la Tragedie, a Comedy, a kind of Play which begins sorrowfully and ends merrily, contrary to a Tra­
gedy. 
Comedie, le Lieu où se font les  
Comedies, the Play house. 
La Comedie du Roi, & celle du Duc, the Kings and the Dukes Play-house. 
Comedien (m.) a Player, an Actor. 
Comedien, qui jouë une, Co­
medie, a Comedian, a Comedian player. 
Comedien, qui écrit des Co­
medies, a Comedian, or Writer of Comedy's. 
Comedienne (f) an Actri­
ce. 
Comique, Comical, Comedy-like, pleasant. 
Comiquement, like a Comedy, pleasantly.  

COMETE (f) a Comet, a blazing star. 
Les Cometes paroissent quê­
quefois sous la Lune, & quêque­
fois au dessus, & pour l'ordi­
naire avec une queuë, Comets appear to us, somtimes under the Moon, and sometimes above her, but most commonly with a tail.

* Comique, & Comiquement. V. Comedie.  

COMITE (m.) Officier de Galere, the Captain (or Master) of a Galley, an Officer that looks to the sure chaining of the Slaves, whom sometimes he incourages, but more commonly scourges unto their business.  

COMMANDE, & Com­
mandataire. V. Commende.  

COMMANDER, to com­
mand, to rule, to govern, and bear sway over. 
Commander une Armée, to command (or to have the com­
mand of) an Army. 
Commander, faire commande­
ment, user de commandement, to command, bid, injoyn, or use his authority. 
Faites ce que je vous comman­
de, do what I command you, do what I bid you to do. 
Le Roi m'a commandé de pren­
dre les Armes, the King has com­
manded me to take up Arms. 
Vous n'avez rien à me com­
mander, vous n'avez point droit de me commander, you are not to command me, you have no power over me, I am not bound to receive your commands. 
Il est venu, sans que je lui aie commandé, he is come without my order. 
Commander à baguette, to command absolutely, wholly, per­
emptorily. 
Il ne sauroit se commander en cela, he hath no command of him­
self in that particular. 
Commandé, commanded, bid­
den. 
On m'a commandé de le faire, I am commanded to do it. 
La Ville est commandée du Château, the City is commanded by the Castle. 
La Citadelle est bâtie sur une Hauteur qui commande à toute la Ville, the Citadel is built upon an Eminence which commands the whole Town. 
Commandant (m.) celui qui a quêque Charge dans une Ar­
mée, a Commander, an Officer in an Army. 
Commandeur (m.) Comman­
deur d'un Ordre de Cheva­
liers, the Commander of an Or­
der of Knights. 
Commanderie (f.) a Comman­
dership, the Place (or Office) of a Commander of one of the Or­
ders. 
Commandement (m.) charge, droit, & pouvoir de com­
mander, command, power, autho­
rity. 
Avoir Charge & Commande­
ment dans l'Armée, to have an Office or Command in the Ar­
my. 
Avoir le Commandement de toute l'Armée, to have the Com­
mand of the whole Army. 
Commandement, jussion, char­
ge, order, or command, an actual command. 
Par Commandement du Roi, by the Kings order. 
On lui a fait commandement de la part du Roi, de se re­
tirer de la Cour, he had an Order from the King to leave the Court. 
Executer les Commandemens (obeir aux commandemens) de quêcun, to perform (execute, or obey) ones commands. 
Les Commandemens que vous me faites sont trop fâcheux, your commands are too grie­
vous. 
Ce que j'en ai fait ça eté par vôtre commandement, whatever I did therein was by your express command. 
Il a le commandement si beau, qu'il y a presse à lui obeir, he commands with so much grace, that every body strives in obedi­
ence. 
Les dix Commandemens de la Loi de Dieu, le Decalogue, the ten Commandments of Gods Law, the Decalogue.  

COMME, as, like. 
Il poursuit comme il a com­
mencé, he proceeds as he has begun. 
Il est muet comme un poisson, he is as mute as a fish. 
Il est fait comme lui, he is like him, he is just such another. 
Triste comme content, il te faudra chanter, sad or merry, you will be forced to sing. 
Comme, apres que, when. 
Comme il eut ouï ces choses, when he had heard these things.  



Comme quoi, comment, how. 
Je m'étonne comme quoi une si sotte pensée a pû vous venir en l'esprit, I wonder how such a simple fancy could come into your mind. 
Comme si, as if. 
Nous perdons ici le tems à cau­
ser, comme si nous n'avions ri­
en à faire, we prattle our time away, as if we had nothing to do. 
Vous vous mettez en peine, comme s'il y alloit de vôtre honneur, you are as much con­
cerned as if your honour was at stake. 
Comme si je ne savois pas ce que c'est, as if I knew not what it is.  

COMMEMORATION, ou Commemoraison (f.) commemo­
ration, remembrance.  

COMMENCER, to com­
mence, or begin. 
Commencer quêque chose, lui donner commencement, to be­
gin a thing. 
Commencer par une chose, to begin with a thing. 
Commencez par là, begin there, begin with that. 
On a la moitié fait quand on a bien commencé, he has half done that has well begun. 
Commencer à parler, to begin to speak. 
Celui qui doit commander aux autres Animaux commence sa Vie par les Supplices, he that is to have the command of other Creatures begins his life in misery. 
Achever ce que l'on a com­
mencé, to make an end of what one has begun. 
Finit par où l'on a commencé, to finish where one has begun. 
Commencer, prendre son com­
mencement, to begin, neut. 
L'an 77. commencera bien tôt, the year 77. shall begin very shortly. 
Commencé, begun. 
Voila qui est fort bien com­
mencé, that's very well begun. 
Commencement (m.) com­
mencement, beginning. 
Toutes choses ont leur com­
mencement, every thing has a beginning. 
Les commencemens sont diffi­
ciles, beginnings are difficult. 
Depuis le commencement ju­
squ'a la fin, from the beginning to the end. 
Le Commencement du Monde, the beginning of the World. 
Les Commencemens d'un Art, the principles (or rudiments) of an Art. 
Donner commencement, to be­
gin. 
Avoir commencement, to have a beginning. 
Prendre commencement, to take beginning.  

COMMENDE (f.) a Com­
mendum, or Benefice given in Commendum. 
Avoir un Benefice par Com­
mende, to have a Benefice in Commendum. 
Commendataire, Commenda­
tary, that enjoyes a Benefice by Commendum. 
Abbé Commendataire, a Secu­
lar Abbot, one that has an Abbey in Commendum, and yet was never Monk nor Priest.  

COMMENSAL (m.) as, 
Les Officiers Domestiques & Commensaux de la Maison du Roi, such Officers of the Kings House as have bouche en Cour, or (as the English say's) budge-a Court.  

COMMENT, how. 
Je ne sai comment il le fera, I know not how he will do it. 
Comment (Interrogative) how? 
Comment se porte-t-il? how do's he do? 
Comment donc? how then?  

COMMENTAIRE (m.) a Comment, Commentary, Gloss, or Exposition. 
Faire des Commentaires sur un Auteur, to comment upon an Author. 
Un Livre sur quoi l'on a fait un Commentaire, a Book comment­
ed upon. 
Un faiseur de Commentaire, a Commentator.  

COMMERCE (m.) trafic, commerce, trade, or traffic. 
Commerce, familiarité, corre­
spondence, communication, com­
merce, communication, familiari­
ty, acquaintance, converse, corre­
spondence. 
Avoir commerce avec quêcun, to have a commerce with one. 
La Vertu n'a aucun commerce avec la Volupté, Virtue has no commerce at all with Voluptuous­
ness.  

COMMERE (f.) a she-gos­
sip.  

COMMETTRE un crime, to commit (or perpetrate) a crime. 
Commettre une faute digne d'amende, to commit a finable trespass. 
Commis, committed, done, per­
petrated. 
Commis en une affaire, qui en a la commission, assigned, ap­
pointed, delegated in a business, to whom a matter is referred. 
Commis par la Cour pour co­
noitre d'un Procez, appointed by the Court to examine a Law-Suit. 
Commis, substitué en la place d'un autre, appointed to supply an Officers place. 
Commis à la Doüane, a Com­
missary (an Officer) of the Cu­
stom-house. 
Commis (m.) Commise (f.) devolution d'une hoirie ou d'autre chose semblable, faute d'avoir gardé quêque conditi­
on requise, trespass, a forfeiture of an estate, or any thing else, for not having observed a condition required and agreed on. 
Se saisir d'un heritage par droit de Commis, to seize up­
on an estate forfeited by a Tre­
spass. 
Commissaire (m.) a Com­
missioner, or Commissary, one that receives his authority by Com­
mission. 
Commissaire de Justice, deputé pour conoitre d'une affaire, a Judge delegate. 
Commissaire du Roi pour trai­
ter d'affaires d'Etat avec un Ambassadeur étranger, a Com­
missioner of the King to treat of States-business with a foreign Am­
bassadour. 
Commissaire de Guerre, a Com­
missary (or Muster-master) of an Army. 
Commissaire general de la Ca­
valerie, the Commissary General of the Horse. 
Commissaires des Vivres, gene­
ral Overseers appointed by Com­
mission to look that the Victuals provided for Armies & Garrisons be justly distributed and disposed of.
Commissaire de l'Artillerie, a Commissary of the Ordnance. There is a certain number of them, one whereof the Master  



of the Ordnance assignes to eve­
ry Province or Government, for the overseeing of the Ordnance that is therein. 
Commission (f.) charge de faire quêque chose, a Commis­
sion, or delegation. 
Donner Commission à quêcun, to give one a Commission. 
Prendre commission, se char­
ger d'une commission, to take (or to receive) a commission. 
Faire (ou executer) sa commis­
sion, s'en acquitter, to perform (or to acquit himself of) his com­
mission. 
Commission, ou Juridiction Ju­
diciaire donnée à un Commis­
saire, a Mandate or Warrant for the exercising of Jurisdiction, &c. given by Letters Patents, or under a publick Seal. 
Committimus, Lettres de Committimus, par lesquelles le Prince dispense quêcun de la Juridiction de son Juge or­
dinaire, & commet sa Cause à un autre Juge, Special Commis­
sions, whereby one is exempted from the Jurisdiction of his own Judge, and his Cause referred to another Judge.  

COMMINATOIRE, Com­
minatory, threatning much.  

COMMISERATION (f.) commiseration, compassion, a sensi­
ble apprehension or pity taken of other mens miseries.  

COMMODE, propre, com­
modious, convenient, proper, fit. 
Voila qui est fort commode, that's mighty convenient. 
Commode, profitable, benefici­
al, profitable. 
Un homme commode, qui a de quoi vivre à son aise, a sufficient man, one that hath means and wherewithall to live handsomly. 
Avoir un esprit commode, étre accommodant, to be a good hu­
mour'd man, good company, migh­
ty complaisant, to have a complai­
sant humour. 
Il a l'esprit le plus commode du Monde, il n'oblige pas les au­
tres à suivre ses sentimens, il se fait des divertissemens des folies d'autrui, he is mighty complaisant, he do's not compell others to follow his own opinions, but he makes his pastime of other peoples follies. 
Commodité (f.) convenien­
cy. 
C'est une grande commodité, that's a great conveniency. 
Chercher ses commoditez, s'ac­
commoder le mieux que l'on peut, to seek for conveniencies, to look for ease. 
Commodité, occasion, opportu­
nity. 
A la premiere commodité, with the first opportunity. 
Lors que vôtre commodité le permettra, quand vouz aurez la commodité, when it shall be convenient for you. 
Les Commoditez, les Privés d'une Maison, the convenient house, or the house of office. 
Commodement, commodiously, conveniently, aptly, fitly, or to the purpose.  

COMMOTION (f.) tumul­
te, a commotion, tumult, or up­
roar.  

COMMUN, appartenant à plusieurs, common. 
Tout est commun entre les A­
mis, all things are common a­
mongst friends. 
Le Genre commun, the common gender. 
Un Nom commun, a Noun of the common gender. 
Commun, ordinaire, common, usual, ordinary, vulgar. 
C'est un commun dire, que qui se fait Brebis le Loup la mange, it is a common saying, that those who will needs be sheep the Wolf devours, that he who carries him­
self like a sheep shall be fleeced and fed on. 
Rendre une chose trop com­
mune, too make a thing too com­
mon. 
Un mot commun, a common word. 
Un vice commun, a common vice. 
Commun, ou Communauté; as,
Vivre en commun, to live in common. 
Le Commun, la Populace, the common people, the vulgar sort of people. 
Un homme du commun, one of the common sort of people. 
Le commun, la plus grande partie, most, or the greatest part. 
Le commun des Sages, most of the Wise men. 
Commune (f.) Communau­
té, a Commonalty, or the Com­
mon People of a Place. 
Les Communes d'un Etat, the Commons of a State. 
Les Communes, la Chambre des Communes, the Commons, or House of Commons. 
Une Commune, ou piece de Terre qui depend d'une Ville en Commun, a Commons, Com­
mon-field, or Town-field. 
Communauté (f.) societé, a Commonalty, Society, or Corpora­
tion. 
Communauté, assemblée de personnes qui vivent en com­
mun, a Society (or Brotherhood) of people living together in com­
mon. 
Communauté de biens, commu­
nity of goods. 
Vivre en communauté, to live in common. 
Communément, ordinaire­
ment, commonly, usually, general­
ly, ordinarily. 
Communier, recevoir le S. Sacrement de la Cene, to com­
municate, or receive the Commu­
munion. 
Communion (f.) reception du S. Sacrement, the Commu­
nion. 
Communion de biens, communi­
ty of goods, communion, fellowship, or mutual participation. 
Communiquer, faire part d'une chose à quêcun, to impart, or communicate, to make partaker of, to tell. 
Communiquer ses desseins à quêcun, to communicate (or im­
part) his designs to one. 
Je vous communiquerai mon déplaisir, I shall tell you my grief. 
Le feu communique sa cha­
leur, fire distributes its heat. 
Ils communiquent ensemble ce qu'ils ont ouï, they com­
pare together what they have heard. 
Une maladie qui se communi­
que, an infectious disease. 
Communiqué, communicated, imparted. 
Communication (f) partici­
pation, communication, or parti­
cipation. 
Communication de biens avec les Amis, Community of goods a­
mongst Friends. 
Communication, conversation, converse.
Il n'est rien de tel pour se ren­
dre  



éclairé, que d'avoir commu­
nication avec des personnes savantes, the best way that is to improve our selves in lear­
ning is to converse with learned men. 
Communication de profit, part­
nership. 
La Citadelle a communication avec la Ville par un Pont, the Cittadel has a communication with the City by a Bridge. 
Lignes de Communication, the Lines of Communication.  

COMPAGNIE (f.) assemblée de personnes, a company, or meet­
ing of people. 
Etre en compagnie, to be in company, to have company with him. 
Monsieur est en compagnie, re­
venez une autre fois, my Master has company with him, and there­
fore come at another time. 
Il y a toû jours grand'Compa­
gnie dans cette Maison, there is alwayes much company in that house. 
J'aime bien étre en bonne com­
pagnie, I love good company very well. 
Je veux fuïr les mauvaises compagnies, I will avoid ill com­
pany. 
Fuïr les compagnies, étre soli­
taire, to hate company, to love a solitary life. 
Faire compagnie à quêcun, to bear one company. 
Se fourrer dans une Compa­
gnie, to intrude himself into a company. 
Rompre Compagnie, to leave the company, to break off good com­
pany. 
Prendre quêcun en sa compa­
gnie, to take (or receive) one in­
to his company. 
Aller (marcher) de compagnie, to go together. 
Compagnie, conversation, com­
pany, or conversation. 
Etre de bonne compagnie, to be good company. 
Il est de bonne compagnie, he is good company. 
Je me plais extremement en vôtre Compagnie, I like your company exceeding well, I am ve­
ry much taken with your company. 
Il n'y avoit personne dont la compagnie me fust plus agrea­
ble que la sienne, there was no body whose company pleased me better than his. 
Compagnie de gens de guerre, a Company of soldiers. 
Lever des Compagnies de gens de Guerre, to raise Soldiers. 
Compagnie de gens de cheval, a Troop of horse. 
Compagnie de gens de pié, a company of Foot. 
Compagnie de chevaux legers, a company of light horse. 
Compagnie, societé de person­
nes alliées en un même corps, a Company, Society, or Corporation. 
Compagnie de Marchands, a Company of Merchants. 
Compagnie d'Artisans, corps d'Artisans de même mêtier, a Com­
pany of Tradesmen, a Corporation of men of the same Trade. 
Compagnon (m) Compagnon de travail & d'office, a Compa­
nion, a Fellow, a Comrade. 
Compagnon de Guerre, a fellow soldier. 
Compagnon de Voiage, a fellow traveller. 
Compagnon d'Ecôle, a School­
fellow. 
Compagnon de logis, a chamber-fellow. 
Compagnon de même charge, a Collegue. 
Compagnon à boire, a pot-com­
panion. 
Compagnon à causer & railler, a merry companion, that keeps com­
pany in merry conceits. 
Bon Compagnon, plaisant com­
pagnon, toûjours pret à rire & à se divertir, a good fellow, a boon Companion. 
Bon compagnon, pret à tout & en tout tems, a good fellow, ready for any thing, and at any time. 
Aller de pair avec quêcun, le traiter comme compagnon, to make himself ones fellow, to use him as if he were his fellow. 
Vous faites du compagnon, you take too much upon your self. 
De compagnon à compagnon, as amongst friends. 
Un petit compagnon, un hom­
me de neant, a pitiful fellow. 
De grand & riche qu'il étoit il est devenu petit compagnon, of an eminent and rich man he is be­
come a pitiful fellow. 
Compagne (f.) a she-compani­
on, a she-fellow.  

COMPARER, to compare, to liken. 
Comparer une chose avec une autre, to compare one thing with another. 
Il se compare à moi, he compares himself to me, he thinks himself as good as I. 
Comparé, compared, likened. 
Henri le grand peut avec raison étré comparé à Jules Caesar, Hen­
ry the great may fitly be compared to Julius Caesar. 
Comparable, comparable, or that may be compared. 
Ce vieux Livre est il compara­
ble à ce nouveau? is that old Book to be compared to this new one? 
Vous n'avez rien fait de compa­
rable, you have done nothing like it. 
Comparablement,ou en com­
paraison, comparatively. 
Comparaison (f.) comparison. 
Faire comparaison d'une chose avec une autre, les comparer, to compare things together. 
Etre mis en comparaison avec un autre, to be compared with an­
other. 
En comparaison, to, or in com­
parison. 
C'est peu de chose en comparai­
son de ce qui se fait maintenant, that's little or nothing to what is practised now adaies. 
L'absin the est doux en compa­
raison du fiel, wormwood is sweet in comparison of gall. 
Une comparaison, ou similitude, a comparison, or similitude. 
Comparatif, comparative. 
Le Degré comparatif, the com­
parative Degree.  

COMPAROITRE, ou Com­
paroir (en termes de Palais) to appear. 
Comparoitre en Jugement, ou devant le Juge, to appear in Judgement, or before the Judge. 
Comparoitre (ou comparoir) au jour assigné, to appear at the day appointed. 
Comparu, appeared. 
Comparition (f.) appearance. 
Acte public de comparition, an Act (or Testimonial) signifying the appearance of a Party.  

COMPARTIR, faire un com­
partiment, to divide (or put) into equal parts, to make a comparti­
ment. 
Comparti, divided (or put) into equal parts. 
Compartiment (m.) a compar­
timent, an equal and proportiona­
ble division of a building. 
Compartiment d'un Jardin en  



divers carreaux, a division of a Garden into several beds.  

COMPAS (m) instrument avec quoi l'on compasse, a com­
pass, a pair of compasses. 
Compasser, mesurer avec le compass, to measure by the com­
pass. 
Compassé, mesuré avec le compas, measured by the com­
pass. 
Compassé, regulier, exact, com­
pleat, regular. 
Il n'est rien de plus compassé que ses actions, there is nothing more compleat (or exact) than his actions. 
Tout ce qu'il fait est compassé, whatever he does is according to the rules of Morality.
 
* Compassion. V. Compatir.  

COMPATIR, porter com­
passion, to sympathize, to take compassion. 
Compatir auz foiblesses de quêcun, les tolerer, to bear with ones infirmities. 
Compassion (f.) pity, compassion. 
Avoir compassion de quêcun, é­
tre émeu (ou touché) de com­
passion, to take compassion of one. 
Donner de la compassion à quê­
cun, l'émouvoir (l'exciter) à compassion, to move one to pity or compassion. 
Digne de compassion, worthy of compassion. 
Compatible, compatible, which can abide (or agree) together. 
Le chaud est compatible avec l'humide, heat is compatible with moisture.  

COMPATRIOTE (m.) qui est de même Païs, ones Country­
man.  

COMPENSER une chose par une autre, to compensate, to satisfy for a thing, to make amends, to make up one thing by another. 
Ce Service n'est pas capable de compenser leur crime, that Ser­
vice cannot compensate their Of­
fence. 
Compensé, compensated. 
Les Depens compensez, (entre les Parties qui plaident) chacun devant paier les siens, each party being to pay his share of the costs and charges. 
Compensation, (f.) compensati­
on, recompence, equal amends.  

COMPERE (m.) a gossip.  

COMPETANCE (f.) brigue de plusieurs, competition. 
Mettre une chose en compe­
tance, to bring a thing into com­
petition. 
Entrer en competance, brigu­
er avec quêcun, to sue for a thing with another, to strive (or to con­
tend) with him for the same, to make equal claim to it. 
Etre en competance, to stand in competition. 
Competiteur, (m.) a Competi­
tor, one that strives for a thing with other people. 
Competant, propre, suffisant, competent, capable, fit. 
Un Juge competant, a competent Judge. 
Competamment, competently, sufficiently, fitly. 

† COMPILER, ramasser plusi­
eurs choses ensemble, compo­
ser, to compile.  

COMPLAINTE (Terme de Palais) plainte du possesseur troublé, & demande d'étre maintenu par le Juge, a bill of Complaint.  

COMPLAIRE à quêcun, to please one, to please his humour, or to comply with him. 
Complaisant, complaisant, civil, officious. 
C'est un homme fort complai­
sant, he is very complaisant. 
Il est si complaisant qu'il se fait aimer de tout le monde, he is so very complaisant, that he makes himself beloved of all men. 
Complaisance (f) condescen­
dance, complaisance, compla­
cency, compliance, or condescen­
sion. 
Avoir bien de la complaisance pour quêcun, to be very complai­
sant to one, to have very much of condescension for him. 
En ce tems la Complaisance se fait des Amis, & la Verité des Enemis, Now adaies Complacency gets Friends, & Truth makes Foes. 
Il a une vaine complaisance en tout ce qu'il fait, he has a good opinion of any thing that he does.  

COMPLANT. V. Plant.  

COMPLET, compleat, perfect, absolute. 
Une Victoire complete, a com­
pleat (or absolute) Victory. 
Faire des Journées completes, lors qu'on est en Voiage, to make full daies iourneys.  

COMPLEXION (f.) con­
stitution de corps, the complexi­
on, temper, or constitution of the body. 
Forte ou foible complexion, a strong or weak constitution of body. 
Complexion, naturel, humeur d'une personne, the disposition, af­
fection, humours, or inclination of the mind. 
Complexion triste ou joieuse, a sad, or a merry humour. 
Complexionné, as,
Un corps bien complexionné, de bonne complexion, a well complexioned body. 
Un corps mal complexionné, an ill complexioned body.  

COMPLICE (m.) complice d'un crime, a complice, or an ac­
complice, an accessory to a crime. 
Complicité (f.) the state or condition of one who is guilty of the same crime with another.  

COMPLIES (f.) derniere partie de l'Office Ecclessastique, dans l'Eglise de Rome, the Com­
pline, or last part of the Church-office amongst the Roman Catho­
licks.  

COMPLIMENT (m.) civi­
lité, complement. 
Faire un compliment à quêcun, le complimenter, to make one a complement, or to complement him. 
Il me fit un grand compliment, he passed an high complement upon me, I was highly complemented by him. 
Addonné aux complimens, com­
plemental. 
Les complimens ne me plaisent point, I am not pleased with com­
plements. 
Ce n'est pas par compliment que je vous le dis, what I say to you is no complement. 
Ce n'est plus à la mode de faire des complimens, complements are out of fashion. 
Laissons là tous ces complimens, let us give over all these comple­
ments. 
Complimenter, to complement. 
Complimenter quêcun, lui faire un compliment, to complement one, or make him a Complement, to pass a complement upon him. 
Il complimenta le Roi sur son Marriage, he complemented the King upon his Marriage. 
Complimenté, complemented.
Complimenteur (m.) qui fait trop de complimens, a comple­
menter, or one that is too much  



given to complementing.  

COMPLOT, (m.) conjura­
tion, complot, combination, conspi­
racy, confederacy. 
Ceux du complot, the Conspira­
tors. 
Comploter, faire un complot, to complot, combine, conspire, or joyn together for some ill purpose.  

COMPONCTION (f.) re­
mors de conscience, compuncti­
on, or remorse of conscience. 
Avoir componction de ses fau­
tes, to be grieved or troubled for his faults. 

Se COMPORTER, to com­
port, carry, or behave himself.
Comment se comporte-t-il? how do's he comport himself? 
Il se comporte fort bien, he be­
haves himself very well. 
Je me comporterai de telle sor­
te dans les affaires du Public, I shall so carry my self in the publick Concerns. 
Je me comporterai en Ami, I shall shew my self a Friend.  

COMPOSER, faire ou écri­
re, to compose, make, or write. 
Composer un Livre, to compose, (make, or write) a Book. 
Composer en Grec ou en Latin, to make Greek or Latin. 
Composer en vers & en prose, to compose in verse & in prose. 
Apprendre à bien composer, to learn to write well. 
Composer un mot de plusieurs, to compound a word, to make one word of many. 
Composer un corps de diverses pieces, to make up a body of seve­
ral pieces. 
Composer à moitié de profit, to agree that every one shall have an equal share. 
Composé, fait, écrit, compo­
sed, made, or written. 
Un discours bien composé, a speech well composed. 
Un Livre composé en Latin, a book written in Latin. 
Un mot composé, a compound, or compounded word. 
Un corps composé de plusieurs parties, a body made up of several parts. 
Composé, modeste, sober, grave, or modest. 
Un jeune homme bien compo­
sé, dont l'exterieur est fort mo­
deste, a composed (or sober) young man, a young man of a sober and modest countenance. 
Composeur (m.) a Composer. 
Grand composeur (ou faiseur) de Livres, a great Writer of Books. 
Compositeur (m.) celui qui compose, ou qui range les lettres dans une Imprimerie, a Composi­
tor, he that sets the letters in a Printing-house. 
Composition (f.) chose com­
posée, a thing composed, or writ­
ten. 
Faire une composition, to write (or compose) a thing. 
Une composition bien faite, a thing well written. 
Une composition pleine de fau­
tes, a thing ill composed or writ­
ten, swarming with faults. 
C'est par la composition que l'on se rend bon Orateur, it is by frequent exercise of his style that one becomes a good Orator. 
Composition, en termes d'Im­
primerie, the composing of Letters for the printing Press. 
Composition de drogues, d'on­
guens, &c. a Composition of drugs, ointments, &c. 
Composition, accord, conventi­
on, an agreement, accord, compo­
sure, or composition. 
Se rendre à Composition, to sur­
render upon Composition, or upon terms of Composition. 
Prendre une Ville à Composi­
tion, to take a Town by Composi­
tion. 
La Citadelle s'est rendue à composition honorable, the Ci­
tadel surrendred upon honourable terms. 
Les Articles de nôtre Compo­
sition furent, que nous sortiri­
ons tambour battant, enseignes dêploiées, mêche allumée, bale en bouche, the Articles of our Ca­
pitulation were, that we should go out drums beating, colours flying, match lighted, and bullets in the mouth.
 
* Comprehensible. V. Com­
prendre.  

COMPRENDRE, conce­
voir quêque chose, to apprehend, conceive, or understand. 
Comprenez vous ce que je dis? do you apprehend (do you under­
stand) what I say? 
Je ne compren pas bien ce que vous dites, I do not understand well what you say. 
Je vous le ferai comprendre, I shall make you understand it. 
Autant que je puis compren­
dre, as far as I can understand. 
Ce sont des choses qu'on ne peut comprendre, they are things that pass mens understanding. 
Comprendre, contenir, to com­
prehend, include, or contain. 
La Justice comprend toutes les Vertus, toutes les Vertus sont comprises sous la Justice, Justice includes all Virtues, all Virtues are comprehended under that of Justice. 
Compris, entendu, apprehend­
ed, conceived, understood. 
Compris, renferme, comprehend­
ed, included, contained, compri­
sed. 
Le Vaisseau a eté brûlé, & je crain que mon frere n'ait eté compris dans cette perte, the Ship was burnt, and I fear that my brother was comprised in that loss. 
Comprehensible, conceva­
ble, which may be apprehended, or understood, conceivable.  

COMPRIMER, resserrer, to press, squeeze, or thrust close. 
Compresse, pour appliquer sur, une plaie (f.) a fold of lin­
nen to bind up (or lay on) a wound.
 
* Compris. V. Comprendre.  

COMPROMETTRE, to compromit, or put unto compro­
mise, to make a mutuall promise, to stand to the arbitrement of an indifferent Judge. 
Compromis (m.) promesse reciproque de se tenir au Juge­
ment d'un Arbitre, a Compro­
mise, a mutual promise of Adver­
saries to refer their difference un­
to Arbitrement, or a private pow­
er to end a Controversy given by the mutuall consent of the Parties concerned. 
Mettre une affaire en compro­
mis, to put a thing in compro­
mise. 
Mettre son autorité en compro­
mis, to hazard his authority. 
Vous mettrez vôtre vie en compromis, you will venture your life, your life shall be at stake. 
Sa tête fut souvent mise en compromis, his head did often lay at stake.  
COMPTE, & ses derivés. V. Conte.  

COMTE (m.) an Earl. 
Comtesse (f.) a Countess. 
Comté (m.) a County.  

 

CONCAVE, creux, concave, hollow. 
Concavité (f.) concavity, hol­
lowness.  

CONCEDER, accorder quêque chose à quêcun, to grant. 
Conceder, avouër, to grant, or to confess. 
Concedé, granted. 
Concession (f.) concession, grant.  

CONCENTRER, to con­
center, or to joyn in one center. 
Se concentrer, to concenter, or to meet in one center. 
Concentré, concentred, or meeting in one center.
 
* Conception. V. Concevoir.  

CONCERT (m.) concert de Musique, a Consort of Mu­
sick. 
Concert de voix, a vocal Con­
sort of musick, a consent of many voices in one. 
Concert d'opinions, de senti­
mens, unanimity. 
Agir de concert, to act unani­
mously. 
Concerter, pour faire un ac­
cord de musique, to prepare a consort of musick. 
Concerter quêque chose, y avi­
ser, to concert a thing, or to consi­
der of it. 
Nous concertons maintenant les Operations de la Campagne prochaine, we do now concert the Operations of the approaching Campagne. 
Concerter une Réponse, en matiere importante, to contrive an Answer, in a business of some importance. 
Il a concerté avec lui ma ruine, they two have concerted my ru­
ine. 
Concerté, concerted, contrived, considered of. 
Une affaire mal concertée, a bu­
siness ill concerted, or ill contri­
ved. 
Concerté, point émeu, unmo­
ved. 
Apres ce Combat il parût aussi concerté que s'il ne se fust point batu, after the fight he seemed as little moved as if he had not been at all concerned in it.
 
*Concession. V. Conceder.  

CONCEVOIR (parlant d'une mere) to conceive, or breed in the womb. 
Concevoir, comprendre quê­
que chose, to conceive, appre­
hend, or understand. 
Concevez vous ce que je dis? do you apprehend what I say? 
Je ne le conçois pas bien, I do not understand it well. 
Conceu, conceived, or bred in the womb. 
Christ a eté conceu du Saint Esprit, Christ was conceived of the holy Ghost. 
Conceu, compris, entendu, conceived, comprehended, under­
stood. 
Sa Lettre étoit conceuë en ces termes, his Letter was expressed in these terms. 
Une Lettre mal conceuë, a Let­
ter ill indited. 
Concevable, comprehensible, that may be conceived. 
Il n'est pas concevable (on ne sauroit concevoir) combien de peine il soûfrit, it is not to be conceived how much he suffer­
ed. 
Conception (f.) conception, or breeding in the womb. 
La Conception de la Sainte Vi­
erge, the Conception of the Bles­
sed Virgin. 
Conception, pensée, conception, thought, or notion. 
Expliquer ses conceptions, to explain his conceptions. 
Conception, jugement, appre­
hension, judgement, understand­
ing. 
Il a la conception promte & fa­
cile, he is quick of apprehension. 
Il a la conception dure, il ne conçoit pas aisément, he is dull of apprehension.  

CONCHYLE (f.) poisson dont on exprime la pourpre, a shell-fish, the liquor whereof ma­
keth purple.  

CONCIERGE (m.) Conci­
erge de Maison, a house-keep­
er, he that keeps a great mans house in his absence. 
Concierge de Prison, a Gaoler, a keeper (or Warder) of a Pri­
son. 
Conciergerie (f.) Prison, a Prison, or Goal.  

CONCILE (m.) Assemblée de Gens d'Eglise touchant les Affaires de la Religion, a Coun­
cil, for Church matters. 
Concile Oecumenique, ou Ge­
neral, a General Council. 
Concile National, a National Council. 
Concile Provincial, a Provinci­
al Council. 
Denoncer un Concile, to call a Council. 
Assembler un Concile, to assem­
ble a Council. 
Tenir un Concile, to hold a Council.  

CONCILIER, accorder, to reconcile. 
Concilier les esprits, to reconcile men that are at variance.  

CONCIS, succint, concise, short, succinct, compendious.  

CONCITOIEN (m.) a fel­
low-Citizen.  

CONCLAVE (m.) le Lieu où les Cardinaux s'assemblent pour élire un Pape, the Conclave, wherein the Cardinals assemble a­
bout the election of a new Pope.  

CONCLURE, terminer quêque chose, to conclude, end, or finish. 
Conclure un discours, to con­
clude (or end) a discourse. 
Conclure, resoudre, to con­
clude, determine, or resolve up­
on. 
Conclure une affaire, to con­
clude a business. 
Je n'ai rien encore conclu, I have as yet resolved upon nothing. 
Conclure, inferer, tirer conse­
quence, to conclude, gather, infer, or draw a consequence. 
De là je conclus, que vous mentez, from thence I conclude that you ly. 
Conclure contre un accusé, to condemn the Party accused. 
Conclure criminellement con­
tre l'accuse, to condemn the par­
ty accused (or to adjudge him) un­
to death, to give sentence of death. 
Tout conclud à ta mort, every thing conduces to your death. 
Je conclus à vôtre départ, I am for your going away. 
Conclu, terminé, concluded, ended, or finished. 
Conclu, resolu, concluded, de­
termined, or resolved on. 
Je l'ai dit, cela sera, cela est conclu, I said it, it shall be so, I am resolved on it. 
C'est une chose conclue & ar­
rêtée, it is a thing agreed on. 
Conclusion (f.) fin, issue, con­
clusion, end, issue. 
La Conclusion d'un Discours, the Conclusion (or the end) of a Discourse. 
Conclusion, consequence, a con­
sequence.  



D'où je tire cette conclusion, from whence I draw this conse­
quence. 
Conclusion de Demandeur, the demands of a Plaintiff.  

CONCOCTION (f.) con­
coction, digestion in the stomack. 
Faire concoction de la viande mangée, to concoct his meat, to digest it. 
Cette viande aide la concocti­
on, this meat helps the digesti­
on.  

CONCOMBRE. V. Cou­
combre.  

CONCORDE (f.) union, concord, union. 
Etre en concorde, to concord, or be at concord. 
Mettre la concorde entre des enemis, to reconcile enemy's, to make them friends. 
Concordat (m.) an Agree­
ment, or the Articles of an Agree­
ment. 
Le Concordat entre le Pape & les Rois de France, the solemn Act, or Book of Agreement, that passes between the Pope and the French King touching the disposi­
tion of Benefices.  

CONCOURIR, to concur, to come (meet, or joyn) together. 
Concourir au même sentiment, to be of the same opinion. 
Concours (m.) a concourse, a running of many to a Place. 
On ne vid jamais en ce lieu un si grand Concours, there was never so great a Concourse of people in that place. 
Concurrent (m.) Competi­
teur, a Competitor. 
Il étoit son Concurrent à l'Em­
pire, he was his Competitor in the Empire. 
Concurrent, ou Rival, a Rival, a Corrival. 
Concurrence (f.) concurrency. 
Une grande concurrence de pretendans, a great number of competitors. 
Concurrence de plusieurs qui recherchent une même person­
ne en mariage, the competition of several persons that sue to have a woman in marriage. 
Il lui paia jusques à la concur­
rence de mille écus, he paid him to the Sum of a thousand crowns.  

CONCUBINE (f.) a Con­
cubine, a Woman used as a wife. 
Concubine d'un homme marié, a married mans strumpet, whore, or harlot. 
Concubinage (m.) Concubi­
nage, the keeping of a Whore for his own filthy use. 
Concubinage d'un homme ma­
rié, the ill life or company that a wedded man leadeth with a strum­
pet. 
Concubinaire (m.) enfant concubinaire, a bastard born of a Concubine, a Whores Son.  

CONCUPISCENCE (f.) concupiscency, lust. 
Concupiscible, concupiscible. 
L'Appetit Concupiscible, the Concupiscible Appetite, that fa­
culty which frames our sensual desires.
 
* Concurrent, & Concurrence. V. Concourir.  

CONCUSSION (f.) concus­
sion, publick extorsion, or money unjustly taken in the time one was in Office, or while he was a Ma­
gistrate. 
Accusé & convaincu de concus­
sion, accused and convicted of ex­
torsion. 
Concussionaire (m.) a Con­
cussionary, or publick Extorsio­
ner.  

CONDAMNER, to condemn, judge, or adjudge. 
Condamner quêcun de larcin, to condemn one of theft. 
Condamner à la mort, to adjudge to death, or to condemn to die. 
Condamner aux Galeres, to condemn to the Galleys. 
Condamner à une amende, to fine, or amerce one. 
Condamné, condemned, judg­
ed, adjudged. 
Etre faussement accusé & in­
justement condamné, to be false­
ly accused and unjustly condemn­
ed. 
Etre condamné à de grands Supplices, to be condemned (or adjudged) to great torments. 
Condamné à une amende, fi­
ned, amerced. 
Ma partie averse a eté condam­
née, my adversary was cast. 
Etre condamné à tant de de­
pens, to be cast in so much cost. 
Tel est condamné qui a bonne Cause, he that is in the right of­
ten receives the foil. 
Condamnable, that deserves to be condemned. 
Condamnation (f.) condem­
nation. 
Passer condamnation, to give o­
ver a Suit in Law, to yield unto an Agreement, to desist from brab­
ling in Law. 
Je passe condamnation, je vous avouë que j'ai tort, I submit to my condemnation, I confess I am in the wrong. 
Condamnatoire, ou portant condamnation, condemning, condemnatory. 
Suffrage condamnatoire, suf­
frage de condamnation, a con­
demning voice, or vote.  

CONDENSER, épaissir, to condense, thicken, or make thick. 
Condensé, épaissi, condensed, thickned, or made thick. 
Condensation (f.) épaississe­
ment, condensation, thickening, or making thick.  

CONDESCENDRE, to con­
descend, or to agree to. 
Condescendre à la volonté d'autrui, to condescend to another mans will. 
Je condescens aux Offres que vous me faites, I condescend to your Offers. 
Je condescens à tout ce que vous voudrez, I shall submit to what you please. 
Il nous faut condescendre à leur foiblesse, we must bear with their infirmity. 
Condescendant, facile, com­
plaisant, flexible, or complai­
sant. 
Condescendance (f.) con­
descendency, or condescension. 
Il a beaucoup de condescen­
dance pour vous, he has very much of condescension for you.  

CONDITION (f.) rang, état d'une personne, ones qua­
lity. 
Un homme de condition, de grande condition, a man of great quality. 
Un homme de moienne condi­
on, a man of mean condition. 
Un homme de basse condition, a man of low condition. 
Des hommes de la plus basse, de la derniere condition, men of the lowest condition. 
Je ne suis pas de pire conditi­
on que les autres, I am as good a man as the rest. 
Vivre selon sa condition, to live according to his quality, or to his condition. 
Condition, Place, ou Emploi, a Place, or imployment. 
Chercher une condition, to look for a place.  



Trouver une tres bonne Con­
dition, to find a very good Place. 
Entrer en Condition, to enter into (or upon) an Imploy­
ment. 
Sortir de Condition, to leave a Place, or to come out of it. 
Condition d'un Accord, the Conditions (Articles, or Termes) of an Agreement. 
Imposer des conditions, to im­
pose conditions, to bring one to ar­
ticles. 
Offrir des conditions hono­
rables, to offer honourable terms. 
Recevoir (accepter) les con­
ditions proposées, to accept of the conditions proposed. 
Refuser (ne pas accepter) les conditions, to refuse conditions. 
Accomplir (garder) les con­
ditions, to keep (or observe) the Articles. 
Mettre une condition, to put in an article, to put in a proviso. 
A condition que, pourveu que, provided that. 
A condition que vous vous tai­
siez, provided that you hold your tongue. 
Conditioner, mettre des con­
ditions, to put in conditions. 
Conditioné, bien conditi­
oné, tel qu'il faut, good, well con­
trived. 
Pourveu que la biere soit bien conditionée, provided that the beer be well brewed. 
Conditionel, conditional. 
Un offre conditionel, a conditio­
nal offer. 
Conditionellement, conditi­
onally, upon condition.  

CONDOLEANCE (f.) as, 
Faire un Compliment de Con­
doleance à quêcun sur la mort d'un proche Parent, to condole with one for the death of a near Relation.  

CONDRILLE (f.) sorte d'herbe, gum-succory, an herb with white leaves like succory, & stalks like rushes.  

CONDUIRE, to conduct, lead, or guide. 
Dieu vous conduise, God be with you, I pray God go along with you. 
Conduire quêcun au Supplice, to conduct one to the Execution place. 
Conduire une Armée, to com­
mand an Army. 
Conduire l'Etat, to govern the State. 
Conduire une affaire, to manage a business. 
Il a conduit l'affaire à ce point que, he has brought the business to such a pass that. 
Conduire du bétail, to drive cat­
tel. 
Conduire un Ruisseau d'un lieu en un autre, to bring in a River to a place. 
Conduire une muraille, la continuer depuis un endroit jusqu'a un autre, to carry out a wall from one place to ano­
ther. 
Se conduire, se comporter sagement, to behave (or to carry) himself discreetly. 
Conduit, conducted, led, or guided. 
Une Armée bien conduite, an Army having good Commanders. 
Un Etat mal conduit, a State ill governed. 
Une affaire mal conduite, a business ill managed, ill order­
ed. 
Conduit (a masc. subst.) a conduit, an aqueduct. 
Sauf conduit, safe conduct. 
Conduite (f.) convoy, a con­
ducting. 
Conduite, administration, ad­
ministration, handling, or mana­
gement. 
Donner la conduite d'une chose à quêcun, to give one the ma­
nagement of a thing. 
Il a la conduite de toutes mes affaires, he has the management of all my concerns. 
Avoir la conduite d'une Armée, to have the Command of an Ar­
my. 
Etre sous la conduite de quê­
cun, to be under ones tuition or go­
vernment. 
Conduite, prudence, conduct, wisdom, prudence, discretion. 
C'est un homme de grande con­
duite, he is a man of a great con­
duct. 
Il manque (il n'a point) de con­
duite, he wants discretion, he has no forecast at all. 
Mauvaise conduite, ill con­
duct. 
Cela lui est arrivé par sa mau­
vaise conduite, that he fell in­
to by his ill conduct, or for want of good conduct. 
Conducteur (m.) celui qui conduit, a Conductor, or Leader. 
Conducteur d'une affaire, d'une entreprise, the manager of a business, or of a design. 
Conducteur de danse, he that leads the dance.  

CONDUPLICATION (f.) figure de Rhetorique, a Fi­
gure when one word is twice re­
peated.  

CONE (m.) figure qui va en pointe obtuse, a Cone, a geometri­
call body, broad beneath and sharp above, with a circular bottom.  

CONETABLE. V. Conné­
table.  

CONFECTION (m.) com­
position, a confection, or composi­
tion. 
La confection du Chyle, the concoction of the Chyle.  

CONFEDERATION (m.) Confederacy, or Confederation, the making of (or entring into) a League with others. 
Faire Confederation avec les Peuples étrangers, to confederate with forein Nations. 
Confederez, Confederate, en­
tred into a League together. 
Les Cantons de Suisse & leurs Confederez, the Swiss Cantons and their Confederates. 
Des Armées Confederées, Con­
federate Army's.  

CONFERER d'une chose avec quêcun, to confer with one about somthing. 
Nous confererons ensemble de toutes ces choses, we shall talk together of all these things. 
Conferer un Benefice, to confer a Benefice. 
Conferer quêque honneur, ou quêque charge à quêcun, to confer an honour or an imployment upon one. 
Conference (f.) a Confe­
rence. 
Ils ont eu Conference ensemble, they have had a conference toge­
ther. 
Mr. l'Ambassadeur & les Com­
missaires ont eu diverses Con­
ferences sur cette matiere, My Lord Embassador and the Kings Commissioners had severall Conferences together upon that matter. 
Une Conference de Paix, a Conference about Peace. 
Conference Academique, an A­
cademicall Conference.   

CONFESSER, avouër sa  



faute, to confess, to acknowledge his fault.
Je lui ferai confesser sa faute, I shall make him confess his fault. 
Confesser ses pechez à un Prê­
tre, se confesser, to confess his sins to a Priest, or make him his con­
fession. 
Se confesser generalement, faire une confession generale, to make a general confession. 
Confesser quêcun, ouir sa con­
fession, to confess, one, or to hear his confession. 
Confessé, confessed, acknow­
leged. 
Confesseur (m.) qui oit les Confessions, a Confessor. 
Il est mon Confesseur, he is my Confessor. 
Confesseur, qui professe la Foi Chrêtienne de vant les Tyrans & dans les Tourmens, a Confessor of the Christian Faith, a Martyr. 
Confession (f.) aveu, a confes­
sion, or acknowlegement. 
Confession auriculaire, the auri­
cular Confession. 
Confession generale, a generall Confession. 
Faire une Confession generale, to make a generall confession. 
Ouïr les Confessions, to hear Confessions. 
Confessional, ou Confessoir (m.) the Confessionary.
 
* Confidence. V. Confier.  

CONFIER quêque chose à quêcun, to trust one with som­
thing. 
Se confier en quêcun, mettre sa confiance en lui, to repose his trust in one, to trust (or confide in) him. 
Celui en qui je me confiois le plus m'a le premier trahi, he that I trusted most betrayed me first. 
Se confier en Dieu, to trust in God, to put his trust or confidence in God. 
Se confier en ses forces, to trust to his own forces. 
Il se confioit en la bonté de sa Cause, he trusted to the justness of his Cause. 
Un homme qui ne se confie qu'en lui même, one that trusts only to himself. 
Confiance (f.) confidence, trust, assurance. 
Mettre sa confiance en Dieu, to put his trust in God. 
Avoir confiance en quêcun, to confide in one, to trust him. 
La confiance que j'ai en vous me fait entreprendre cette af­
faire, the confidence I have in you makes me undertake that bu­
siness. 
Sur la confiance que j'ai en vò­
tre bonté, upon the confidence I have in your bounty. 
J'ai confiance que ceci reüssira à vôtre honneur, I am confident (or I have a great confidence) that this will succeed to your credit. 
La confiance n'est rien qu'une Esperance consommée, & for­
tifiée par l'opinion que l'on prend, que les choses dont on attend du secours ne manque­
ront pas au besoin; Confidence is nothing but a consummate hope, and that strengthned with the o­
pinion one has, that those things from whence he expects a help shall not fail him in time of need. 
Confidence (f.) grande ami­
tié & familiarité avec quê­
cun, intimacy, or great familiari­
ty. 
Avoir confidence avec quêcun, l'avoir pour confident, to be intimate with one, to look upon him as his confident or trusty friend. 
Faire confidence d'une chose à quêcun, to trust a secret thing with one, to impart it to him. 
Confident (m.) a Confident, or a trusty friend, a friend to whom one trusts, in whom he hath con­
fidence, in whose assistance he re­
lies. 
Confidente (f.) a she-confi­
dent, a woman that is confident to one. 
Confidemment, confidently.  

CONFINER, to confine, or keep within bounds. 
Confiner quêcun dans un cer­
tain lieu, to confine one to a cer­
tain place. 
Confiner quêcun dans une Pri­
son, to confine one to Prison. 
Confiner, aboutir en même endroit, to confine, or border upon. 
Confiné, confined. 
Il a eté confiné dans un Desert, he was confined to a Wilderness. 
Confins, frontiere, confines, borders.  

CONFIRE, to preserve. 
Confire des fruits, to preserve fruits. 
Confit, preserved. 
Confitures (f.) preserves, con­
fits, or sweet meats. 
Confitures seches & liquides, dry and wet confits. 
Confisseur (m.) qui fait les Confitures, a Confectioner, or one that makes Confits. 
Confiturier (m.) qui vend des Confitures, a Confectioner, or one that sells confits.  

CONFIRMER, to confirm, or make good. 
Confirmer ce qu'on dit par de bonnes raisons, to make good what one sayes with strong rea­
sons. 
Confirmer, approuver, auto­
riser, to confirm, or approve of. 
Confirmer quêcun, lui donner ce que les Romains appellent le Sacrement de Confirmation, to confirm one, or to give him the Confirmation. 
Confirmé, confirmed, or made good. 
Cette nouvelle est elle confir­
mée ou non? is that news con­
firmed or no? 
Confirmé, approuvé, autorisé, confirmed, approved of. 
Confirmé, qui a receu la Con­
firmation, Confirmed, that hath received the Confirmation. 
Confirmation (f.) confirmati­
on. 
La Confirmation dont les Pa­
pistes font un Sacrement, the Confirmation, which makes one of the seven Sacraments of the Ro­
man Church. 
Recevoir la Confirmation, to receive the Confirmation.  

CONFISQUER, to confis­
cate. 
Confisquer les Biens de quê­
cun, to confiscate ones goods, to seize his goods or estate as forfei­
ted to the Prince or common Trea­
sury. 
Confisquer ses Biens, com­
mettre une faute pour la­
quelle nos Biens soient con­
fisquez, to forfeit his Goods or Estate. 
Confisqué, confiscated, for­
feited. 
Une Santé confisquée, un Corps confisqué, a decay'd bo­
dy, or one that pines away. 
Confiscation (f.) Confiscation de Biens, a confiscation, a publick seisure, a forfeiture. 
J'ai eu la confiscation de ses  



Biens, I have had the confiscation of his Goods.
 
* Confit, Confitures, Confitu­
rier. V. Confire.  

CONFLAGRATION (f.) a Conflagration, a great fire.  

CONFLUENT (m.) le Confluent de deux Rivieres, lors qu'une Riviere entre dans une autre, the Place whereat two Rivers meet.  

CONFONDRE, mêler con­
fusément ensemble, to con­
found, or disorder a thing, disor­
derly to mingle or tumble things together. 
Confondre quêcun, lui jetter la confusion sur le visage, to confound, or shame one, to put him out of countenance. 
Il m'a confondu, je n'ai seu que lui répondre, he hath confounded me, I could not tell what answer to give him. 
Confus, mêlé, brouillé, con­
founded, confused, disordered. 
Un discours confus, a confused discourse. 
Confus en ses pensées & dans ses discours, confused in his con­
ceptions and discourse. 
Confus, honteux, chargé de honté, confounded, ashamed, put out of countenance. 
Cette réponse le rendit fort honteux & confus, that answer did put him very much out of countenance. 
Confus, troublé, confounded, troubled. 
Confusion (f.) desordre, con­
fusion, disorder, hurly-burly. 
Confusion, honte, confusion, or shame. 
Ceci me donne bien de la con­
fusion, this puts me into a great confusion. 
Je le dirai à ma confusion, I shall speak it to my shame and con­
fusion. 
Confusément, sans ordre, con­
fusedly, without order.  

CONFORME, conform, con­
formable, congruous, like, agree­
able. 
Ce genre de vie est tres con­
forme à la nature, this kind of life is very conformable (or agree­
able) to Nature. 
La fin est conforme au com­
mencement, the end is like the beginning. 
Personne du monde n'a des fen­
timens plus conformes aux mi­
ens, no man in the World has any opinions more consentaneous to my own. 
Conformer une chose à une autre, to conform one thing to another, to frame it according to that. 
Se conformer à la volonté de quêcun, to conform to anothers will. 
Conformité (f.) conformity, conformableness, resemblance, or likeness. 
Le bonheur de l'Homme con­
siste en la conformité de sa volonté à celle de Dieu, Mans happiness consists in the confor­
mity of his will with the will of God. 
Conformément, conformably, accordingly, or according to. 
Parler conformément au Tems, to speak according to the Times. 
Il parle conformément à mon desir, he speaks conformably to my desire. 
Conformément à l'Edit du Roi, according to the Kings E­
dict. 
Vivre conformément à la Rai­
son, to live according to the Rules of Reason.  

CONFRERE (m.) Brother, or Fellow of one and the same Com­
pany or Society. 
Confrerie, ou Confrairie (f.) a Fraternity, Brotherhood, Fel­
lowship, Society, a Company of one Trade or Profession.  

CONFRONTER, to con­
front, or compare, to examine one by another. 
Confronter un Témoin au Criminel, to bring an accuser (or accusing Witness) before the par­
ty accused, to confront them toge­
ther, to bring them face to face. 
Confronter la copie avec l'ori­
ginal, to compare the copy by the original. 
Confronté, confronted, compa­
red, or examined. 
Confrontation (f.) a con­
fronting, comparing, or exami­
ning. 
Confrontation de Témoins, a confronting together of Witnesses, a reading or examining of the deposition of accusers in presence of the accused.
 
* Confus, Confusion, & Con­
fusément. V. Confondre.  

CONFUTATION (f.) con­
futation, refutation.  

CONGÉ(m.) permission, leave, permission. 
Donner à quêcun congé de s'en aller, to give one leave to be gone. 
Donner congé à un Soldat, avec charge de revenir, to give a Souldier leave with charge to return. 
Donner congé à un Soldat pour toûjours, to dismiss a Soul­
dier. 
Congé, Vacance parmi les Eco­
liers, a breaking up of School. 
On donnera demain congé, de­
main les Ecoliers auront congé, the School will break up to mor­
row. 
Congedier, to dismiss, dis­
charge, give leave (or permit) to go, to suffer to depart. 
Congedier l'Assemblée, to dis­
miss the Congregation. 
Congedier une Armée, to dis­
band an Army. 
Congedié, dismissed, dischar­
ged, suffered to depart. 
Une Armée congediée, a dis­
banded Army.  

CONGELER, faire cailler, ou faire épaissir, to congeal, to thicken, or make thick. 
Se Congeler, se cailler, s'é­
paissir, to congeal, thicken, or be­
come thick. 
Congelé, caillé, épaissi, con­
gealed, thickned, or made thick. 
Congelation (f.) a congelati­
on.  

CONGRATULER quêcun, le feliciter, se rejouïr avec lui de quêque chose, to congratu­
late, to express his joy to another for his good fortune. 
Congratulation (f.) a congra­
tulation, or verbal rejoycing with one for his good fortune.  

CONGRE (m.) sorte de poisson, a congar fish.  

CONGREGATION (f.) Assemblée, an Assembly or Con­
gregation, a Company of people gathered together in a publick Place.  

CONGREZ (m.) pariement du mâle & de la femelle, copu­
lation.  

CONJECTURE (f.) a con­
jecture, or ghess. 
Deviner par conjecture, to give a ghess.
Je tire de là une conjecture,  



from thence I draw a conjecture. 
On ne peut former aucune con­
jecture sur ces choses, one can­
not make any perfect conjecture of these things. 
La conjecture que j'en ai est fondée sur une concurrence de choses, qui toutes y contribu­
ent, my conjecture is grounded up­
on a concurrence of things which altogether contribute thereto. 
Conjecturer, to conjecture, or ghess. 
Conjecturer quêque chose, to conjecture (or imagine) some­
thing. 
Sa mine me fait conjecturer beaucoup de choses, I conje­
cture many things from his looks. 
Je conjecture par moi même, que vous n'eussiez pas agrée sa Harangue, I ghess by my own self that you would not have liked his Harang. 
Conjecturé, conjectured.  

CONJOINDRE, to conjoyn, or joyn together. 
Conjoindre deux choses, to joyn two things together. 
Conjoint, conjoyned, or joyned together. 
Conjointement, jointly. 
Conjonction (f.) Conjunction, or Union of things together. 
Conjonction, partie d'Oraison, a Conjunction, or a part of Speech so called. 
Conjoncture (f.) état des af­
faires, a conjuncture, case, state (or juncture) of affairs. 
Dans cette conjoncture il fa­
loit dissimuler, in such a case you should have connived. 
Ce fut une mauvaise conjon­
cture, it was a fatal conjun­
cture.  

CONJUGUER un Verbe, to conjugate a Verb. 
Conjugué, conjugated. 
Conjugaison (f.) conjuga­
tion. 
Conjugal, conjugal, belonging unto man and wife. 
L'amour conjugal, the conjugal love. 
Le lien conjugal, the conjugal ty, the bond of matrimony.  

CONJURER, prier quêcun, to conjure, or beseech one earnest­
ly. 
Conjurer, conspirer contre quêcun, to conspire (or com­
bine) against one, to joyn in a private confederacy against him. 
Conjurer, exorciser, to conjure, or exorcise. 
Conjurez (m.) ceux qui sont d'une Conjuration, men that have sworn and conspired together, Conspirators for some ill purpose. 
Conjuration (f.) conspiration, conjuration, conspiracy. 
Conjuration, exorcisme, a conju­
ring.  

CONNETABLE (m.) Ge­
neral perpetuel des Armées de France, the Lord High Consta­
ble of France, the principal Offi­
cer of that Crown in Warlike ex­
peditions. 
Autrefois le grand Ecuier de France étoit le Connêtable, heretofore the Master of the Kings Horse was the Lord High Con­
stable. 
Connêtablie (f.) the Consta­
bleship, the Office (or Place) of the Constable. 

CONNEXION, Connexité (f.) connexion. 

† CONNIL. V. Lapin.  

CONNIVER, to connive, or wink at, to suffer, tolerate, or bear with. 
Connivence (f.) connivence, or winking at, toleration, permis­
sion.
 
* Conoissable, & Conoissance. V. Conoitre.  

CONOITRE, to know, to be acquainted with. 
Je vous conois parfaitement, I know you very well. 
Je le conois admirablement, je sai son humeur, I am well ac­
quainted with him, I do under­
stand his humour. 
Conoitre quêcun de veuë, to know one by sight. 
Je ne le conois pas mêmes de veuë, I do not so much as know him by sight. 
Je ne le conois en nulle façon, I do not know him at all. 
Se faire conoitre, se donner à conoitre, to make himself known. 
Il a vêcu parmi nous sans se faire conoitre, he has lived a­
mongst us unknown, or incognito. 
Conoitre quêque chose, to know a thing, to understand it. 
Je voudrois que vous pussiez conoitre l'affection que je vous porte, I wish you could know the love I have for you. 
Je conois les embûches que me dressent mes Enemis, I know what snares my Enemies do lay against me. 
Je conois par vos Lettres, que vous m'aimez, I see by your Let­
ters, that you love me. 
Autant que je puis conoitre par vos discours, as much as I can understand by your discourse. 
Si je pouvois conoitre ces my­
steres, if I could but know (or penetrate into) those mysteries. 
Il m'a fait conoitre cela, he has made me to understand that. 
Ces choses font conoitre que vous étes un imprudent, these things argue (or make it appear) that you are an unwise man. 
Le jour sit conoitre que les E­
nemis s'étoient enfuis, the day coming on made it appear that the Enemies were fled. 
Je lui ferai conoitre à qui il se prend, I shall make him know who I am. 
Je lui ferai conoitre ma fideli­
té, I shall make him know my fi­
delity. 
Se conoitre en quêque chose, y étre entendu, to have skill in something. 
Conoitre, discerner une chose entre plusieurs autres, to know one thing from many others. 
Conoitre, avoir juridiction de Judicature, to have a Judges power. 
Conoitre d'une affaire, en juger, to be Judge of a thing. 
Conu, seu, known. 
C'est un homme assez conu pour sa vertu, il est d'une vertu conue, he is a man well known for his virtue, his virtue is well known. 
Il y a des choses qui ne peuvent étre conues, there are some things which cannot be known. 
Toutes ces choses me sont co­
nues, je les conois clairement, all these things are known to me, they are as clear to me as the Sun. 
Ce sont des choses conues d'un chacun, they are things known of every one. 
Conoissable, which may be known or understood. 
Conoissance (f.) knowledge. 
Nous avons naturellement quê­
que conoissance de ces choses, we naturally have some knowledge of these things. 
S'appliquer à la conoissance de quêque chose, to apply, (or to give) himself to the knowledge of something.  



La conoissance des choses à venir, the knowledge of things to come. 
Nous avons puisé ces conois­
sances dans ces Auteurs, we have taken those lights from such Authors. 
On n'a aucune conoissance as­
seurée de cette affaire, there is no certain knowledge of that thing. 
Cela étant venu à ma cono­
issance, that being come to my knowledge. 
Prendre conoissance d'un Pro­
cez, s'en reserver la conoissance, to hear a Cause debated, and as a Judge to determine it. 
Etre condamné sans conoissance de Cause, to be condemned with­
out hearing. 
Faire conoissance avec quêcun, to get acquainted with one. 
Je vous ferai faire conoissance avec lui, I shall get you acquainted with him. 
Monsieur, Je suis ravi d'avoir l'honneur de vôtre conoissance, Sir, I am very glad to have the ho­
nour of your acquaintance. 
Je vien de faire une conois­
sance, I got just now a new ac­
quaintance. 
Je le veux, lors que nous au­
rons fait un peu plus de co­
noissance, I will, when we are a little better acquainted toge­
ther. 
Il tomba évanouï, n'aiant plus de conoissance, he fell into a swound, and lost his senses.  

CONQUERIR, to con­
quer, subdue, bring under obedi­
ence. 
Conquerir de nouveaux Païs, to conquer new Countries, or to make new Conquests. 
Conquis, conquered, subdued, brought under obedience. 
Conquerant (m.) a Conque­
rour. 
Conquête (f.) ce qui a eté conquis, a Countrey conquered or subdued. 
Faire de grandes Conquêtes, to make great Conquests.  

CONROYER, to curry, tan, or dress leather. 
Conroyé, curried, tanned, or dressed. 
Conroyeur (or rather) Cor­
royeur (m.) a Currier, a Tanner, or Leather-dresser. 
Conroyement (m.) a cur­
rying, tanning, or dressing of lea­
ther. 
Courroie (f.) bande de cuir, a thong.  

CONSACRER, to conse­
crate, hollow, dedicate, or devote unto. 
Consacrer une Eglise, to conse­
crate a Church. 
Consacrer le Pain & le Vin de la S. Cene, to consecrate the Bread and Wine of the holy Com­
munion. 
Consacrer ses travaux & sa vie au Salut de sa Patrie, to de­
dicate all his endeavours and his life to the service of his Coun­
trey. 
Se Consacrer au Service de Dieu, to devote himself to the Ser­
vice of God. 
Consacré, consecrated, hallow­
ed, dedicated, devoted unto. 
Consecration (f.) dedication, consecration, or dedication. 
Consecration du Pain & du Vin, the Consecration of Bread and Wine.  

CONSANGUINITÉ(f.) Consanguinity, nearness in bloud, Kindred by birth or bloud.  

CONSCIENCE (f.) consci­
ence, the testimony (or witness) of ones mind. 
La Conscience m'est témoin de l'affection que j'ai pour vous, my Conscience witnesses for me the affection and love I have for you. 
Appuié sur le témoignage de sa Conscience, relying on the testimony of his own Conscience. 
Je fais plus d'état du témoi­
gnage de'ma Conscience que de tous les discours des hom­
mes, I value more the testimony of my own Conscience than all the discourses of men. 
Une bonne ou mauvaise Con­
science, a good or bad Conscience. 
Il n'est pas bon de faire quoi que ce soit contre sa Consci­
ence, it is not good to act any thing against his Conscience. 
Agir en bonne Conscience, to act with a good Conscience. 
Jurer sur sa Conscience, to swear upon his Conscience. 
Promettre sur sa Conscience, to promise upon his Conscience. 
Trahir sa Conscience, to betray his Conscience. 
Faire conscience de quêque chose, to make conscience (or scru­
ple) of a thing. 
Il fait conscience de mentir, he makes a conscience of a lie. 
Je me sens obligé en consci­
ence, I think my self bound in conscience. 
Un remors de Conscience, a remorse of Conscience. 
La Conscience le remord, le tourmente, lui reproche ses crimes, & ne lui donne aucun repos, his Conscience rebukes and torments him, layes his crimes before him, and gives him no man­
ner of rest. 
Ma Conscience ne me trou­
ble point, ne me reproche rien, my Conscience troubles me not at all, never upbraids me in the least. 
Un homme sans Conscience, a man of no conscience. 
Conscientieux, conscientious, that hath a good conscience. 
Conscientieusement, consci­
entiously, with a good conscience.

* Consecration. V. Consacrer.

* Consecutif, Consecutivement. V. Consequence.  

CONSEIL (m.) avis, coun­
sel, advice, a judgement (or opini­
on) demanded, or given. 
Demander conseil à ses Amis, to ask counsel (or advice) of his friends. 
Donner conseil, to give counsel, or advice. 
Prendre conseil, to take advice or counsel. 
Prendre conseil d'autrui tou­
chant quêque affaire, to take counsel of another about some bu­
siness. 
Suivre le conseil des autres, to follow other mens counsel. 
Il l'a fait sans m'en demander conseil, he has done it without asking my advice. 
Conseil, Assemblée de gens pour consulter & deliberer, a Coun­
cil, a Court (Company, or Assem­
bly) of Counsellors. 
Conseil Privé, où le Prince pre­
side, the Privy Council. 
Conseil d'Etat, the Council of State. A Council which is so cal­
led, when assembled about publick and important businesses, and espe­
cially matters of War. 
Conseil des Finances. So is that Council called, which is assembled about the ordering or disposing of the Kings Revenue. 
Conseil privé, Conseil des par­
ties. 



A Council which is assem­
bled about particular Controversy's or Causes between Party and Party, and of some resemblance with those which are determined at the Council Table in England. 
Grand Conseil. A Court compo­
sed of four Presidents (who are withall to be Masters of Requests) and twenty Counsellors; which determine ordinarily of Appeals from the Provost of the Kings Hou­
shold, and extraordinarily of such Cases as be referred unto them by Commission from the Privy Coun­
cil. 
Conseil de Ville, the common Council of a City. 
Tenir Conseil, to hold a Coun­
cil. 
Conseil, le Lieu du Conseil, the Council Place. 
Conseiller, to counsel, advise, or direct. 
Conseiller quêcun, lui donner conseil, to counsel (or advise) one, to give him counsel or advice, to direct him what to do. 
Conseiller quêque chose à quêcun, to advise one to some­
thing. 
Que me conseillez vous? what do you advise me to? what do you advise me to do? 
Je vous conseille de vous en aller, I advise you to be gone. 
Se conseiller à quêcun, se con­
seiller aupres de quêcun, lui de­
mander conseil, to ask counsel of one. 
Conseillé, counselled, advised. 
Conseiller (m.) qui conseille, a Counsellor, one that gives his advice (or delivers his opinion) upon a doubt propounded, business discussed, or cause to be determi­
ned. 
Conseiller du Roi, the Kings Counsellour. 
Conseiller du Roi en son Con­
seil Privé, a Privy Counsellor, one of his Majesties Privy Council. 
Consul (m.) a Consul, one of the chief Magistrates of a City. 
Toutes les Années on choisit de nouveaux Consuls, every year new Consuls are chosen. 
La Charge de Consul est peu de chose maintenant en compa­
raison de celle des Consuls de l'ancienne Rome, the Place of a Consul now adaies is very inconsi­
derable if compared to those of old Rome. 
Les Consuls de Rome n'étoient pas établis seulement pour gou­
verner la Ville, mais pour com­
mander les Armées, the Roman Consuls were not only appointed to govern the City, but to command also their Armies. 
Pour étre Consul parmi les Ro­
mains il faloit avoir quarante­
trois ans, no man could be a Con­
sul of Rome under the age of three and forty years. 
Consulaire, appartenant à Consul, of, or belonging to a Con­
sul. 
Consulaire (m.) qui a eté Consul, one that has been Con­
sul. 
Consulat (m.) the Consulship, the Office (or Place) of a Con­
sul. 
Durant mon Consulat, during my Consulship. 
Consulter, deliberer, to con­
sult, to deliberate. 
Ils consultent entr'eux (ils de­
liberent sur) ce qu'ils doivent faire, they consult (or deliberate) together what to do. 
Consulter quêcun, to take ad­
vice of one, or to advice with him. 
Consulter son Avocat, to take advice of his Councel. 
Consulté, consulted. 
Consultation (f.) delibera­
tion, consultation, deliberation. 
On fera consultation sur ce point, a consultation will be held upon this point.  

CONSENTIR, to consent, or to agree to. 
J'y consens, je le veux, j'en suis content, I consent (I agree) to it, I am contented with it. 
Vous ne sauriez me faire con­
sentir à cela, you cannot make me consent to that. 
Tous les hommes consentent en cela, all men agree in that. 
Consentir à une tentation, to yield to a temptation. 
Consentant (m.) Complice de quêque Crime, an Accessary to some Crime. 
Consentement (m.) consent, approbation. 
Donner son consentement à quêque chose, l'approuver, to give his approbation to som­
thing. 
Tâcher de tirer le consente­
ment d'autrui, to indeavour to get anothers consent. 
Suspendre son consentement, to suspend his consent. 
Du Consentement du Magi­
strat, by the Magistrates con­
sent. 
D'un commun consentement, with one accord.  

CONSEQUENCE (f.) a consequence, a sequel. 
Une Consequence necessaire, a necessary consequence. 
Cette consequence n'est pas bonne, ou ne s'ensuit pas, that is no good consequence, it doth not follow. 
Par voie de consequence, by way of consequence. 
Quelle consequence tirez vous de là? what consequence do you draw from thence? 
Tirer une chose en consequen­
ce, to bring a thing into prece­
dent, to make a precedent of it. 
Je vous accorde cette grace, mais sans tirer à consequence, I grant you that favour, but it must not be brought as a precedent. 
Consequence, importance, con­
sequence, moment, importance. 
Une chose de grande conse­
quence, a thing of great moment. 
Une chose de peu de conse­
quence, a small matter, a thing of small consequence. 
De quelle consequence pensez vous que cela soit pour acque­
rir de l'estime? how material (or conducive) do you think that is to get fame? 
Une chose de dangereuse con­
sequence, a thing of a dangerous consequence. 
Consequent; as,
Par conquent, consequently, by consequence, therefore. 
Vous étes son Ami, & par con­
sequent vous devez l'aider, you are his Friend, and therefore you ought to help him. 
Consecutif, following immedi­
ately, or one after another. 
Durant trois jours consecutifs, during three daies one after ano­
ther. 
Il m'en prie par trois lettres consecutives, he desires me to do it in three several Letters received one upon another. 
Consecutivement, one after another.  

CONSERVER, to keep, maintain, conserve, preserve, or defend.
Conserver sa santé, se conser­
ver, ou se conserver en santé, to  



keep his health, to keep himself in health. 
Conserver son Autorité, to keep his Authority. 
J'ai conservé ma Patrie durant les Guerres, I have preserved (or defended) my Country during the Warrs. 
Conserver des fleurs contre le froid, to keep flowers from cold. 
Conservé, kept, maintained, preserved, or defended. 
Conservateur, (m.) a Conser­
vator, Preserver, or Maintainer. 
Conservatrice (f.) a Conser­
vatrix. 
Conservation, (f.) conservati­
on, keeping, maintaining, preser­
vation, defence, or protection. 
Je veille à la Conservation de la Ville, I watch for the Defence or Preservation of the Town. 
Conservation, ou Juridiction de la Conservation des Privile­
ges Roiaux, a Jurisdiction esta­
blished for the maintaining of Pri­
viledges granted by the King, and judging of all Causes and civil Con­
troversies relating thereto. 
Conservation des Foires de la Ville de Lyon, a Jurisdiction o­
ver all manner of Debtors for Com­
modities taken up at any of the Fairs of Lyon. 
Conserve (f.) espece de con­
fitures, conserve. 
Conserve de roses, a conserve of roses.  

CONSIDERER, to consider, advise upon, think of, mind, ex­
amine. 
Considerer quêque chose avec attention, to consider a thing ear­
nestly, to take it seriously into con­
sideration. 
Considerons la chose en soi, let us consider the thing in it self. 
Considerer chaque chose a loi­
sir, to consider everything leisurely. 
Considerez la sottise du person­
nage, mind the sottishness of the man. 
Considerer, contempler, to view, behold, or look upon. 
Considerez bien cette peinture, look stedfastly upon that picture. 
L'aiant consideré depuis les piés jusqu'a la tête, having look'd upon him from top to toe. 
Consideré, avisé, a considerate man, a man that is careful, wary, wise, circumspect, one that doth things with consideration. 
Consideré, respecté, estimé, re­
spected, or esteemed. 
Je suis le plus consideré dans la Cour, I am the chief man at the Court. 
Considerable, qui merite d'étre consideré, that is to be con­
sidered, advised on, or thought of. 
Il ne pouvoit rien faire alors de considerable, he could do then nothing considerable. 
Un gain fort considerable, a very considerable gain. 
Une perte considerable, a great loss, a considerable loss. 
Une homme considerable, an e­
minent man, a considerable man. 
Rien ne le rendoit considerable que sa Noblesse, nothing but his Nobility made him considerable. 
Consideration (f.) delibera­
tion, consideration, or delibera­
tion. 
Ne rien faire sans une meure consideration, to do nothing with­
out mature deliberation, to do no­
thing rashly, or abruptly. 
Consideration, ou estime, e­
steem. 
Si je vous suis en quêque consi­
deration, if I be in some esteem with you. 
Etre en nulle consideration, to be of no esteem, to be inconsiderable. 
Consideration, ou égard, consi­
deration, regard, or respect. 
Faites cela en consideration de notre amitié, do that in conside­
ration of our friendship, or, for our friendship sake. 
Je le ferai à vôtre considerati­
on, I will do it for your own sake, upon your account. 
Considerément, avec consi­
deration, considerately, advisedly, discreetly, circumspectly.  

CONSINER, Consigner, mettre une chose en depôt, to deliver a thing into a third persons hand, to leave (or commit) it into his keeping by agreement of both Parties in controversy. 
Le Consinant, celui qui consi­
ne, he that committeth a thing to another man to keep. 
Consination, Consignation, ou acte de consiner, a laying down, (or committing) a thing to ones custody. 
Consination, chose consinée, a thing left to ones custody. 
Receveur de consinations, he that takes things committed to his custody, in whose hands any thing is put by agreement of both Par­
ties in controversy.  

CONSIRE (f.) herbe de pré, the herb Comfry, consound, ass-ear, knitback, backwort.  

CONSISTER, to consist, to ly. 
La Beauté consiste en la pro­
portion des parties, Beauty con­
sists chiefly in proportion. 
La Vie de l'homme consiste en l'union du corps avec l'ame, the life of a man consists in the union of the body with the soul. 
L'affaire consiste en ceci, here lies the business. 
Consistance (f.) état perma­
nent d'une chose, continuance, firmness, stableness. 
Les choses du monde n'ont point de consistance, the things of this world are uncertain, and last but for a while.  

CONSISTOIRE (m.) As­
semblée de Gens d'Eglise, a Consistory, a Session (or Assembly) of Ecclesiastical persons. 
Le Consistoire du Pape, the Popes Consistory. 
Le Consistoire d'une Eglise Pro­
testante, the Consistory of a Prote­
stant Church. 
Consistorial, of, or belonging to a Consistory. 
Une Assemblée Consistoriale, the Consistory, or the Assembly that makes it. 
Un Decret Consistorial, a Decree made in the Popes Consistory. 
Consistorialement, selon les formalités du Consistoire, Consi­
story-like, or according to the wayes and methods of the Popes Consi­
story.  

CONSOLER, to comfort, give comfort, or cheer up. 
Il n'est rien qui puisse me con­
soler, ma douleur est inconsola­
ble, nothing can comfort me, my grief is not to be allayed. 
Vôtre veuë me console, it is some comfort to me to see you. 
Cette pensée vous consolera be­
aucoup, that very thought will give you much comfort. 
Consolé, comforted, cheered up, that has received comfort. 
Je suis tout consolé quand je vous écris, I am all comforted when I write unto you. 
Etre consolé, recevoir consola­
tion, to be comforted, or to receive comfort. 
Consolable, that may be com­
forted.  



Consolateur (m.) a Comforter, or one that gives comfort. 
Consolation (f.) comfort, con­
solation. 
Une Lettre de consolation, a comfortable Letter. 
Trouver quêque consolation dans ses soûfrances, to find some comfort in his sufferings. 
Je trouve toute ma consolation & tout mon contentement dans mes Livres, I find all my comfort and delight in my Books. 
Consolatoire, comfortable, or that comforteth. 
Console (f.) piece d'archite­
cture, a corbel (or pendant of stone) a bracket, or shouldring piece.  

CONSOLIDER, rendre so­
lide, to consolidate, to make firm, whole and strong. 
Se consolider, to heal, or close up, as a wound or ulcer. 
Consolidé, consolidated. 
Consolidation (f) consolidation. 
Consolidation d'une plaie, the closing up of a wound.  

CONSOMMER, to consum­
mate, perfect, or finish. 
Consommé, consummate, or consummated. 
Consommé dans les Sciences, a great Scholar. 
Un homme d'une prudence consommée, a man of a consum­
mate prudence. 
Consommation (f.) consum­
mation.
 
* Consomption, V. Consumer.  

CONSONANTE (f.) lettre non voielle, a Consonant.  

CONSORT (m.) qui possede un fonds joignant celui d'un autre, one whose land joins to an­
other mans ground. 
Consors, Freres Consors posse­
dans des sonds par indivis, Bro­
thers Copartners, that possess an E­
state in coparseny.  

CONSPIRER, to conspire, to join in a plot with others. 
Conspirer contre quêcun, to conspire (to plot, or combine) against one. 
Conspirer la perte (ou la ruine) de quêcun, to contrive a mans ruine. 
Conspirateur (m.) a conspi­
rator. 
Conspiration (f.) conspiracy. 
Former une Conspiration, to make a conspiracy.  

CONSTANCE (f.) ferme­
té d'esprit, constancy, firmness, or stedfastness. 
Constant, constant, firm, or stedfast. 
Il endura tous ses malheurs avec toute la constance imaginable, he suffered all his troubles with the greatest constancy. 
Etre constant dans sa resoluti­
on, to be constant (or firm) in his resolution. 
Constant, certain, sure, or cer­
tain. 
Il est constant, c'est une verité constante, que, it is certain, plain, clear, or evident, it is a certain truth, that. 
Constamment, with constancy, firmness, or stedfastness.  

CONSTELLATION (f.) a Constellation. 
Une Constellation est un Signe Celeste, composé de quêques étoiles qui sont proches les unes des autres, a Constellation is a Celestial Sign, consisting of some Stars not far from one another. 
Il y a soixante deux Constella­
tions, & de ce nombre il y en a douze principales, que l'on ap­
pelle les Signes du Zodiaque; There are sixty two Constellations, and amongst them twelve chief ones, called the Signs of the Zodi­
ack. 
Outre ces douze, il y en a Vint & trois du coté du Septentrion, & vint & sept du coté du Midi; besides those twelve, there are three and twenty Northwards, and seven and twenty South­
wards. 
Parmi les Constellations Meri­
dionales il y en a douze qui ont eté depuis peu découvertes, A­
mong the Southern Constellations there are twelve of them which have been not long since discove­
red.  

CONSTERNATION (f.) consternation, astonishment, pa­
nick fear. 
Etre dans une grande conster­
nation, to be in great Consterna­
tion. 
Voila ce qui jetta le Peuple dans la derniere consternation, that's it which did cast the People into the utmost consternation.  

CONSTIPER, resserrer le ventre, causer des obstructions, to make costive, to bind. 
Les poires constipent, pears are binding. 
Constipé, constipated, costive, bound.  

CONSTITUER, établir, to make, or settle. 
Constituer un nouveau Droit, to make a new Law. 
Constituer un Heritier par Te­
stament, to make one his Heir by his Will. 
Constituer par écrit une pensi­
on annuelle à quêcun, to settle by writing any yearly pension upon one. 
Constituer à sa fille sa dot, to settle a portion upon his daughter. 
Constitué, made, or settled. 
Rente constituée, établie sur quêque fonds, a Rent raised upon some Land. 
Constitut (m.) point princi­
pal d'une écriture publique, the chief point of a publick writing. 
Constitution (f.) Edit, an Edict, an Ordinance, a Decree. 
Constitution de corps, comple­
xion, the constitution, temper, or complexion of the body. 
Avoir une bonne constitution, to be of a good complexion, or consti­
tution. 
Mettre son argent en consti­
tution de rente, to lay out his money upon a yearly income.  

CONSTRUIRE un bâti­
ment, to build, or make a build­
ing. 
Construire une Ville, un Pont, to build a Town, a Bridge. 
Construire du Latin, ou du Grec, to conster (or construe) a piece of Latin or Greek. 
Construit, built, construed. 
Constructeur (m.) a builder. 
Construction (f.) construction de mots, Construction.

* Consul, consulaire, Consu­
lairement, Consulat, Consul­
ter, & ses derivez. V. Con­
seil.  

CONSUMER, to consume, to waste, to spend away. 
Consumer son Bien en débau­
ches, to wast his Estate in riot and debauchery. 
Consumer sa vie (ou son tems) en joüant, to spend his life time in gaming. 
Le tems consume tout, time con­
sumes all things. 
Se consumer, par trop de soins ou de peine, to spend (or to con­
sume) himself by too much care and trouble. 
Consumé, consumed, wasted, spent. 
Consumé (m.) jus exprimé d'  



une chair succulente & bien bouillie, a coulis, a jelly broth, or a strengthning broth. 
Il a eté si malade qu'il n'a vecu depuis long tems que de consu­
mes, he has been so sick that he has eaten nothing a long while but jel­
ly-broth. 
Consumant (adj.) as,
Un feu consumant, a consuming fire. 
Consomption (f.) phthisie, the Consumption, a disease so called.
 
* Contable. V. Conte.  

CONTAGION (f.) infecti­
on qui se communique en tou­
chant, contagion, infection, or pe­
stilent disease. 
Contagieux, pestilent, conta­
gious, infectious. 

† CONTAMINER. V. Souiller.

* Contant. V. Conte.  

CONTE (m.) an account, or reckoning. 
Faire un conte, dresser un con­
te, to make up an account. 
Conte du mis, du depensé, an ac­
count of disbursements or expen­
ses. 
Conte du receu, de la recette, an account of a mans receits. 
Tenir conte, se servir de livre de conte, to keep accounts. 
Demander conte, to ask an ac­
count. 
Rendre conte, to give up an ac­
count. 
Recevoir les contes d'un autre, to take another mans accounts. 
Allouër un conte, to allow an ac­
count. 
Clorre (souder) un conte, to finish an account. 
Les bons Contes font les bons Amis, even Reckoning keeps long Friends. 
Un Livre de conte, a Book of Ac­
compts. 
Mettre sur le Livre de conte ce que nous devons & ce qui nous est deu, le nom de nos Debiteurs & Creanciers, to set down in the Book of Accounts what sums we ow & what are owing to us, the names of our Debtors and Creditors. 
Tenir conte, to score, or keep rec­
koning. 
Tenir conte à autrui de ce qu'on a receu de lui, to set down what one has received of another man. 
Tenez moi conte du service que je vous ai fait, remember (be mindful of) the good office I have done you. 
Cela n'est pas du conte, that is not of the reckoning. 
Mettre une chose sur le conte d'un autre, to put a thing to ones account. 
Mettez cela sur mon conte, put that to my account. 
Je ne trouve pas le conte en cette somme, I find somthing defective in this sum. 
Je trouverai bien mon conte en cela, I shall find it turn to account to me very much, I shall find it ve­
ry much to my advantage. 
Il n'y a pas trouvé son conte, son esperance l'a trompé, the thing did not succeed according to his expectations, he was frustrated of his expectations. 
Il se trouva fort loin de son con­
te, he was very much disappointed, the thing fell out quite contrary to what he expected. 
Il a son conte, il est content, he is pretty well, he has what he desi­
red. 
Faites vôtre conte, qu'il ne vous recevra point, assure your self be­
fore hand, that he will not receive you. 
Croiez vous tout de bon de passer à meilleur conte que no­
us? do you think seriously to be fa­
voured more than we? 
A vôtre conte, mes affaires iront fort bien, in your judgement (in your opinion) I shall have a good success in my business. 
A ce conte il faut s'enfuïr, so we must fly. 
Contes, Regitres, Livres de rai­
son du Domaine du Prince, the Books of Accounts in the Kings Ex­
chequer. 
La Chambre des Contes, le Lieu où l'on garde ces Regi­
tres, the Exchequer, or Exchequer Chamber. 
Chambre des Contes, les Pre­
sidents, & Conseillers de cet­
te Chambre, the Court of Ac­
counts. 
Un Maitre des Contes, an Audi­
tor, or Overseer of Accounts. 
Conte, estime, account, or e­
steem. 
Un homme de qui l'on ne fait aucun conte, a man of no ac­
count. 
Ne tenir conte des prieres de quêcun, to slight ones prayers. 
Conte, recit, a recital, relation, or narrative. 
Faites nous le conte de ce Combat, give us an account of that Fight, make us a relation of it. 
Conte fait à plaisir, a merry sto­
ry, a tale told for diversion sake. 
Faire des contes à plaisir, dire des sornettes, to tell merry story's or fables. 
Ce sont des contes, de vrais contes, they are meer story's. 
Vous me faites de ridicules contes, vous m'en contez de belles, you tell me idle sto­
ries. 
On fera des contes de vous, you will be talk't of and laughed at every where. 
Contes de vieilles, contes à dor­
mir debout, old womens tailes. 
Un faiseur de contes, an idle teller of story's, a tale-teller. 
Conter, nombrer, to reckon. 
Savoir conter, to know how to reckon. 
Vous contez sans vôtre Hôte, you reckon without your Host. 
Conter une somme d'argent, to tell a sum of money. 
Conter, supputer, faire un con­
te, to reckon, or make a reckoning, to compute, to cast an account. 
Je vous prie, contons ensemble, pray let us reckon together, pray let us compare our accounts. 
Si vous contez bien, vous trou­
verez quil y a autant, if you rec­
kon right, you will find it so much. 
Conter par le menu, to make a particular account. 
Conter, mettre à conte, to set to account. 
Conter une somme à quêcun, la lui mettre sur ses contes com­
me fournie pour lui, to put a sum to ones account. 
Je vous conterai ce Champ bien cherement, I shall make you pay dear for that field. 
Conter, raconter, to tell an idle story. 
Tu nous en contes, tu nous en contes de belles, thou tellest us i­
dle story's. 
Si vous l'écoutez, il vous en contera de belles, if you give ear to what he say's, he shall entertain you long enough with idle talk. 
Contant; as,
Argent contant, ready mony. 
On a d'ordinaire les choses à meilleur marché quand on les achete argent contant, things are commonly cheaper when we buy them ready mony.  



Conté, reckoned, told. 
Conteur (m.) Conteur de sor­
nettes, an idle talker, one that de­
lights in telling of idle story's. 
Contoir (m.) a Contor.  

CONTEMPLER, conside­
rer des yeux quêque chose, to behold seriously, to view with great earnestness, or affecti­
on. 
Contempler de l'esprit, medi­
ter, to contemplate, muse, or medi­
tate upon. 
Contemplé, seriously beheld, viewed with great earnestness or affection. 
Contemplé, medité, contempla­
ted, mused, or meditated up­
on. 
Contemplateur (m.) a Con­
templator, an admirer. 
Contemplateur de choses na­
turelles, a Naturalist, or naturall Philosopher. 
Contemplatif, contempla­
tive. 
Vie contemplative, a contempla­
tive Life. 
Contemplation (f.) contempla­
tion, deep consideration, inward beholding of (or profound musing on) a matter.  

CONTEMPORAIN (m.) Contemporary, or of the same time. 
Il étoit son Contemporain, he was his Contemporary, they lived at the same time.  

CONTEMPTEUR (m.) as, 
Contempteur de Dieu, a Con­
temner of God.
Contemptible, ou méprisa­
ble, contemptible, or fit to be sleighted.  

CONTENIR, tenir en son étendue, to contain, hold, or com­
prehend. 
Cette Sale contient trois mille hommes, this Hall contains (or holds) three thousand men. 
La Justice contient toutes les autres Vertus, Justice compre­
hends all other Virtues. 
Contenir quêcun dans son de­
voir, to contain one in his du­
ty. 
Se contenir, to refrain, forbear, or with-hold from. 
Contenu, contained. 
Contenu (a masc. subst.) con­
tents, the contents of a thing. 
Le contenu d'un Livre, the Con­
tents of a Book. 
Contenance (f.) mine, air du visage, ones countenance, looks, meen, or aspect. 
Une contenance posée, a sober (or a grave) countenance. 
Une contenance égarée, an un­
composed (or unsettled) counte­
nance. 
Changer de contenance, pren­
dre une nouvelle contenance, to change his countenance. 
Perdre contenance, to be put out of countenance. 
Il perdit contenance & ne seut que dire, he was so much out of countenance that he had not a word to say. 
Je lui ai fait perdre contenance, I put him (I dashed him) out of countenance. 
Contenance de tout le corps, ones carriage (or posture) of the body. 
Voiez sa contenance, observe his carriage. 
En verité il a une mauvaise contenance, truly he carry's his body very unhandsomly, he has an unhandsome carriage. 
Quelle contenance tiendrai je en sa presence? how shall I carry my self before him? 
Continence (f.) continency, forbearance of (or abstinence from) carnall pleasures. 
Avoir le don de continence, to have the gift of continency. 
Continent, retenu, modeste, continent, sober, moderate. 
Un Continent, une Terre ser­
me, a Continent, or firm Land.  

CONTENTER, satisfaire, to content, or to satisfy. 
Contenter quêcun, le paier, to pay one. 
Contenter quêcun, satisfaire à son attente, to give one con­
tent. 
Ses Serviteurs ne le contentent pas, his Servants give him no con­
tent. 
Il contente tout le monde, he gives every one content. 
Un homme difficile à conten­
ter, a hard man to please. 
Contenter, donner du plaisir à quêcun, to please (or humour) one. 
Se contenter, to be contented, sa­
tisfy'd, or well pleased. 
Il ne s'est pas contenté de le vo­
ler, mais il lui a encore ôté la vie, he was not contented to rob him, but more than that he took a­
way his life. 
Contentez vous de cela, be con­
tented (be satisfy'd) with that. 
Je ne saurois me contenter en cela, I cannot be satisfy'd therein. 
Jamais je ne me contentai moins qu'hier, I never was less pleased than I was yester­
day. 
Content, satisfait, content, contented, satisfy'd, well plea­
sed. 
Je le veux, j'en suis content, I will, I am content. 
Etes vous content? are you con­
tented? 
Je suis content, je me contente de ce que j'ai, I am contented (satisfy'd, or well pleas'd) with what I have. 
Je suis content, on m'a paié ce qu'on me devoit, I am conten­
ted, I am paid what was due to me. 
Renvoier quêcun content, to dismiss one very well contented. 
Mais tout de bon, est il con­
tent de moi? but seriously, is he pleased with me? do I please him? 
Je ne suis pas content de sa con­
duite, I do not like his con­
duct. 
Je ne suis pas content, je suis fâ­
ché, I am not well pleased, I am vexed. 
Je vis content, rien ne me fâ­
che, I live contentedly, nothing crosses me. 
Contentement (m.) plaisir, contentment, or contentation, plea­
sure, delight, satisfaction. 
Il y a un grand contentement à apprendre ce qu'on ne sait pas, it is a great satisfaction to one to learn that which he do's not know. 
Je pren tout mon contentement à l'étude, I take all my delight in studying. 
Vos Lettres m'apportent (me donnent) un extreme conten­
tement, your Letters please me extreamly, I am highly pleased with your Letters. 
Ne donnez pas ce contente­
ment à vos Enemis, don't give your Enemy's that satisfaction, or do them that courtesy.  

CONTENTION (f.) que­
relle, contention, strife, or fal­
ling out. 
Ils sont en contention sur ce point, they are faln out about that.  



Contentieux, querelleux, contentious, litigious, quarrel­
som. 
Contentieusement, contenti­
ously, litigiously, or in a quarrel­
som manner.
 
* Contenu. V. Contenir.
 
* Conter. V. Conte.  

CONTESTER, to contest, debate, or bring a thing into que­
stion, to wrangle, or contend about it. 
Contester les Ordres de quê­
cun, to question ones Commands. 
Contester avec quêcun, to argue with one. 
Contester devant le Juge, to o­
pen before a Judge the chief points of the Bill and Answer. 
Contester en cause, lors que le Demandeur a fait rendre une Ordonnance par le Juge sur sa Demande, to wage Law, as the Defendant doth, when the Plain­
tiff has obtained an Order upon his Bill. 
Contesté, contested, deny'd, op­
posed, or argued. 
Une chose fort contestée, & dont les plus Savans ne sent pas d'accord entr'eux, a thing very much contested, and not agreed on amongst the most learned men. 
Contestation, Conteste (f.) a Contestation, or Contest. 
Voila ce dont ils sont en conte­
ste, that's it which they wrangle a­
bout. 
Contestation de Cause, an open­
ing before a Judge the points con­
tained in the Bill and Answer. 
Contestation en Cause, the wa­
ging of Law by the Defendant up­
on the Judges Order or Rule given in the Plantiffs behalf.
 
* Conteur. V. Conte.  

CONTIGU, attenant, joi­
gnant à un autre, Contiguous, next, close or adjoyning to. 
Une Maison contigue (ou atte­
nante) à une autre, the next house to another. 
L'Air est contigu à la Mer, the Air is contiguous to the Sea.
 
* Continence, & Continent. V. Contenir.  

CONTINGENT, casuel, contingent, accidental.  

CONTINU, CONTINUEL, continuall, whole, without inter­
mission or interruption. 
Trois jours continus de pluie, three whole day's of rain. 
Un discours continu de trois heures, a discourse lasting three houres. 
Fievre continue, a continuall feaver, whose fit never ceaseth till the disease or the diseased end. 
Un soin continuel, a continuall care. 
J'ai eté malade trente jours con­
tinuels, I have been sick three whole day's. 
A cause des Guerres continuel­
les, because of the continuall Wars. 
Ce n'est qu'une continuelle Val­
lée jusqu'a la Mer, it is but a continued Valley to the very Sea. 
Continuellement, continually, incessantly, alwaies, ever. 
Il pleure continuellement, he cry's continually. 
Marcher continuellement jour & nuit, to be ever night and day upon the march. 
Continuer, perseverer, durer, to continue, last, hold out, perse­
vere. 
Tout est perdu, si ces Guerres continuent, all is lost, if these Wars continue. 
Continuer toûjours à bien fai­
re, to persevere in well doing. 
Continuez comme vous avez commencé, go on as you begun. 
Continuer, act. to continue, to confirm. 
Continuer son discours bien avant dans la nuit, to hold on a discourse very late. 
Continuer quêcun dans son Office, to confirm one in his Office. 
Continuer une muraille, ou semblable chose, à la hauteur de vint piés, to raise a wall, or the like, twenty foot high. 
Je continuerai ce bâtiment jusques là, I'le carry on the buil­
ding to that place. 
Continué, continued. 
Continuation (f.) continuation, continuance. 
Je vous demande la continua­
tion de vôtre amitié, I beg of you the continuance of your love to me. 
Continuation dans une Charge, a Keeping in his Office.
 
* Contoir. V. Conte.  

CONTORSION (f.) con­
torsion. 
Le Demon lui donnoit d'étran­
ges contorsions, he was very much distorted by the Devil.  

CONTOUR (m.) a turning, or winding. 
L'Oreille a plusieurs contours, the ear hath many turnings and windings. 
Contour, circuit, compass, or cir­
cumference. 
Contourner, tourner quêque chose vers un endroit, to turn, wheel, or compass about. 
Contourner, tourner une chose d'un côté & d'autre, to turn a thing from one side to another. 
Contourné, turned, wheeled, or compassed about. 
Contourné, tourné d'un côté & d'autre, turned from one side to another.  

CONTRACT (m.) a Con­
tract, bargain, or agreement. 
Contract de Mariage, a Con­
tract of Mariage. 
Passer Contract (faire un Con­
tract) avec quêcun, to make a Contract (a Bargain, or an Agree­
ment) with one. 
Se tenir à son Contract, to stand to his Contract, to observe it. 
Se departir de son Contract, to break off (or recede) from his Con­
tract. 
Contracter, to contract. 
Contracter amitié avec quêcun, to contract friendship with one. 
Contracter alliance avec quê­
cun, to joyn in a league with one. 
Contracter une mauvaise habi­
tude, to get an ill habit. 
Contracter une maladie, to get a distemper. 
Contraction (f.) contraction de nerfs, a shrinking of the sinews.
 
* Contradiction, &c. V. Con­
tredire.  

CONTRAINDRE, to force, compel, or constrain. 
Contraindre quêcun à quêque chose, to force (or to compel) one to something. 
Il m'a contraint de dire la veri­
té, he has forc'd me to tell the truth. 
Se contraindre, se retenir, ou dissimuler, to dissemble, to force his own nature or humour. 
Contraint, constrained, compel­
ed, forced. 
Contrainte (f.) constraint, compulsion, force. 
Par contrainte, by force. 
Sans contrainte, freely, willingly, of ones own accord.
 
* Contraire, &c. V. Contre. 

† CONTRASTE, strife, contention.
 
* Contravention. V. Contre­
venir.  

CONTRE, against, contrary to.   



Il s'est marié contre son gré, he married himself against his will. 
Ce que vous dites sait contre vous, that which you say makes a­
gainst your self. 
Contre mon opinion, contrary to my opinion. 
Contre ce que je m'étois pro­
posé, contrary to what I had pro­
posed to my self. 
Apporter des Raisons pour & contre, to alledge reasons pro and con. 
Contre, vis à vis, over against, on the other side. 
Sa Maison est contre le Col­
lege, his house stands over against the College. 
Ils s'assirent tous les uns contre les autres, they all sate over a­
gainst one another. 
Tout contre, tout aupres, hard by. 
Contraire, opposé, contrary, opposite. 
Le froid est contraire au chaud, cold is contrary to heat. 
Les Vices sont contraires aux Vertus, Vices are contrary to Vir­
tues. 
Un Vent contraire, a contrary wind. 
Des Opinions contraires, con­
trary Opinions. 
Il fait tout le contraire de ce qu'il dit, he acts quite contrary to what he sayes. 
Je montrerai le contraire de ce qu'il a dit, I shall confute what he said. 
Contraire, dommageable, hurt­
ful. 
Cela vous est contraire, that is not good for you, that will do you hurt. 
Etre contraire à quêcun, étre son Enemi, to be bent against one, to be his Adversary. 
Etre contraire à quêcun, le con­
trarier, to contradict one. 
Etre d'un Parti contraire, to be of a contrary side. 
Au contraire, on the contrary. 
Tout au contraire de ce qu'il faloit, quite contrary to what should have been. 
Contrarier quêcun, to contra­
dict one. 
Contrariant, cross, contradict­
ing. 
Etre d'une humeur contrari­
aute & opiniâtre, to be of a cross and contradicting humour, to have a spirit of contradicti­
on. 
Contrarieté (f.) repugnance, contrariety, difference. 
Contrarieté d'opinions, a diffe­
rence of opinions.  

CONTRE-BALANCE (f.) Contrepoids, a counter-ballance, or counterpoise. 
Contre-balancer, peser une chose contre une autre, to coun­
ter-balance, or to counterpoise. 
Contre-balancer, peser autant qu'une autre chose, to counter-ballance, or be of equal weight with another thing. 
Contre-balancé, counter-bal­
lanced, counter-poised,  

CONTRE-BANDE (f.) dé­
cri de denrées, a Prohibition of some commodities. 
Marchandises de Contre-bande, Counter-band Goods, prohibited Commodities.  

CONTRE-BARRE, (en terme de Blazon) Counterbarry, in Blazon.  

CONTRE-BATERIE (f.) a Counter-battery.  

CONTRE-CARRER quê­
cun, to contradict one. 
Contre-carré, contradicted.  

CONTRE-CEDULE (f.) a Counter-bond.  

CONTRE-CHANGE (m.) a Counter-change.  

CONTRE-COEUR; as, Faire une chose à contre-cœur, to do a thing against his will.  

CONTRE-COUP (m.) a contrary blow, or chance.  

CONTREDIRE, to contra­
dict, or gainsay. 
Contredire à quêcun, to contra­
dict one. 
Contredire quêque chose, to gainsay a thing. 
Se contredire, to contradict him­
self. 
Il se contredit en cela, he con­
tradicts himself in that. 
Contredisant, contradicting, gainsaying. 
Contredit (m.) contradicti­
on. 
Il est le premier sans contredit, he is the first without contradi­
ction. 
Contredits (en termes de Pa­
lais) Objections. 
Contradiction (f.) contradi­
ction, gainsaying. 
Il y a en cela de la contradicti­
on, cela implique contradicti­
on, that's a contradiction, that implies contradiction. 
Tomber en contradiction, to fall into contradiction. 
Un Esprit de contradiction, a spirit of contradiction. 
Contradictoire, où il y a de la contradiction, contradictory, which implyes contradiction. 
Contradictoirement, contra­
dictorily.  

CONTRÉE (f.) Païs, a Countrey, Land, or Region.  

CONTREFAIRE, imiter, to counterfeit, or to imitate. 
Contrefaire quêcun parfaite­
ment, to imitate one perfectly. 
Contrefaire le seing de quêcun, to counterfeit ones hand and seal. 
Contrefaire l'homme de bien, to make a shew of a good man, to carry himself seemingly like a good man. 
Contrefaire le malade, to make as if one were sick. 
Le Loup contrefait son port & sa demarche pour seduire les Brebis, the Wolf disguises him­
self (or puts on a disguise) to se­
duce the Sheep. 
Se Contrefaire, to dissemble, or disguise himself, to seem other than he is. 
Contrefait, counterfeit, imi­
tated, disguised. 
Contrefaiseur (m.) a Counter­
feiter.  

CONTRE-FENETRE (f.) a Counter-window, or outward window.  

CONTRE-FINESSE (f.) countercunning, or deceiving of the deceiver.  

CONTRE-FORT (m.) Con­
tre-boutant, pilastre appuiant une muraille, a Buttress, in Ar­
chitecture.  

CONTREGARDE, ce qui preserve, defence. 
Contregarde, Controleur de Garde, an Under-Warden, or Counter-Warden. 
Contre-garde de Monnoie, an Officer of the Mint, who takes no­
tice and keeps a reckoning of the Metal that is delivered in to be coined, and afterward oversees the working thereof, together with the Warden, whose Place he sup­
plies in his absence. 
Contregarder quêcun, to look well to one.



CONTRE-JOUR (m.) a false-light.  

CONTREMANDER, to countermand, to recall a former command, or to give contrary commands. 
Contremander une Ambassade, to countermand an Embassy. 
Contremandé, countermand­
ed.  

CONTRE-MARCHE (f.) a counter march. 
Il fit faire la Contremarche à ses premiers Cavaliers, qui vin­
rent joindre les autres Che­
vaux, he caused the first Party of Horse to countermarch, and so they came to joyn the other Horse.  

CONTREMINE (f.) a Coun­
termine, a mine digged by the be­
sieged within a Fortress to meet with another made by the Enemy without it. 
Contreminer, faire une con­
tremine, to countermine. 
Contreminé, countermined.  

CONTREMONT, contre le cours de l'eau, up the River, against the stream.  

CONTRE-PESER, peser autant, to counterpoise, or be of equal weight. 
Contre-peser, valoir autant, to countervail. 
Contrepoids (m.) counterpoise, or equal weight.  

CONTRE-PIED, Counter, in hunting. 
Prendre le contre-pied de la bête, to follow the contrary tracks of a beast. 
Vous prenez le contre-pied de la veritable Eloquence, you go the contrary way to the attaining of true Eloquence.

* Contrepoids. V. Contrepe­
ser.  

CONTRE-POIL, à contre­
poil, against the wool, the wrong way, quite contrary. 
Se peigner à contre-poil, to comb the hair upwards. 
Prendre la chose à contre poil, à rebours, to take a thing the wrong way, to go the wrong way to work.  

CONTRE-POINTE, ou Courte-pointe (f.) couverture de Lit, a Counter-point, or quilt­
ed covering for a bed. 
Contre-pointer une étoffe, la piquer à l'aiguille, to stitch a stuff, to work it with the back­
stitch. 
Contre-pointer, contredire, to gainsay, or to contradict. 
Contrepointé, piqué à l'ai­
guille, stitched, like a quilt. 
Contre-pointeur (m.) Ou­
vrier en contre-pointes, a Quil­
ter, or Counterpoint-maker.  

CONTRE-POISON (m.) a counter-poison, antidote, or pre­
servative against poison.  

CONTRE-ROLLE (m.) Regître tenu par un Officier aupres d'un autre Officier, an Office wherein are kept the Co­
pies of Rolls of Accounts, &c. un­
der a Controller, whose Place it is to take notes (or keep a Role) of another Officers Accounts, there­
by to discover him if he do a­
miss. 
Contrôler, faire l'Office de Controleur, to do a Comptrollers Office. 
Contrôler les actions d'autrui, to find fault with (to controll) other mens actions. 
Contrôlé, controlled. 
Contrôleur (m.) a Controller, an Officer that takes notes (or keeps a Role) of another Officers Accounts. 
Contrôleur, Censeur, qui trou­
ve à redire en toutes choses, a Controller, one that finds fault with every thing.  

CONTRE-RUSE (f.) a coun­
tersleight, a wile for a wile, one trick in lieu of another. 
User de contre-ruse, to play a trick for a trick.  

CONTR'ESCARPE (f.) a counterscarp. 
Contr'escarper un fossé, to make a counterscarp about a ditch.  

CONTRE-SEING (m.) a subscription joyned to another. 
Contre-signer, to joyn a sub­
scription to another.  

CONTRE-SEAU (m.) a counter-seal, a seal joyned to ano­
ther. 
Contre-seeller, to counter­
seal, to joyn one seal to another.  

CONTRE-SENS (m.) a con­
trary sense, a contrary meaning. 
Vous donnez un contre-sens à mes paroles, vous rapportez à contre-sens tout ce que je dis, you turn my words to a contrary sense, you pervert the sense of my words.

* Contre-signer. V. Contre­
seing.  

CONTRE-TEMS, tems mal propre & incommode, an un­
seasonable time. 
Vous venez à contre-tems, you come unseasonably.  

CONTRE-TENANT (m.) ones adversary.  

CONTRE-TIRER, to draw a writing, or a picture by the ori­
ginal. 
Contre-tiré, drawn by the ori­
ginal.  

CONTRE-VENIR, to con­
travene, to do contrary to promise, or otherwise than was agreed. 
Contre-venir au Droit, to break (or to transgress) the Law. 
Contre-venir au Traité, to break the Treaty, or the Agree­
ment. 
Contre-venant (m.) a contra­
vener, a transgressor, a breaker of his agreement, promise, or bar­
gain. 
Contravention (f.) the break­
ing of his agreement, promise, or bargain.  

CONTRIBUER, paier sa part, to contribute, or to pay his share. 
Contribuer à faire quêque chose, to contribute to some­
thing. 
Contribuer quêque chose à l'honneur ou à la gloire de quê­
cun, to contribute something to ones credit or fame. 
Contribué, contributed. 
Contribuant (m.) a Contribu­
tor. 
Contribution (f.) contribution, a joynt gift of many. 
Contribution, impôt, contribu­
tion, or tax. 
Mettre une Ville sous contri­
bution, to put (or set) a Town un­
der contribution.  

CONTRIT, marri de sa faute, contrite, grieved, or hear­
tily sorry for his fault. 
Contrition (f.) contrition, hearty sorrow, inward lamenting for his faults.
 
* Contrôler, &c. V. Contre­
role.  

CONTROVERSE (f.) diffe­
rent, controversy, variance, or difference. 
Vuider une controverse, to de­
cide a controversy. 
Controverse, difference d'opi­
nions, controversy, difference of opinions.
Mettre une chose en contro­
verse,  



to bring a thing into con­
troversy. 
Enseigner la Controverse, to in­
struct one in matters of contro­
versy. 
Controversé, ou qui est en controverse, a thing controverted, or in controversy. 
Controversiste (m.) a Wri­
ter (or Dispater) in controver­
sies. 

† CONTROUVER. V. Inven­
ter, ou Forger.  

CONTUMACE (f.) terme de Droit, Contempt, in the sense of the Law. Now the French Lawyers make two sorts of Contu­
mace. The first, of such as after three several and publick sum­
mons refuse to appear. The se­
cond, of those that appearing stand mate and will not answer, a Silence which imports a Con­
fession. 
Condamné par defauts & par contumace, condemned for de­
fau t, and contempt of the Court.  

CONTUSION (f.) meur­
trissure, contusion, bruise.
 
* Conu, known. V. Conoitre.  

CONVAINCRE, to convince, or to convict. 
Convaincre quêcun de larcin, to convict one of theft. 
Convaincu, convinced, or con­
victed. 
J'en suis convaincu, I am con­
vinced of it. 
Convaincu de larcin, convicted of theft. 
Etre convaincu par des Té­
moins, to be convicted by Wit­
nesses. 
Convainquant, convictive. 
Une raison convainquante, a convictive reason. 
Conviction (f.) preuve mani­
feste, conviction, infallible proof.  

CONVALESCENCE (f.) a recovery of health, strength, and vigour.  

CONVENIR, étre seant, to befit, or beseen, to be meet, agree­
able, proper, or convenient for. 
Le discours convient à la vie, discourse and society is agreeable to life. 
Convenir, étre d'accord, to a­
gree, consent, or accord with. 
Convenir, faire une convention, to make an agreement. 
Convenir quêcun, le mettre en instance, l'appeller en Justice, to enter an action against one. 
Convenu, agreed on. 
On n'en est pas encore conve­
nu, the thing is not as yet agreed on. 
Convenable, bienseant, come­
ly, decent, seemly. 
Convenable, propre, agreeable, convenient, fit, sutable. 
Convenablement, convenient­
ly, fitly, sutably. 
Convenance (f.) proportion, agreeableness, proportion, hand­
someness. 
Convention (f.) accord, a co­
venant, contract, bargain, or a­
greement. 
Faire une convention, to make a covenant. 
Observer les conventions, to observe (or stand to) his cove­
nants. 
Rompre les conventions, to break off the covenant. 
Conventionel, done by agree­
ment, under articles, or cove­
nants. 
Conventionellement, upon condition, or agreement. 
Convent (or rather) Couvent (m) a Convent, or Monastery. 
Conventuel, of, or belonging to a Convent or Monastery. 
Messe Conventuelle, Mass that is celebrated in a Convent. 
Conventicule (m.) a Conven­
ticle, or private Assembly of ill-affected people.  

CONVERSER, to converse, to be much conversant (or keep much company) with. 
Je converse familierement avec lui, I am very familiar with him. 
Conversation (f.) entretien familier avec quêcun, conver­
sation, company, commerce, great acquaintance, familiarity. 
Un homme d'une belle conver­
sation, a man of good (or gentile) conversation. 
Ouvrir une conversation, to be­
gin a conversation. 
Faire un discours en conversa­
tion, to make a discourse in com­
pany.
 
* Conversion. V. Convertir.  

CONVERTIR, changer une chose en une autre, to turn, change, or convert.
Convertir de l'argent en or, to turn silver into gold. 
Convertir l'argent du Public à son profit particulier, to convert the publick stock to his own pri­
vate use. 
Convertir quêcun, le retirer des débauches, to convert one, or reclaim him from his vicious life. 
Convertir un Paien, to convert a Heathen, to make him turn Christian. 
Se convertir, se changer, to turn, or to change, neut. 
Le sel se convertit en eau, salt doth turn into water. 
Le froment semé dans une mauvaise terre se convertit en avoine, wheat sowed in an ill soil turns into oats. 
Se convertir, se retirer du Vice, to leave his former vicious life, or to lead a new life. 
Se convertir, quitter une fausse Religion pour en prendre une bonne, to be converted, to leave a false Religion and take that which is right. 
Converti, turned, changed, converted. 
Il s'est bien converti des here­
tiques, many hereticks have been converted. 
Conversion (f.) changement, turning, or change. 
Conversion de vie, ones change, or conversion. 
La Conversion de quêcun à la Foi Chrêtienne, ones Conversion to the Christian Faith.  

CONVEXE, convexed, or crooked as an arch. 
Convexité (f.) convexity, the crookedness or bending of a hollow thing turned downward.
 
* Conviction. V. Convaincre.  

CONVIER. V. Inviter.

* Convocation. V. Convoquer.  

CONVOI. V. Convoy.  

CONVOITER, desirer pas­
sionnément, to covet, or to lust after a thing. 
Convoité, coveted, or lusted after. 
Convoitable, covetable, desira­
ble, to be coveted, or desired. 
Convoiteux, desireux, gree­
dy, desirous of, covetous. 
Convoitise (f.) concupiscence, or lust. 
Condescendre (ou se laisser em­
porter) à sa convoitise, to be carried away by his lust. 
Reprimer ses convoitises, to bri­
dle his lust.  

CONVOLER, passer à de secondes nôces, se remarier, to marry again, to take a second wife.



CONVOQUER, to call, or assemble together. 
Convoquer les Etats, to call a Parliament. 
Convoqué, called, assembled. 
Convocation (f.) a Convocati­
on, an Assembly, or a Calling toge­
ther.  

CONVOY (m.) Convoy de Vivres pour une Armée, a Con­
voy, or Victuals sent to an Ar­
my with an attendance of Soul­
diers. 
Un Regiment escortoit le Con­
voy, a Regiment convoy'd the Provisions. 
Convoy funebre, a Funeral, or the Attendance thereof.  

CONVULSION (f.) Con­
vulsion de nerfs, convulsion, or shrinking of the sinews. 
Etre sujet à des convulsions, to be troubled with convulsion fits.  

COOPERER à quêque chose, to cooperate, or to help.
Cooperateur (m.) he that co­
operates, or helps. 
Cooperation (f.) cooperation, or help.  

COPIE (f.) extrait, the copy of a writing.
Une Copie, une piece de Pein­
ture tirée sur l'Original, a Copy, or a Picture drawn upon the Ori­
ginal. 
Cet enfant est une parfaite Copie de son Pere, this Child is the very picture of his Fa­
ther. 
La Copie, ou l'Original d'un Auteur, l'écrit sur lequel on imprime, an Authors Copy or Ori­
ginal, that which Printers print by. 
Copier, to copy, to write out, or transcribe. 
Copier une Lettre, to write out a Letter. 
Copier un Original de Pein­
ture, to copy an Original Pi­
cture. 
Copié, copy'd, writ out, tran­
scribed. 
Un portrait copié, a copy'd pi­
cture. 
Copiste (m.) a writer out of Copies.  

COPORAL. V. Caporal.  

COQ. V. Coc.  

COQUE (f.) coque de noix, a nut-shell. 
Coque verte de noix, the green shell of a Walnut upon the tree. 
Coques de ver à soie, the cods of a silk-worm. 
Coquille (f.) shell. 
Coquille de noix, a nut-shell. 
Un Vendeur de coquilles, de bagatelles, a seller of trifles and toyes of no value, a cousener, a cheater. 
Savoir vendre (savoir faire va­
loir) ses coquilles to know how to make money of his toyes, how to put off bad toyes for good ware. 
Coquille de poisson, the shell of a fish. 
Coquille d'huitre ou de li­
mace, an oister or snail-shell. 
Coquillage (m.) shell-work, work made of (or trimmed with) shells. 
Cocon (m.) coque de ver à soie, the cods of a silk-worm.  

COQUELICOC (m.) pavot sauvage, wild poppy.  

COQUELOURDES (f.) the wind-slower.  

COQUELUCHON (m.) capuchon, a capuch, or hood. 
Coqueluche (f.) sotte de ma­
ladie, the Coqueluchoe, a sort of disease.  

COQUEMAR (m.) a brazen pot, or chafer, with a cover.  

COQUERETS, sorte d'her­
be, the herb called Alcakengy.

* Coquet, & Coquette. V. Coc.

* Coquille, & Coquillage. V. Coque.  

COQUIN (m.) gueux, a needy wretch, a beggar, a ra­
scall. 
Coquin, méchant homme, a rogue, a scurvy fellow, a knave, a base man. 
Un tour de Coquin, a Rogues trick. 
Coquinerie (f.) roguery, base­
ness, or knavery.  

COQUIOLE (f.) orge bâ­
tard, a degenerate barley, a weed commonly growing amongst bar­
ley, and called haver-grass.  

COR (m.) cornet, a Hunters horn. 
Suivre la bête à cor & à cri, to hunt with the sound of the horn and great clamour. 
Poursuivre sa Partie à cor & à cri, to prosecute his Adversary by might and main, with heave and hoe, eagerly, vehemently, se­
riously. 
Sonner du cor, to wind a horn. 
Cors de têtes de Cerf, les branches de ses cornes, the bro­
ches of a Deers head. 
Tête de Cerf chevillée de plu­
sieurs cors, a harts thick-branch­
ed horns. 
Cors, chevillures, tous les cor­
nichons traversains, toutes les branchetes de chaque perche de Tête de Cerf, entre le sur­
andouillet, & l'épois, ou coro­
nure des perches, the pegs of a Deers broches from the second or third upwards. 
Cor, cor aux piés, corn, a corn in the foot. 
Corne (f.) horn. 
Corne de pié de bêtes, the hoof of a beasts foot. 
Corne de Cerf, harts-horn. 
Corne de Cerf, sorte d'herbe, harts-horn, crowfoot (or buck­
horn) plantain. 
Corne d'abondance, the horn of abundance. 
Se durcir en corne, to wax hard as horn. 
Abbatre à quêcun les cornes, reprimer son insolence, to hum­
ble one. 
Corner, sonner d'une corne, to blow the horn. 
Les oreilles me cornent, my ears tingle. 
Cornement (m.) son de cor­
net, the blowing of the horn. 
Cornement d'oreilles, the glow­
ing (or tingling) of the ears. 
Cornaline (f.) the cornaline stone. 
Cornard (m.) a cuckold. 
Sa propre femme l'appelle cor­
nard, his own wife calls him cuck­
old. 
Cornemuse (f) a bag-pipe. 
Jouëur de cornemuse, a bag­
piper. 
Cornet (m.) cornet à sonner, a cornet, or a little horn. 
Cornet de Chasseur, a Hunts­
mans horn. 
Cornet de papier, à plier quê­
que chose, a cornet (or coffin) of paper wherein a Grocer makes up his retailed parcel of spice, &c. 
Cornet d'écritoire, an ink-horn. 
Cornet à bouquin, a musical cornet. 
Cornet à ventouses, a horned cup.
Corneter quêcun, lui appli­
quer  



des cornets à ventouses, to cup, or scarify with horned cups. 
Corneté, cupped, or scarify'd with horned cups. 
Cornichon (m.) petite corne, a little horn. 
Cornichon, chevillure de Tê­
te de Cerf, a peg of a Deers head. 
Cornu, horny, horned. 
Cornue (f.) vase de terre à long coû pour faire le depart de l'or & de l'argent, an ear­
then long-necked vessel used to make the separation of gold from silver. 
Cornuete (f.) sorte d'herbe, axefitch, or axewort, a small pulse so called.  

CORAIL (m.) Arbrisseau qui croit dans la Mer, & qui étant verd tandis qu'il demeure sous l'eau devient dur & rouge lors qu'on l'en tire, Corral, a Shrub that grows in the Sea, and is then of a greenish colour; but taken thence it waxeth hard, and after it has been dressed becomes red and smooth.
Coraline (f.) sorte d'herbe, Sea-moss, corralline, or corral­
moss. 
Coraline, pierre precieuse, a kind of precious stone like to Sino­
per or red lead.  

CORBEAU (m.) sorte d'oi­
seau, a crow. 
Crier comme un corbeau, to croke like a crow oftentimes. 
Le cri du Corbeau, the croking of a crow. 
Corbeau, sorre de poisson, a black Sea-fish, having an head shining like gold. 
Corbeau, croc de fer pour ac­
crocher les Navires de l'Enemi, a grappling iron. 
Corbeau (en tems de Peste) porteur de corps morts, he that carries the bodies dead of the plague to be buried. 
Corbin (m.) a Crow, a carrion (or carr) crow. 
Corbiner, dérober en Corbe­
au, to steal, filch, or purloyn. 
Corbiner, tirer par surprise l'argent à quêcun, to get away ones mony by craft. 
Corbineur (m.) a filcher. 
Corbineur de Palais, a lurching Lawyer.  

CORBEILLE (f.) a basket, a wicker-basket. 
Corbeillon (m.) petite cor­
beille, a little basket.
 
* Corbin, Corbiner, Corbineur. V. Corbeau.

* Corcelet. V. Corps.  

CORDE (f.) a cord, rope, or halter. 
Corde à danser dessus, a dan­
cing rope. 
Danser sur la corde, to dance upon the rope. 
Qui danse sur la corde, a dan­
cer upon the rope. 
Corde pour pendre, a hanging rope. 
Se mettre la corde au coû, to put a rope about his neck. 
Se pendre avec une corde, to hang himself with a rope. 
Corde, estrapade, a wrack. 
Appliquer le Criminel à la corde, to put the Criminal upon the wrack. 
Corde d'arc, a bow-string. 
Avoir deux cordes à son Arc, to have two strings to his bow, to be furnished with two helps. 
Corde de Violon, de Lut, &c. the string of a Violin, of a Lute, &c. 
Garnir de cordes un Violon, to string a Violin. 
Gardez vous bien de toucher cette corde, forbear medling with that. 
Cordeau (m.) a line. 
Cordeau de Charpenterie, à ali­
gner, a Carpenter's (chalked, or oakered) line. 
Cordele, Cordelete (f.) a lit­
tle cord, or twisted string. 
Il tâche de l'attirer à sa cor­
dele, he endeavours to draw him unto his side, or to win him unto his faction. 
Il le tient à sa cordele, he has made sure of him. 
Cordeler, tordre en corde, to twist cords or ropes. 
Cordelé, twisted, or made in­
to cords. 
Cordelier (m.) a Cordelier, a Frier of S. Francis Order. 
Cordelieres (f.) petites cor­
des passées en divers neuds, any knotted thread, or string. 
Se Corder (ce qui arrive aux herbes & aux fruits apres la sai­
son de leur tendreur naturelle) to grow full of strings, as herbs and fruits do when they are out of season. 
Cordé; as, 
Laitue cordée, lettuce out of season. 
Chaude-pisse cordée, the most dangerous sort of clap. 
Tout en est dit, l'affaire est cor­
dée, there's nothing more to say, the business is done. 
Cordier (m.) faiseur de cor­
des, a roper, a rope (or cord) ma­
ker. 
Cordon (m.) cordon dont plusieurs tordus ensemble font la corde, one of the twists of a rope or cord. 
Cordon, petite corde, a string. 
Cordon de Chapeau, a hat­
band. 
Les Chevaliers de l'Ordre du Saint Esprit portent un cordon bleu, the Knights of the Order of the Holy Ghost wear a blew hat­
band upon their hats. 
Cordon de muraille, an out­
standing wreath or edge of stone on the out-side of a building, com­
monly distinguishing the several Stories.
 
* Cordial, &c. V. Cœur.  

CORDONNIER (m.) a Shoo­
maker. 
L'art d'un Cordonnier, a Shoo­
makers trade. 
Boutique de Cordonnier, a Shoo­
makers shop.  

COREE (f.) fressure de bê­
te, the haslet of a beast.  

CORIANDRE, herbe & grain, the herb or seed Corian­
der.  

CORIPHEE. V. Coryphée.  

CORLIS, ou Corlieu (m.) sorte d'Oiseau, a Curlew.  

CORME (f.) sorte de fruit, the Service, or Sorb apple.
Cormier (m.) l'arbre qui porte les cormes, the Service-tree, or Sorb apple tree.  

CORMORANT (m.) Cor­
beau qui péche dans l'eau, the greedy water-fowl called a Cormo­
rant.
 
* Cornaline, Corne. V. Cor.  

CORNEILLE (f.) sorte d'oiseau, a Raven.
Sorte de Corneille, encline à dérober la monnoie d'or & d'argent, a Jack-daw.
 
* Cornemuse, Corner, Corne­
ment, Cornet, Corneter. V. Cor.  

CORNETE (f.) drapeau, guidon, the Ensign of a Troop of Horse.



Cornete, porte-guidon, a Cor­
net of Horse. 
Cornete de Docteur, a Do­
ctors tippet.  

CORNICHE (f.) piece d'architecture, the cornish (or brow) of a wall, pillar, or other piece of building.
 
* Cornichon. V. Cor.  

CORNIERE (f.) jointure de deux pantes de Toit à l'an­
gle de deux Corps de Logis joints ensemble, the gist of a House. 
Corniere, canal de tuiles ou de fer blanc le long de l'angle de deux Corps de Logis, Gutter-tiles, or Troughs to convey wa­
ter.  

CORNOILLE (f.) sorte de fruit, cornil-berry.
Cornoiller (m.) l'arbre qui porte les cornoilles, the cornill-tree.
 
* Cornu, Cornue, Cornuete. V. Cor.  

COROLLAIRE (m.) a Co­
rollary, or addition.
 
* Corporal, Corporalier, Cor­
porel, Corporellement. V. Corps.  

CORPS (m.) a body.
Le Corps humain, mans body. 
Les parties du Corps, the parts of the body. 
Un Corps mort, a Corps. 
A corps perdu, desperately, fu­
riously, headlong, without any care of his own safety. 
Corps, Communauté, Body, Cor­
poration. 
Le Corps de la Noblesse, the bo­
dy of the Nobility. 
Corps, assemblée, compagnie, a body, or company. 
Vous serez receu dans nôtre Corps, you shall be incorporated into our Society. 
Le Senat l'est venu trouver en Corps, the whole body of the Se­
nate came to wait upon him. 
Le Corps de Ville, the Civil Magistrate. 
Un Corps d'Armée, a body of an Army. 
Un Corps de Cavalerie, a body of Horse. 
Un Corps de Garde (pris pour le Lieu) the Court of Guard, or the Corps de Guard. 
Un Corps de Garde (pris pour les personnes) the Guards. 
Poser un Corps de Garde en quêque Lieu, to place a Corps de Guard somewhere. 
Le corps d'un Discours, the bo­
dy of a Discourse. 
Tous les Ouvrages de Ciceron reduits en un Corps, all the Works of Cicero put into one Vo­
lume. 
Le Corps & les Dehors d'une Place, the body and the out-works of a Place. 
Un Corps de Logis, an Apart­
ment, or a part of a House. 
Une Maison qui a deux Corps de Logis, a House that hath two Apartments. 
Une Cour fermée de quatre Corps de Logis, a Court inclosed with the four sides of a House. 
Un Corps de Jupe, the wast-coat of a womans gown. 
Corporel, corporal, or bodily. 
Corporellement, corporally, bodily. 
Corporal (m.) linge benit, servant à la Messe, the Corporal, or fine linnen wherein the Sacra­
ment is put. 
Corporal, ou Caporal, chef d'une Escoüade d'hommes à pié, a Corporal of a Foot compa­
ny. 
Corporalier (m.) bourse de Corporal, a box for the foresaid linnen and Sacrament. 
Corpulence (f.) corpulency, bigness (or fatness) of body. 
Corpulent, corpulent, or big-bodied. 
Corsage (m.) the form, ha­
bit, or constitution of the body. 
Corselet (m.) cuirasse legere, a corslet.
 
* Correct, Correcteur, Corre­
ctrice, Correction, Correctif. V. Corriger.  

CORRELATIF, correlative, that hath a mutual relation.  

CORRESPONDRE, to cor­
respond, or be correspondent unto, to be like, answerable, and equal in all points. 
Correspondence (f.) accord, correspondency. 
Correspondence d'inclination & de sentimens, a resemblance of humours and opinions. 
Entretenir correspondence avec quêcun, to correspond (or hold cor­
respondency) with one. 
Correspondence, societé de ne­
goce, correspondency, in point of trade. 
Correspondant (m.) a Cor­
respondent. 
J'ai trois ou quatre Correspon­
dans à Paris, I have three or four Correspondents at Paris.  

CORRIDOR (m.) chemin couvert sur la Contr'escarpe, a Curtain, in Fortification.  

CORRIGER, to correct, or to mend. 
Corriger une faute, to mend a fault. 
Corriger quêcun, to correct one. 
Corrigé, corrected, or mended. 
Correct, correct, neat, or per­
fect. 
Correcteur (m.) he that cor­
rects, or mends. 
Un Correcteur d'Imprimerie, the Corrector of a Printing-house. 
Correctrice (f.) she that cor­
rects or mends. 
Correction (f.) correction, or mending. 
Sous vôtre correction cela n'est pas, under your favour it is not so. 
Correctif, corrective. 
Un medicament correctif, a corrective medicine.  

CORROMPRE, to corrupt, spoil, taint, putrifie. 
Corrompre quêcun, le débau­
cher, to debauch one. 
Corrompre quêcun, le subor­
ner par argent ou autrement, to bribe one, to suborn (or win) him by gifts. 
Se laisser aisément corrompre par argent, to suffer himself to be corrupted by gifts. 
Tâcher de corrompre la Ju­
stice, to indeavour to corrupt Ju­
stice. 
Corrompu, corrupted, spoiled, tainted, putrify'd. 
Qui n'est point corrompu, un­
corrupted. 
Corruptible, corruptible, sub­
ject unto corruption, or easie to be corrupted. 
Tout est corruptible, excepté la Vertu, all but Virtue is corru­
ptible. 
Corrupteur (m.) a corrupter, or he that corrupts. 
Corruptrice (f.) she that cor­
rupts. 
Corruption (f.) corruption, putrefaction. 
Corruption de moeurs, corrupti­
on of manners.
 
* Corsage, & Corselet V. Corps.

* Corsaire, V. Courir.



CORTEGE (m.) a Train of Coaches.  

CORVÉE (f.) a toilsom and drudging days work due by a Vassal or Tenant unto his Land­
lord, and to be done either in his own person (which is most proper­
ly) or by his cattel, plough, or team in the ground, or about the house of his Lord or Landlord. 
Corvée, travail penible, a hard job of work. 
Faire une grande corvée, to do a hard job of work.  

CORYPHÉE (m.) the chief, or principal.  

COSMOGRAPHIE (f.) de­
scription du Monde, Cosmogra­
phy, or the Description of the World. 
Cosmographe (m.) a Cosmo­
grapher, or Describer of the whole World. 
Cosmographique, Cosmogra­
phicall.  

COSSE. V. Gousse.  

COSSER, se Cosser, se heur­
ter du front en se battant, ainsi que font les moutons, to butt, or jure, as fighting rams.  

COSSON (m.) ver qui gâte le blé, a mite, or weevel.
Cosson, ver qui s'engendre dans le bois, a worm that breedeth in the wood.  

COTE (f.) Côte de Mer, ri­
vage, coast, or Sea-coast. 
Le long des Cotes, along the Sea-coasts. 
Coteau (m.) colline, a little hill. 
Cotoier, cotoier le rivage, côtoier terre à terre, to coast a­
long by, or go by the coast of.  

COTE (f.) sorte d'os, a rib.
Cotelette (f.) petite côte, a little rib.  

COTE de maille (f.) a coat of mail. 
Vêtu d'une côte de maille, ha­
ving a coat of mail on. 
Cote d'Armes, a coat-armour, a long coat worn over armour. 
Cote de femme, a womans gown. 
Cotillon (f.) a peticoat.  

COTE (f.) taxe, a tax, a par­
ticular mans rate (part, or por­
tion) of an assessment or imposi­
tion. 
Paier sa cote part, to pay his quota. 
Cotiser, mettre à taille, to tax, assess, or rate. 
Cotisé, taxed, assessed, rated. 
Cotisation (f.) a taxing, as­
sessing, or rating.  

COTE (m.) ones side. 
Avoir mal de côté, to have a pain in his side. 
Tomber sur le côté droit, to fall upon his right side. 
Ils marchent a côté l'un de l'autre, they walk a breast. 
Il est assis à mon côté, he sits by me. 
Il est toûjours à mon côté, he is alwayes by me. 
Mettre une epée à son côté, to put on a sword by his side. 
De côté, de biais, sideward. 
De tous côtez, on every side, eve­
ry way. 
Je suis pris de tous côtez, I am taken every way, I can no way make my escape. 
Le mal se répand de tous côtez, evil spreads it self every way. 
Il a cinq piés de tous côtez, it is five foot every way. 
D'un côté & d'un autre, on both sides. 
De ce côté ci, on this side, or this way. 
De ce côté là, on that side, or that way. 
Ils se sont enfuis, qui d'un cô­
té qui d'un autre, they are fled, some one way some another. 
Ils viennent qui d'un côté qui d'un autre, they come some from one place and some from ano­
ther. 
Du côté d'Orient & du Midi, Eastwards and Southwards. 
De quel côté qu'il se tourne il sera artrappé, which way soe­
ver he turns himself he will be caught. 
Il ne sait plus de quel côté se tourner, he do's not know which way to turn himself, he is driven to a nonplus. 
J'ai fait de mon côté ce que j'ai pù, faites du vôtre ce que vous pourrez, I have done my part, do your own. 
Il est mon Cousin du côté de ma Mere, he is my Cousin by my Mothers side. 
Côté, Parti, Side, or Party. 
Je me rangerai de vôtre côté, je suivrai vôtre parti, I shall be of your side, or I shall take your part. 
Il panche de mon côté, he in­
clines to my side. 
Se ranger du bon côté, to take the right side. 
La Raison est de mon côté, I have the Reason on my side. 
Je ne suis ni d'un côté ni d'un autre, I am of neither side.
 
* Cotelette. V. Còre.  

COTHURNE, sorte de brodequins, a fashion of Buskin coming over the calf of the leg.

* Cotillon. V. Cote de maille.

* Cotiser, Cotisé, & Cotisation. V. Cote.  

COTON (m.) Cotton. 
Coton, bourre qui vient sur cer­
tains fruits, the soft wooll, or cot­
ton that grows upon some fruits. 
Cotonner, to stuff with cot­
ton. 
Cotonné, stuffed with cotton. 
Cotonné, couvert de bourre, mossy, covered with soft stuff like wool or cotton.  

COTTICE (f.) piece de Blazon, laquelle n'a que la moi­
tié de la Bande, a Cottice, or Bat­
tune, less by half than a Bend, in Blazon.  

COUARD (m.) lâche, a cow­
ard. 
Il vaut mieux étre couärd que temeraire, 'tis better to be a cow­
ard than fool-hardy. 
Coüardise (f.) cowardise, or cowardliness.  

COUCHE, sorte de lit, a couch.
Couche, ou accouchement de femme, a womans lying in. 
Elle est en couche, she lyes in. 
Elle a fait ses couches, she is new­
ly set up. 
Elle n'est pas encore relevée de ses couches, she do's not yet sit up. 
Une mauvaise couche, a hard labour. 
Une heureuse couche, an easy labour. 
Faire une fausse couche, to mis­
carry. 
Couche de couleurs, en Pein­
ture, the first laying on of the co­
lours. 
La premiere couche de couleur sert de sol aux autres, the first laying on of colours serves for a ground to the rest. 
Il quitta son Ouvrage apres a­
voir fait la premiere couche, he left off his work after he had just laid on the colours. 
Peinture qui n'a que la premi­
ere couche, a Picture in its first draught.
Couche de mortier, de chaux,  



de plâtre, &c. plaistering, or laying on of plaister. 
Coucher quêcun, l'étendre sur un lit, to lay one down, to lay him upon a bed. 
Coucher son Enemi par terre, to throw down his Adversary. 
Coucher un sarment de Vigne, to set a Vine-slip flat along within the ground. 
Coucher les couleurs pour pein­
dre, to lay on the colours in order to paint. 
Coucher (ou mettre) par écrit, to couch (or set down) in wri­
ting. 
Coucher sur le Livre, to write down in the book. 
Coucher un Officier sur l'état du Prince, to inroll one in the list of the Kings Officers. 
Coucher argent sur jeu, to stake, at play. 
Coucher cent pistoles sur cha­
que carte, to stake (or to lay down) an hundred pistols upon every card. 
Coucher de son reste, to stake all one hath about him. 
Coucher de son reste, hazarder tout, to venture all. 
Coucher, étre couché, to ly, to ly down. 
Coucher aux piés de quêcun, to ly down at ones feet. 
Coucher dehors en plein air, to ly abroad in the open air. 
Coucher seul, to ly alone, to ly all alone. 
Coucher à part, to ly by him­
self. 
Coucher dessus, to ly (or rest) upon. 
La Poule couche sur ses oeuss, the Hen fits on her eggs. 
Se coucher, se mettre au lit, to go into the bed. 
S'en aller coucher, to go to bed, to be going to bed. 
Se coucher à terre, to ly down upon the ground. 
Le Soleil se couche, the Sun sets, the Sun is going down. 
Couchant; as, 
Le Soleil couchant, the Sun-set­
ting.
Un Chien couchant, a setting dog. 
Couché, couché sur un lit, lying upon a bed. 
Couché à terre, lying upon the ground. 
Couché sur l'herbe, lying upon the grass. 
Couché sur le visage, lying upon his face. 
Etre couché, étre au lit, to be in bed. 
Couchée (a fem. subst.) a nights lodging. 
Paier la couchée, to pay the nights lodging. 
Coucher (a masc. subst.) as,
Le Coucher du Soleil, the Sun-setting, or the going down of the Sun. 
Le Coucher du Roi, the King's bed-time. 
Le petit Coucher du Roi, the Kings lying abed till he falls asleep, during which time the Nobility that is about him entertains him with discourse. 
Couchette (f.) a little bed, a couch, a bed of ease.  

COUCOMBRE (m.) a cu­
cumber.  

COUCOU (m.) sorte d'Oi­
seau, a Cuckoo. 
Chanter coucou, to sing like a Cuckoo. 
Coucou, sotte d'herbe, the Primrose.  

COUDE (m.) partie du bras, the elbow.
Pousser du coude, to thrust (or justle) with the elbow. 
S'appuier sur le coude, to lean upon his elbow. 
Coudée (f.) a cubit, the length of the arm from the elbow to the end of the middle finger, which in ordinary measure is a foot and a half. 
Avoir les coudées franches, to have elbow-room, to have free li­
berty. 
Coudée Roiale, a Royal cubit, which is three fingers longer than the ordinary one. 
Coudée Geometrique, a Geo­
metrical cubit, containing six ordi­
nary cubits.  

COUDRE, to sow, to stitch to­
gether. 
Coudre une chose avec une au­
tre, to sow one thing with ano­
ther. 
Cousu, sowed, stitched toge­
ther. 
Toutes ses finesses sont cousues de fil blanc, all his devices are plain and apparent enough. 
Coûture (f.) a seam. 
Ils furent defaits à plate coûtu­
re, they were utterly defeated, totally routed. 
Coûturier (m.) Garson de Tailleur, a Tailors Journey­
man.  

COUDRIER (m.) sorte d'arbre, an hasel-tree.
Lieu planté de Coudriers, a Grove of hasel-trees.  

COUILLE (f.) Couillon (m.) stone, or testicle.  

COULER, to run along, glide, run down, or run out. 
Une eau qui coule doucement, water that runs gently along. 
Un Vaisseau qui coule, a Vessel that runs, or runs out. 
Cette pluie fait couler les rai­
sins, this rain makes the grapes drop, or fall off. 
Couler sa main dans la poche d'un autre, to dive into ones poc­
ket. 
Couler un Navire à fond, to sink a Ship. 
Se Couler, se glisser, to creep in. 
Coulé, passé par le couloir, strained. 
Coulé à fond, sunk, sunk to the bottom. 
Coulant, fluide, gliding, flow­
ing gently along. 
Un discours coulant, a fluent dis­
course. 
Coulamment, fluently, readi­
ly. 
Coulement (m.) flux, a run­
ning of liquor. 
Coulure (f.) coulement de Vigne, the falling of the grapes, which fault comes by much rain, when the grapes are young, or in knitting. 
Coulis; as, 
Chassis coulis, qui coule dans des enchassures, a falling lat­
tice. 
Vent coulis, a wind that blows through a hole or crevis. 
Coulis, liqueur exprimée par le couloir, a liquor strained through a cullander. 
Coulisse (f.) porte-coulisse, ou grille de porte, a Portcul­
lis. 
Couloir (m.) a cullander, or strainer.  

COULEUR (f.) colour. 
Couleur pour peindre, colour to paint withall. 
Couleur simple, naturelle, natu­
rall colour. 
Couleur composée, mixt co­
lour.
Couleur empruntée, couleur de  



ard, a false and counterfeit co­
lour. 
La couleur de ton visage n'est pas naturelle, the colour of thy face is not naturall. 
Couleur vive, gaie, riante, a live­
ly colour. 
Couleur triste, morne, sombre, morte, a dull colour. 
Couleur obscure, a sad (or dark) colour. 
Couleur haute, riche, a rich co­
lour. 
Couleur changeante, a changea­
ble colour. 
Couleur chargée, deep colour. 
Couleur pâle, pale colour. 
Bonne couleur, good colour. 
Mauvaise couleur, bad colour. 
Oter la couleur, to take off the colour. 
Donner couleur, colorer, to co­
lour. 
Coucher les couleurs pour pein­
dre, to lay on the colours in order to paint. 
Changer de couleur, to change its colour. 
Les ombrages relevent (ou re­
haussent) l'éclat des couleurs, the shadow sets off the colours. 
Pâles couleurs, sorte de mala­
die, the green sickness. 
Avoir les pâles couleurs, to have the green sickness. 
Nuance de couleurs, the right mixing (or tempering) of co­
lours. 
Couleurs, Ornement de Rhe­
torique, Colours of Rhetorick, Rhe­
toricall colours. 
Couleur, apparence de verité, a false shew of truth. 
Donner une couleur specieuse à un mensonge, to colour a lie with a specious shew of truth. 
Tromper quêcun sous couleur d'amitié, to cheat one under colour of friendship. 
Sous couleur de recouvrer le sien il ravit le bien d'autrui, under colour (or under pretence) of recovering his own, he robs other men of their own. 
Colorer, to colour. 
Colorer une chose, la déguiser, lui bailler une fausse cou­
leur, to colour, disguise, or palliate a thing. 
Colorer (deguiser) sa cruauté du nom de Justice, to colour his Cruelty with the Name of Ju­
stice. 
Coloré, coloured. 
Coloré, deguisé, coloured, or dis­
guised. 
Coloris (m.) l'air des cou­
leurs, the colouring. 
Le coloris doit étre vif, the co­
louring must be lively.  

COULEUVRE. V. Coleu­
vre. 

* Coulis, Coulisse, & Couloir. V. Couler.

* Coulombin, sorte de couleur. V. Colombe.  

COULPABLE. V. Coûpa­
ble.

* Coulure. V. Couler.  

COUP (m.) a blow, stroke, knock, rap, thump, throw, fling, or cast. 
Donner un coup de poing à quêcun, to strike one (or give him a blow) with the fist. 
Donner un coup de pié à quê­
cun, to kick one. 
Donner à quêcun un vilain coup de bâton, to give one a deadly blow with a stick. 
Il m'a donné plus de cent coups de bâton, he has banged me sound­
ly with a stick. 
Un coup de pierre, a blow with a stone. 
Faire d'une pierre deux coups, faire deux choses differentes en même tems, to kill two birds with one stone. 
Donner (porter) un coup d'e­
pée à quêcun, to hit one with a sword, to give him a thrust with a sword. 
Parer (eviter) le coup, se sau­
ver des coups qu'on nous porte, to put by a blow. 
Manquer son coup, to miss of his aim. 
C'est un coup perdu, that's no­
thing. 
Tirer à coups perdus, to aim at nothing, to shoot at random. 
Un coup de dez, a throw (or cast) at dice. 
Un coup d'arme à feu, the shoo­
ting of a gun. 
Porter coup, to hit home. 
Ils ne tirent coup qu'il ne porte, they ever shoot truly, exact­
ly. 
Il fut tué d'un coup de canon, he was killed with a cannon shot. 
Un Coup de Mer, a violent wave, a mighty Sea. 
Un Coup du Ciel, a great Provi­
dence. 
Un Coup d'Etat, a great poli­
cy. 
Vous avez fait un grand coup de vous remettre en ses bonnes graces, you have done very well to get into his favour again. 
C'est un coup de Maitre, its a notable deed. 
C'est un coup de ta main, je le conois assez, 'tis your own handy work, I know it well enough. 
C'est lui qui a fait le coup, he is the man that has done it. 
Un coup, une fois, once. 
Frapez encore un coup, strike once more. 
Je le ferai au premier coup, I'le do it the first time. 
Je vous defie de le faire en trois coups, I defy you to do it in three times. 
A ce coup, maintenant, now. 
A ce coup je conoitrai si vous m'aimez, now I shall know whether you love me or no. 
A tous coups, now and then, ever and anon. 
Tout à coup, tout d'un coup, presently, all of a sudden. 
Tout d'un coup, tout à la fois, all at once, or all together. 
D'un même coup, tout d'un train, with one and the same la­
bour.  

COUPABLE, culpable, or guil­
ty. 
Je ne suis pas coûpable de cela, I am not guilty of that. 
Il est aussi coûpable que s'il tra­
hissoit sa Patrie, he is as guilty as if he did betray his own Coun­
try. 
Se rendre coûpable d'un Cri­
me, to make himself guilty of a Crime.
 
* Coupans, Coupe, & Coupe­
au. V. Couper.  

COUPE (f.) tasse, a cup. 
Coupele (f.) Vase à affiner l'or & l'argent, a Coppell, the little ashen pot or vessel wherein Goldsmiths melt or fine their me­
tal. 
Argent de coupele, fine silver, silver that hath been tested or tri­
ed.  

COUPER, to cut, or to cut off. 
Coupez moi du pain, cut me some bread. 
Coupez moi de la viande, cut me some meat. 
Couper les oreilles ou la tête à quêcun, to cut ones ear, or head off. 
Couper la gorge à quêcun, to cut ones throat.   



Couper les viandes à table, to carve the meat at table. 
Couper les blés, to reap the corn. 
Couper (tailler) la Vigne, to prune (or dress) the Vine. 
Couper les branches trop épais­
ses des Arbres qui sont trop d'ombre, to make a glade in a wood, to top trees. 
Couper un arbre par le pié, to fell a tree. 
Couper des pierres, to cut stones. 
Se faire couper les cheveux, to get his hair cut. 
Je lui couperai l'herbe sous les piés, je le supplanterai, I shall supplant him. 
Couper jusqu'au vif, to cut to the quick. 
Couper un habit, ou l'étoffe dont se doit faire l'habit, to cut out a sute of clothes. 
Couper les chemins, fermer tous les passages à quêcun pour l'empêcher d'aller en quêque li­
eu, to shut up the avenues, to stop the passage. 
Il faut couper chemin à ce mal, we must prevent that evil. 
Pour couper court, to be short. 
Se couper, to cut himself. 
Il s'est coupé le doit, he has cut his fingers. 
Se couper les ongles, to cut (or pare) his nails. 
Il se coupe en parlant, il se con­
tredit, he contradicts himself. 
Il se coupe, il dit un mot pour un autre, he mistakes, he says one word for another. 
Coupé, cut, cut off. 
Pain coupé n'a point de Maitre, a cut loaf has no Master. 
Il a eu la tête coupée, he had his head cut off. 
Coupans de l'ongle du Sang­
lier (m.) les bords des deux co­
tez, the sharp edges or sides of the foot of a wild boar. 
Coupe (f.) taille, action de couper, cutting, or the act of cutting. 
Coupe de bois, the cutting, fel­
ling, or lopping of wood. 
J'ai droit de coupe dans cette Foret, I have a right of cutting down of wood in that Forest. 
Bois de coupe, bois coupé, wood ready cut. 
Coupe de monnoies defendues, the cutting of forbidden monies. 
Coupeau (m.) éclat de bois, a chip. 
Coupeau (croupe) d'une mon­
tagne, the top of an hill. 
Coupe-jarret (m.) a Swash-buck­
ler. 
Coupeur (m.) a cutter, or he that cuts. 
Coupeur de bourse, a Cut-purse. 
Etonné comme un coupeur de bourse pris sur le fait, amazed like a Cut-purse taken in the act. 
Coupure (f.) a cutting, or the thing cut.  

COUPEROSE (f.) pierre minerale à faire teinture bleuë, copperas, or copperose.
Couperosé, mingled, or done with copperas. 
Un visage couperosé, a red face, a face full of red pimples.  

COUPLE (m.) a couple. 
Un couple d'oeufs, a couple of eggs. 
Couple, ou attache pour cou­
pler, a pair of dog-couples. 
Mettre les Chiens de Chasse en couple, to couple hounds toge­
ther. 
Coupler, to couple, or joyn to­
gether. 
Couplé, coupled, joyned toge­
ther. 
Couplet (m.) couplet de chan­
son, part of a song.  

COUR (f.) Maison de Prin­
ce, Palais d'un Roi, a Court, a Princes Court, or a Kings Palace. 
La Cour, le Prince & sa Famil­
le, avec les Courtisans, the Court, or the Prince and his Fami­
ly, and the Assembly of Nobles a­
bout him. 
Faire la Cour à un Prince, to give frequent Attendance upon a Prince. 
Faire la Cour à quêcun, tâcher de gagner ses bonnes graces, to court one, to screw himself into his favour. 
Suivre la Cour, to follow the Court. 
Avoir bouche en Cour, to have budge a Court. 
Cour de Justice, a Court of Judi­
cature. 
Cour de Parlement, a Supream (or Sovereign) Court, or Session of Parliament, a Session of Justice established in eight Capital Cities of France, viz. Paris, Grenoble, Tho­
louse, Dijon, Rouën, Aix, Rènes, and Bourdeaux. 
De par la Cour, by the opinion, consent, or sentence of the Judges in Court. 
En pleine Cour, in the hearing of the whole Court, all the Judges and Officers thereof being present. 
Cour des Aides, the Court of Aids. 
Cour des Contes, the Court of Accounts. 
Cour, basse Cour, a base Court, or Yard. 
Cour interieure, environnée de Corps de Logis, an inner Court. 
Courtisan (m.) qui suit la Cour, a Courtier, one that keeps at (or follows) the Court. 
Les artifices des Courtisans, Courtiers tricks, or reaches. 
Courtisane (f.) a Court-Miss, a Courtizan. 
Courtiser, to court. 
Je l'ai courtisée long tems, mais en vain, I have courted her a long while, but to no purpose. 
Courtisé, courted. 
Etre courtisé, to be courted, to be intertained with all Comple­
ments or offices of respect and ob­
servance. 
Courtois, courteous, affable, ci­
vil, kind. 
Lance courtoise, lance de joûte sans pointe, a tilting-staff, a lance with a blunt head. 
Courtoisie (f.) courtesy, affa­
bility, civility, kindness.
 
* Courage, Courageux, Cou­
rageusement. V, Cœur.

* Couramment, Courant, Cou­
rante. V. Courir.  

COURBER, to bend, act. 
Se courber, to bend, neut. 
Courbé, bent. 
Courbé en avant, bent forwards. 
Courbé en arriere, bent back­
wards. 
Courbé au bout, bent at the end. 
Courbé au milieu, bent in the middle. 
Courbement (m.) Courbure (f.) the bending of a thing. 
Courbette (f.) certain mou­
vement d'un cheval dressé au manege, a curvet, or the curvet­
ting of a horse. 
Faire des courbettes, to curvet. 
Ce Cheval fair les courbettes a­
vec une justesse merveilleuse, this horse curvets with a marvel­
lous exactness.  

COURÉE. V. Corée.
 
* Coureur, & Coureuse. V. Cou­
rir.  

COURGE (f.) sorte de fruit, a pumpkin.  

COURIR, COURRE, to run.   



Courir d'un côté & d'autre, to run up and down. 
Courir devant, to run before. 
Courir ensemble, to run toge­
ther. 
Courir apres, to run after. 
Courir sus (en termes de l'Ecri­
ture) to assail, or set upon. 
Où courez vous? whither do you run? 
Vous avez assez couru, you have runned sufficiently. 
Il court les Rues, il court com­
me un furieux, he runs up and down the streets like a mad man. 
Courir tous les lieux, courir par tout, to run every where. 
Courir à bride abbatue, to run a full gallop. 
On couroit à lui de toutes parts, people runned to him from all parts. 
Courir après un Heritage, to be eager upon an Inheritance. 
Courir risque, to run a risk. 
Courir une Riviere, une Mer, to rove up and down a River, or the Sea. 
Les Galeres qui courent les Isles de l'Archipel, the Galleys which rove about the Islands of the Ar­
chipelago. 
Le bruit court, there is a rumour, it is said, or it is reported. 
Vous avez fait courir ce bruit, you are the divulger (or author) of this report. 
Les Manifestes qu'on fait cou­
rir, the Manifesto's that are pub­
lished abroad. 
Courre le Cerf, to hunt the Deer. 
Courre la poste, to run post. 
Courre (ou courir) fortune, to run the risk or hazard of a think. 
Nous courons même fortune, we run the same hazard. 
Vous courez fortune d'étre tué, you run the hazard of being killed. 
Courant, chien courant, a hound, a grey hound. 
Une eau courante, a running wa­
ter. 
Courant (a masc. subst.) a cur­
rent, or swift course of waters. 
Se laisser aller au courant de l'eau, to go with the stream. 
Naviger contre le courant d'u­
ne Riviere, to sail up the River, to go against the stream. 
Courante (f.) sorte de danse, a couranto. 
Couramment, sans hesiter, readily, or without stop. 
Coureur (m.) a runner. 
Un Avant-coureur, a forerun­
ner. 
Coureur, vagabond, a roamer, or wanderer abroad. 
Coureur d'Armée, espion, a Spy. 
Coureur de campagne, one that is imployed in the over running, ra­
vaging, or forraging of an Enemies Country. 
Coureur de Mer, a Corsair, a Pi­
rate. 
Coureuse (f.) a gadding huswife. 
Coureuse, prostituée, a common (publick, and notorious) Whore. 
Courier (m.) a Courier, or a Messenger sent in hast. 
Cours (m.) course, a course. 
Le cours d'une Riviere, the cur­
rent (or the stream) of a River. 
Le Rhone a le cours rapide, the Rhone has a swift stream. 
Détourner le cours d'une Rivi­
ere, lui faire prendre un autre cours, to turn (or divert) the course of a River. 
Le Rhone prend son cours vers le Midi, the Rhone takes its course Southwards. 
Le Cours de la Vie humaine, the whole course of humane life. 
Cours, lice, lieu de Course, the Place wherein a Race is run. 
Le Cours, le Lieu où les per­
sonnes de Condition se prome­
nent en Carosse, a Publick place (as Hide Park) to which persons of quality resort together in their Coaches to take the air, and to view one another. 
Cours de Philosophie, de Me­
decine, Theologie, &c. the whole course of Philosophy, Physick, Divi­
nity, &c. the whole order or procee­
ding of study in those Sciences from the first rudiments to the last and deepest Mysteries thereof. 
Cette marchandise n'a plus cours, this commodity is clean out of date, no chapman will buy it, no tradesman can utter it, there is no further dealing in it. 
Monnoie qui n'a plus cours, mo­
ney that is not currant, that is cry'd down. 
Ce mot n'a plus cours, that word is obsolete, or out of use. 
Course (f.) course, or running. 
Leger à la course, light of foot, or an excellent footman. 
Course, lice, a course, a race. 
Achever la course de sa vie, to finish the whole race (or course) of his life. 
La course de nôtre vie est tres courte, our life is but very short. 
Faire des Courses sur les Terres des Enemis, to make incursions into the Enemies Country. 
Les frequentes courses de nô­
tre Armée sur l'Enemi ont ruiné tout le plat Païs, the frequent in­
cursions of our Army into the Ene­
mies Country have ruined all the flat Country. 
Aller en course sur mer, to rove upon the Sea. 
Course à cheval, a horse-race. 
Il s'est sauvé a course de cheval, he made his escape on horseback with a full gallop. 
Corsaire (m.) Pirate, a Cor­
sair, a Pirat, a Robber on the Sea. 
Faire le métier de Corsaire, to practise piracy, or robbing on the Sea. 
Les Corsaires d'Argers, Tu­
nis, & Tripoli, the Corsairs of Al­
giers, Tunis, & Tripoli. 
Coursier (m.) cheval pour la course, a courser, a tilting horse, a horse for the carreer. 
Coursier, cheval de guerre, a war-horse. 
Coursier, canon au coursier d'un Vaisseau, a kind of cannon for a ship. 
Coursier (m.) passage de prouë à pouppe, the Coursey, part of the hatches of a Galley. 
Courtier, ou Couretier (m.) a dealer in bargaining betwixt man and man, an hukster.  

COURONNE (f.) a Crown. 
Couronne, Diademe, a Crown, or Diadem. 
Une bonne femme vaut une Couronne, a virtuous Dame is worth a Diadem. 
Couronne Imperiale, the Imperi­
all Crown. 
Couronne de Prêtre, a Priests shaven Crown. 
Couronne de laurier, a lawrell Crown. 
Couronne de fleurs, a garland of flowers. 
Couronne de Corniche, mem­
bre carré entre les deux Cimai­
ses, the crown of a Cornish, in Ar­
chitecture. 
Couronner, to crown. 
Couronner un Roi, to crown a king, to set a Crown upon his head.  



Couronné, crowned. 
Couronnement (m) a Crow­
ning, or Coronation. 
Couronnement, ou Sacre du Roi, the Kings Coronation. 
Couronnement, en Architectu- the top of a building. 
Couronnement (achevement) d'un Ouvrage, the perfecting of a Work. 
Couronnure (f.) Couronnu­
re de têtes de Cerf, the broad­
spread and Crown-resembling top of a Deers head.  

COURRE, & Courretier. V. Courir.
 
* Courroie. V. Conroyer. 

† COURROUX (m.) colere, an­
ger, wrath.
Courroucer, se Courroucer contre quêcun, to be angry at one. 
Faire courroucer quêcun, to make one angry. 
Courroucé, angry.
 
* Cours, Course, Coursier, Cour­
siere. V. Courir.  

COURT, short. 
Les jours sont fort courts en hi­
ver, the days are very short in win­
ter. 
Des sentences courtes, short sen­
tences. 
C'étoit le plus court de les renvoier, the best way was to send them back. 
Demeurer court, to be at a non­
plus, to be mum, to have not a word to say. 
Tenir la bride courte, to pull in the bridle. 
Tenir de court la Jeunesse, to bridle youth, or to keep youth un­
der. 
Il s'arrêta tout court, he stopped on a sudden. 
Pour couper court, pour étre court, to be short. 
Courtaut (m.) cheval court de corsage, mais membru & fort, a curtal horse. 
Courtaut de boutique, a Shop­
keepers man, a Tradesmans Pren­
tice. 
Courre-pointe, ou Contre-pointe (f.) couverture de lit pi­
quée dedans & dehors, a quilt, or quilted counterpoint. 
Courtibau (m.) dalmatique de Diacre & de Soûdiacre, a white sleeved Vestment or Surplice worn by Deacons and Subdeacons during the celebration of solemn day's Masses. 
Court-pendu, sorte de pom­
me. V. Capendu.
 
* Courtier. V. Courir.  

COURTINE (f.) front de muraille entre deux boulevars, a curtain (in fortification) the plainness of the Wall between two bulwarks.

* Courtisan, Courtisane, Cour­
tiser, Courtois, Courtoisie. V. Cour.

* Couru. V. Courir.  

COURVÉE. V. Corvée.  

COUSIN (m.) a Cosen. 
Cousin germain, a Cosin ger­
man. 
Cousin, moucheron qui pique de son long bec, a gnat, or a midge. 
Cousinage (m.) parenté en­
tre Cousins, Cosenship.  

COUSSIN (m.) a cushion. 
Coussinet (m.) petit coussin, a little cushion.
 
* Cousu. V. Coudre.  

COUTEAU (m.) a knife. 
Manche de coûteau, the handle (or haft) of a knife. 
Lame de coûteau, the blade of a knife. 
Couteau, ou courte epée, a short sword. 
Apres s'étre querelés, ils en sont venus aux coûteaux, after some quarrelling they fell to their swords. 
Jouër des coûteaux, to fight with edge-tools. 
Coûtelas (m.) a Cuttelas, or Courtelas, a short sword for a man at arms. 
Coûtelier (m.) faiseur de coû­
teau, a Cutler, or maker of knives. 
Coûteliere (f.) a Case of knives. 
Coûtre (m.) coûtre de Char­
rue, the Coulter of a Plough.  

COUTER, to cost. 
Combien vous coûte cela? what do's it cost you? how much did you give for it? 
Il me coûte bien cher, I paid dear enough for it. 
Les Honneurs coutent à qui veut les posseder, much worship much cost. 
Il lui a beaucoup coûté d'avoir eté absent, he paid dear for his ab­
sence. 
Cette Victoire leur coûta beau­
coup de Sang, that Victory cost them much bloud. 
Quoi qu'il en coûte, à quel prix que ce soit, whatever it cost.
 
* Coûtre. V. Coûteau.  

COUTUME (f) custom, use, wont, or habit. 
C'est vôtre coûtume, 'tis your custom, 'tis your way. 
C'est une vieille Coûtume, pra­
tiquée de tout tems, it is an old Custom, or a Custom of old. 
Mettre une Coûtume, introdui­
re une Coûtume, to bring (or to introduce) a Custom. 
Passer en Coûtume, to become a Custom, to pass into a Custom. 
Garder une Coûtume, to keep a Custom. 
Une Coûtume qui commence à s'établir, à prendre pié, a Custom that begins to prevail, or to take root. 
Une Coûtume qui ne se garde plus, qui n'est plus en usage, a Custom that is not longer kept or observed, that is grown out of use. 
Remettre une Coûtume, to re­
new an old Custom. 
Reprendre sa Coûtume, to re­
sume an old Custom. 
Perdre la Coûtume de jurer, to leave off the Custom of swearing. 
Je lui ferai perdre cette coûtu­
me, I shall wean him of that Cu­
stom. 
Il étudie plus que de coûtume, he study's more than he uses to do. 
Selon la Coûtume, according to Custom. 
Contre la coûtume, against the Custom. 
Coûtumier, Droit Coûtu­
mier, the Customary Laws of a Na­
tion. 
Coûtumier, le Livre du Droit Coûtumier, the Book containing the Customs of the Nation.
 
* Coûture, & Coûturier. V. Coudre.  

COUVER, to brood, sit on, or sit over. 
Couver des oeufs, to sit on eggs. 
Mettre couver, to put eggs under a hen to be hatched. 
Couver une haine contre quê­
cun, to nourish a secred hatred and malice against one. 
Couver un mauvais dessein, to foment (or nourish) an ill design, to hatch (or to be hatching of) mis­
chief. 
Couvé, brooded, set on, set o­
ver.
Un oeuf couvé & gâté, un oeuf  



couvis, an addle egg, a rotten egg that hath been set on. 
Sentir le couvé, to savour musti­
ly. 
Ce mal a long tems couvé avant que d'éclorre, this evil has lain smothering a great while before it broke out. 
Couvée (f.) Couvée d'oeufs, one sitting of eggs. 
Couvée de poussins, a brood (or hatching) of chickens, as many as came of one sitting. 
Couvement (m.) a brooding, or sitting on.
 
* Couvercle, Couvert, &c. V. Couvrir.  

COUVRIR, to cover. 
Couvrir un pot, ou autre chose semblable, to cover a pot, or the like. 
Couvrir un Tableau de quêque voile, asin d'empêcher la pous­
siere, to draw a curtain before a Picture to keep the dust off. 
Couvrir la Table de viandes, to cover the Table with meat. 
Se couvrir, mettre son chapeau, to put his hat on. 
Couvrez vous, be covered, put on your hat. 
Il ne se couvre jamais en ma presence, he never keeps his hat on before me. 
Se couvrir de son bouelier, to protect (or guard) himself with his buckler. 
Se couvrir richement, to wear rich cloaths. 
Couvrir la jouë à quêcun, to give one a box on the ear, or a slap over the face. 
Couvrir, cacher, to hide, cloak, co­
lour, vail, or conceal. 
Il couvre sa haine d'une sausse apparence, he disguises his ha­
tred with a shew of friendship. 
Couvrir, excuser, pallier quê­
que faute, to palliate a fault. 
Couvrir son ambition de quê­
que pretexte, to cloak his ambi­
tion with a false pretence. 
Se couvrir d'un sac mouillé, to colour his hard or ill dealing with idle and insufficient pretences, to alledge for himself excuses which rather condemn than clear him. 
Il s'en alla à l'Armée, resolu de s'y couvrir de gloire, ou d'y mourir, he went into the Army, with a resolution to come off with glory or die. 
En faisant cela vous vous cou­
vrirez d'honneur & moi de confusion, by so doing you'l cloath your self with honour and me with confusion. 
Couvrir quêcun, le surpasser, le vaincre, obscurcir sa reputation par de plus belles actions, to e­
clipse a mans actions, to surpass (or to exceed) him. 
Couvrir, saillir la femelle, to cover, line, or leap. 
Le Chien ne couvre la femelle que quand elle est en amour, the Dog never lines the bitch but when she is proud. 
Couvert, covered. 
Un Champ couvert de fleurs, a field covered with flowers. 
Une Montagne toûjours cou­
verte de neige, a hill always cove­
red with snow. 
Une Campagne couverte de corps morts, a Plain covered with dead body's. 
Un Lieu couvert, ombragé, a shady Place. 
Un Chemin couvert, propre pour se cacher, a sculking place. 
Servir à plats couverts, to bring up the dishes covered. 
Un homme richement couvert, qui est couvert d'un riche ha­
bit, a man richly clad, that has got rich clothes on. 
Un tems couvert, Ciel cou­
vert, close (dark, dull, gloomy) weather, a weather that is over-cast. 
Un esprit (un naturel) sombre & couvert, a close and reserved man. 
Les esprits des hommes sont couverts, the minds of men are reserved. 
En termes couverts, in obscure terms. 
Couvert (a masc. Subst.) the roof, or covering of an house. 
Donner le couvert à quêcun, to receive one under his roof, or into his house. 
Le couvert d'une Litiere, d'un Carosse, the top of a Litter or of a Coach. 
Se mettre à couvert, to shelter himself. 
Se mettre à couvert des ardeurs du Soleil, to shelter himself from the scorching heat of the Sun. 
Etre à couvert du vent & de la pluie, to be under shelter from wind and rain. 
Etre à couvert de ses Enemis, du Canon, & des mousqueta­
des, to be secure from his Enemy's, from Canon shot, and from Musket­
shot. 
Etre à couvert de blâme, ou de l'envie, to be secure (to be free) from blame and envy. 
Couvert de table, a plate with a napkin and other necessarys for a man to use at table. 
Un Festin à trente couverts, a Feast for thirty people. 
Mettre le couvert, mettre la nappe, les assietes, &c. to lay the cloth. 
Couvertement, covertly, close­
ly, secretly, privily, or under hand. 
Couvertement, en termes cou­
verts, in obscure terms. 
Couvercle (m.) a cover, a pot­
lid. 
Couverture (f.) a covering. 
Couverture de lit, a coverlet, or covering for a bed. 
Couverture de lit velue, a rug. 
Couverture de livre, the cover of a book. 
Couverture de Maison, the roof of a house. 
Couverture, excuse, an excuse. 
Couverture, pretexte, pretence, shadow, colour. 
Couvre-chef (m.) habille­
ment de tête de femme, a Wo­
mans kerchief. 
Couvreur (m.) Couvreur de Maison, a Brick-layer. 

† COY, paisible, quiet, still, or peaceable.

  
C R
CRACHER, to spit, or spawl. 
Cracher en haut, to spit up. 
Cracher en bas, to spit down. 
Cracher contre une muraille, to spit against a wall. 
Cracher sur quêcun par mêpris, to spit upon one out of contempt. 
On lui crachoit sur le visage, people did spit upon his face. 
Cracher du pus, to bring up puru­
lent matter. 
Cracher le sang, to spit bloud. 
Il crache les poulmons, he spits up his lungs. 
Cracheur (m.) a spitter, or spawler. 
Un grand cracheur, a spawling man.  



Crachement (m.) a spitting, or spawling. 
Crachat (m.) spittle. 
Salir le pavé de crachats, to dawb the floor all over with spit­
tles.  

CRAIE. V. Craye.  

CRAINDRE, to fear, to be a­
fraid. 
Ne craignez point, cessez de craindre, fear not, be not afraid. 
Nous ne craignons rien, nous sommes en asseurance, we fear nothing, we are secure. 
Je ne vous crain point, I don't fear you. 
Vous n'avez pas sujet de crain­
dre, you have no reason to fear. 
Ils craignent, ils tremblent de peur, au moindre accident qui leur arrive, they fear, they quake for fear, upon the least acci­
dent. 
Une chose qui est fort à crain­
dre, a thing much to be fea­
red. 
Je crain qu'il ne me fasse du mal, I fear he will hurt me. 
Se faire craindre de quêcun, to keep one in aw. 
Il ne se fait pas craindre de ses enfans, he keeps not his children in aw. 
Je ne crain point de le dire, I fear not to say it. 
Craint, feared. 
Crainte (f.) fear, aw. 
Saisi de crainte, possessed with fear. 
Crainte religieuse, a godly fear. 
Tenir en crainte quêcun, lui donner de la crainte, to keep one in aw. 
Je veux vous ôter toute crain­
te, je veux vous en delivrer, I'le remove from you all cause of fear. 
Chassez (bannissez) cette crain­
te, banish that fear. 
Il faut retenir les Enfans plu­
tôt par l'honneur & par le de voir que par la crainte, Children should be brought up, not so much by fear, as by motives of honour and duty. 
Dissiper la crainte de quêcun par l'esperance qu'on lui donne, to dissipate a mans fear by an im­
pression of hope. 
Floter entre la Crainte & l'Es­
perance, to be floating betwixt Fear and Hope. 
Avoir la Crainte de Dieu de­
vant ses yeux, to have the Fear of God before his eyes. 
Craintif, fearfull, timo­
rous. 
Craintivement, fearfully, timo­
rously.
 
* Craion. V. Crayon.  

CRAMOISI (m.) teinture en cramoisi, crimson, crimson-colou­
red, of a crimson hue. 
Teint en cramoisi, dy'd of a crim­
son colour. 
Méchant en cramoisi (c'est à di­
re, obstiné dans sa mêchanceté, le cramoisi étant une teinture qui conserve fort sa couleur) a rogue in grain.  

CRAMPE (f.) engourdisse­
ment, the cramp. 
Avoir la crampe, to be troubled with the cramp. 
Avoir la crampe au pié, to have the cramp in his foot. 
Crampon (m.) a Cramp-iron, a hook (or cramp) of iron, &c. 
Crampons de fer de Cheval pour l'empêcher de glisser, the frost-nails of a horse shooe. 
Chaque fer a trois crampons, every shooe hath three frost-nails. 
Cramponner, to joyn (or fasten) together with cramp-irons. 
Cramponner les fers d'un Che­
val, le ferrer à glace, to frost-nail a horse. 
Cramponné, joyned (or faste­
ned) together with cramp-irons. 
Cheval cramponné d'acier, fer­
ré à glace, a frost-nailed horse.  

CRANE (m) the scull, or brain­
pan, the top of the head.  

CRAPAUD (m.) a Toad. 
Crapaudine (f.) pierre preci­
euse, the Toad-stone.  

CRAPULE (f.) a heaviness of the head through excessive drink­
ing.  

CRAQUER, Craqueter, to crack, or crash. 
Les dents lui craquent, il cra­
quete des dents, his teeth grate. 
Craquement, Craquetement (m.) a cracking, or crashing. 
Craquelin (m.) sorte de gâte­
au, Cracknel, a sort of Cakes made of yolk of eggs, water, and flower, fashioned like a hollow trendle.  

CRASSE (f.) amas d'ordu­
re, ordure, filth, or nastiness. 
La crasse de la tête, dandriff, the scales that fall from the head. 
Crasse de metal, the dross of me­
tal. 
Crasseux, full of ordure, foul, nasty.  

CRAVATE (f.) a cravat. 
Cravate à dentelles, a lace-cra­
vat.  

CRAYE (f.) chalk. 
Marqué de craye, laid (or mark­
ed) with chalk. 
Crayon (m.) a pensil. 
Premier crayon d'une Peinture, the first draught (or lineaments) of a picture made with a pensil. 
Crayon, Peinture faite avec le crayon, a picture made of dry co­
lours. 
Crayonner, peindre avec le crayon, to make dry painting. 
Crayonner, faire les premi­
ers traits d'une peinture, to draw the first lines (or make the first draught) of a Picture. 
Crayonné, fait avec le crayon, painted (or drawn) in dry colours.
 
* Creance, Creancier. V. Croi­
re.

* Createur, Creation, Crea­
ture. V. Creer.  

CRECERELE (f.) Oiseau de proie, a sort of Hawk. 
Crecerele, jouët d'enfant, a rattle for a child to play with.  

CRECHE, (f.) a manger.
 
* Credence, Credencier, Cre­
dit, Credule, & Credulité. V. Croire.  

CREER, to create, to make of nothing. 
Dieu crea le Monde en six jours, & au septiéme il se repo­
sa, God created the World in six days, and rested on the seventh. 
Creer, choisir, to create, or to chuse. 
Creer un Magistrat, to create (or to chose) a Magistrate. 
Creer les mêmes Magistrats pour la seconde & troisiéme fois, to create the same Magistrates the second and third time. 
Crée, created, made of nothing. 
Crée Magistrat, chosen a Magi­
strate. 
Createur (m.) Creator. 
Dieu le Createur de toutes cho­
ses, God the Creator of all things. 
Creation (f.) Creation. 
Depuis la Creation du Monde, since the Creation of the World. 
Creature (f.) a creature, a thing made of nothing. 
Toutes les Creatures, all the Creatures. 
Creature, Favori d'un Prince, a Princes Creature or Favourite.  



Il étoit la Creature du Roi, he was the Kings Creature, he was by the Kings favour preferred to great Honours. 
Ce Cardinal est une des Crea­
tures du Pape, that Cardinal is one of the Popes Creatures.  

CREMALIERE (f.) a pot­
hook, or pot-hanger.  

CREME (f.) creme de lait, cream, or the cream of milk. 
Crême, huile sacrée. V. Chrê­
me.  

CRENEAU (m.) a pinnacle, a battlement. 
Creneler, to make battlements. 
Creneler une muraille, to make battlements to a wall. 
Crenelé, figuré en creneau, imbattled.  

CREPE (m.) sorte d'étoffe, crape, a curled stuff used in mour­
nings. 
Crèper, to crisp. 
Crêpu, crisped. 
Crepine (f.) the crepine of a French hood. 
Crêpir une muraille, to parget (or plaster) a wall. 
Crêpi, muraille crepie, a par­
getted wall. 
Crepissure (f.) a pargetting.  

CREPUSCULE (m.) the twilight.  

CRESSON (m) sorte d'herbe, cresses, an herb so called.  

CRETE (f.) a crest. 
Crête de morion, the crest of a head-piece. 
Crêté, garni de crête, crested, or having a crest.
 
* Creu, & Creuë. V. Croître.  

CREVER, to burst, or break asunder. 
Crever des pustules, to break pu­
stules. 
Crever les yeux à quêcun, to put ones eyes out. 
Crever un Cheval, to burst a horse. 
Crever, se crever, to burst out, nent. 
Le Canon a crevé (ou s'est crevé) en jouänt, the Cannon burst as it was discharged. 
Crever de dépit, de rage, d'en­
vie, to burst with spight, rage, or envy. 
Tu creves de dépit, voiant l'­
honneur qu'on me rend, you are ready to run mad for spight to see me so much honoured. 
Il y a des Animaux qui crevent de graisse, there are creatures rea­
dy to burst with fat. 
Se crever de manger, to eat till he burst again. 
La muraille se creve, the wall cracks. 
Crevé, burst, broken asunder. 
Crevasse (f.) fente, a crevice, or a chink. 
Plein de crevasses, full of chinks. 
Se Crevasser, to cleave, or crack. 
Creve-coeut (m.) regret, heart­
sore, heart-breaking, or extream grief of heart. 
I'en ressens un grand creve-cœur, I receive from thence a great heart-breaking, I am very much troubled and concerned at it.  

CREUX (m.) trou, a hole, or hollow place. 
Le creux de la main, the hollow­
ness of the hand being half open and half shut, the palm of the hand. 
Le creux de l'estomac, the hole or pit of the stomack. 
Le creux d'un ulcere, the hole of an ulcer. 
Creux (adj.) vuide, hollow. 
La canne est creuse, the cane is hollow. 
Des songes creux, idle dreams. 
Creuser, to dig. 
Creuser la terre, to dig (or open) the ground. 
Creuser un puy, to sink a well. 
Creuser un fossé, to make a ditch. 
Creuser un tronc d'arbre, to bore the trunk of a tree. 
Creusé, digged, bored. 
Un rocher creusé, an hewn rock. 
Creuset (m.) a crucible, a little earthen pot wherein Goldsmiths melt their silver, &c.  

CRI (m.) a cry, or outcry, a clamour, or loud noise. 
Cri des Vendeurs, the cry's of those that vend their ware up and down. 
Cri public, proclamation de la part du Magistrat, a publick Cry or Proclamation from the Magi­
strate. 
Edit du Roi signifié à cri public, an Edict of the king proclaimed, or signified by Proclamation. 
Pousser (jetter) de grands cris, to make a great outcry. 
Cri que la douleur fait faire, a lamentable out-cry, a wailing or crying out with pitiful lamenta­
tion. 
Cri de joie, shout, shouting, or acclamation of joy. 
Cri de peur, a screek, or screeking for fear, a squeaking out. 
Crier, pousser des cris, to cry out, to make a clamour or a noise. 
Crier à pleine tête, crier de tou­
te sa force, to cry with all his strength, to bawl out. 
Crier quêque chose à quêcun, to call to one with a loud cry. 
Crier quêcun, l'appeller en cri­
ant, to call one with a loud voice. 
Crier apres quêcun, le traiter mal de paroles, to make hue and cry after one, to exclaim upon him. 
Crier aux armes, to call to arms. 
Crier alarme, to make an alarm. 
Crier au feu, to cry out fire. 
Crier à l'aide, to call for help. 
Crier de peur, to cry out for fear, to squeak out, or to squeal. 
Crier quêque chose par la Ville, to cry something about the Town. 
Crier, tempêter, to make a cla­
mour, to keep a heavy quarter, to fret and fume. 
Une femme qui crie incessam­
ment, qui ne sauroit vivre sans crier tout le jour, a woman that is always bawling, scolding, fret­
ting and fuming. 
Criant, crying. 
Un peché criant, a crying sin. 
Crié, cry'd. 
Crieur (m.) a Crier. 
Crieur public, a publick Crier. 
Un Crieur de Vin, a Wine Cri­
er, one that publishes throughout the neighbour streets the Names and dwelling Places of such as have Wine to sell, together with the price 'tis held at, and goodness it is of. 
Criée (f) any cry, outcry, or pro­
clamation. 
Criée (f) enchere, encan, an outcry of goods, a port-sale. 
Mettre en criée les biens de quêcun, to make an outcry of ones goods. 
Crierie (f.) a bawling, crying out, or clamour. 
Il nous romt les oreilles par ses crieries, he breaks our heads with his clamours. 
Criailler, to cry out (or to bawl) continually. 
Criailleur, Criard (m.) a trou­
blesom bawler, one that does no­
thing but bawl and cry out.  

CRIBLE (m.) a sieve. 
Cribler, to sift. 
Cribler de la farine, to sift meal.
Cribler quêcun, le bien exami­
ner,  



to sift one, or examine him strictly. 
Criblé, sifted. 
Cribleur (m.) a sifter. 
Criblure (f.) ce qui reste au crible & ne passe pas, the siftings.
 
* Crier, Crieur, Criée, & Cri­
erie. V. Cri.  

CRIME (m.) a crime, a great fault, or offence. 
Commettre un crime, to commit (or perpetrate) a crime. 
Se purger d'un crime, to clear himself of a crime. 
Crime de Leze Majesté, high Treason. 
Convaincu de crime de Leze Majesté, convicted of high Trea­
son. 
Criminel, criminal. 
Une Cause criminelle, a crimi­
nal Cause. 
Vie criminelle, a criminal Life. 
Juge Criminel, Lieutenant Cri­
minel, a Judge that sits on life and death. 
Un Criminel, une Criminelle, a criminal, malefactor, offender, or guilty person, a prisoner at the bar. 
Differer le Jugement d'un Cri­
minel, to put off the trial of a Criminal. 
Condamner un Criminel de Leze Majesté, to condemn a Ma­
lefactor of high Treason. 
Criminellement, criminally. 
Poursuivre quêcun criminelle­
ment, to prosecute one in a crimi­
nal matter.  

CRIN (m.) poil pendant sur le coû des bêtes, the mane of a horse, or other beast.
Le Crin qui pend sur le front, the foretop of a horse.  

CRIQUETER, to give a crack, or crash. 
Criquet (m.) petit cheval, a little ambling Nag.  

CRISSER, to crash, or make a noise. 
Crissement (m.) a crashing, or creaking.  

CRISE (f.) the crisis of a Dis­
ease, or the Judgement of Physick upon the alteration of a Dis­
ease. 
Bonne ou mauvaise crise, good or bad crisis. 
Le malade a fait bonne crise, the patient had a good crisis. 
Critique, critical. 
Jours Critiques, Jours de Cri­
se, critical days, wherein Phy­
sicians observe signs of life and death. 
La Critique, l'art de juger des Ecrits d'autrui, the Criticks, or the art of correcting other mens works. 
Critique, censure, reproof, cen­
sure, criticism. 
Un Critique, un Censeur, a Critick, a Controller, a Corrector of other mens works or doings. 
Faire le Critique, to play the Critick. 
Critiquer, to criticize. 
Critiquer les actions d'autrui, to controll other mens actions, or to find fault with them. 
Critiqué, criticized.  

CRISTAL. V. Crystal.  

CROASSER, crier comme un Corbeau, to croke like a Ra­
ven. 
Croassement (m.) cri de Cor­
beau, the croking of a Raven.  

CROC (m.) a grapple, or great hook. 
Pendre quêque chose à un croc, to hang a thing upon a hook. 
Ce different demeure pendu au croc, that suit remains unde­
cided. 
Donner à quêcun le croc en jambe, en luttant, to give one a foyl, in wrestling. 
Crochet (m.) a hook, a small hook. 
Crochets de Crocheteurs, the forks, or crooked staves used by common Porters to bear their bur­
thens with. 
Garni de crochets, armed with hooks. 
Crocheter, to open (or pick open) with a hook. 
Crocheter un coffre, to pick open a trunk. 
Crocheteur (m.) a Porter, a Street Porter, a common burden bearer. 
Crocheteur de serrures, a Pick-lock, or a Thief. 
Crochu, hooked. 
Crochure (f.) hookedness.  

CROCODILE (m.) sorte de poisson, a Crocodile.

* Croiable, & Croiablement. V. Croire.  

CROIE. V. Craye.  

CROIRE, to believe, or give credit to. 
Croire quêque chose, to believe a thing, to give credit to it. 
On aura de la peine à croire ceci, this will hardly be belie­
ved. 
On est tout disposé à croire ce­
la, every one is apt to believe that. 
Je ne saurois lui faire croire cela, I cannot make him believe that. 
Vòus ne sauriez me le faire croi­
re, you cannot make me believe it. 
Il ne faut pas croire le témoi­
gnage d'un Enemi, it is not good to trust in (or believe) the testi­
mony of an Enemy. 
Croire quêcun, to believe one. 
Le croiez vous? do you believe him? 
Je ne croi pas un mot de tout ce qu'il dit, I do not believe a word of what he sayes. 
Croire quêcun, se laisser con­
duire à lui, to believe one, or suf­
fer to be ruled by him. 
Vouz n'avez pas voulu me cro­
ire, you would not believe me, you would not be ruled by me. 
Vous combattrez, si vous me croiez, you shall fight, if you will be ruled by me. 
Croire, penser, estimer, to think, to make account. 
Je croi pour tout asseuré, I think for certain. 
Crû, believed. 
Je ne l'aurois jamais crû, I had never believed it. 
Si vouz m'eussiez crû vouz ne seriez pas en ces peines, had you believed me you had not been in this peck of troubles. 
Creance (f.) trust, or credit. 
Un homme de creance, à qui l'on a joûte foi, a credible man. 
Gagner creance sur l'esprit de quêcun, to gain a confidence with one. 
Ces choses ont tellement pris creance parrai le Peuple, these things have gained so much credit amongst the People. 
Lettre de Creance, en matiere d'Affaires, Credential Letters, Letters of trust and credence, wherein the Writer wills that his Messenger be credited in those things which he shall deliver by word of mouth. 
Lettre de Creance, en fait de Commerce, a Letter of Credit. 
Creance, opinion, opinion. 
Il est dans cette creance, he is of that opin on. 
Ce n'est pas ma creance, je ne le croi pas, that is not my opini­
on, I do not believe it.



La Creance du Chrêtien, la Foi Chrêtienne, the Christian Faith. 
Creance, filiere, cordelete à lâcher & retenir l'Oiseau de chasse, a hawks crianes. 
Creancier (m.) a Creditor, he that trusts another. 
Faire de nouveaux reanciers pour paier les vieux, to make new Creditors to pay off the old ones. 
Credence (f.) a cup-board for plate. 
Credence d'Autel, a lesser Altar joyned to another. 
Credencier (m.) the Cup-board keeper. 
Credit (m.) creance dans le Commerce, credit, or trust. 
Le Commerce ne peut subsister sans credit, there can be no Trade without trust. 
Vendre à credit, to sell upon trust. 
Acheter à credit, to buy upon trust. 
Credit, autorité, faveur, estime, ou reputation, credit, authority, favour, esteem, or reputation. 
Un homme de grand credit, a man of great credit or authority. 
J'emploirai tout le credit que j'ai pour vous servir, I'le make use of all the credit I have to serve you. 
Si mes Lettres ont quêque cre­
dit aupres de vous, if my Letters have any credit with you. 
Se donner quêque credit, to as­
sume a power to himself. 
Un homme sans credit, a man of no credit. 
Un homme qui n'est plus en credit, a man that has lost his credit. 
Avoir grand credit aupres de quêcun, to be very much in ones favour. 
Ce Gentilhomme a aujourd'hui tout le Credit qu'on peut avoir dans la Cour, that Gentleman has at this day all the Credit that one can have at Court. 
Votre Vertu vous donnera beaucoup d'estime & de credit, your Virtue shall get you a great deal of fame and reputation. 
Cet Ouvrage vous acquerra du credit, vous mettra en credit, this work will credit you, will make you famous. 
Credule, credulous, easy (or light) of belief. 
Vous étes trop credule, you are too credulous. 
Credulité (f.) credulity, lightness of belief. 
Croiable, credible, or fit to be believed. 
Un homme croiable, digne d'é­
tre crû, a credible man. 
Il n'est pas croiable, it is not credible, it is not to be believed. 
Croiablement, credibly.  

CROIS, ou Croix (f.) a cross. 
Mette une chose en croix, to put a thing cross-wise. 
Croix, genre de Supplice, a Cross, a kind of Gallows. 
Mettre quêcun en Croix, to crucify one, or put him to the Cross. 
Jesus Christ a soûfert la mort de la Croix, Christ suffered death upon the Cross. 
Croix, ou l'image de la Croix sur laquelle nôtre Seigneur mourut, a Cross, or representati­
on of that Cross upon which our Saviour died. 
Faire le Signe de la Croix, to make the sign of the Cross 
Croix, affliction, cross, trouble, or affliction. 
Croiser, to cross, or set cross­
wise. 
Croiser les piques, to lay down the pikes cross-wise. 
Croiser (canceler) une écriture, to cross (or cancel) a writing. 
Croiser les chiens qui courent la bête, to cross the Dogs in their chase. 
Croiser la Mer, ainsi que font les Corsaires qui exercent la Pi­
raterie, to cruise up and down the Sea. 
Se croiser, to ly cross. 
Deux lignes qui se croisent, two cross lines. 
Deux chemins qui se croisent, two cross wayes. 
Se Croiser, prendre la Croi­
sade, to take on him the Cross, or undertake with others a holy Jour­
ney or War against Infidels. 
Croisé, crossed, or set a cross. 
Croisé, cancelé, crossed out, or cancelled. 
Croisade (f.) Guerre contre les Infidelles, a Croisade, an Expedition of Christians assem­
bled out of divers Country's (by Preaching and the Popes Bulls) a­
gainst the Turks and other Infi­
dels. Which Expedition is so cal­
led, because every Cristian un­
dertaking the same, accepted of (and wore on his Cassock, or Coat of Armour) the badge of the Cross. 
Prêcher la Croisade, to preach the Croisade, to preach for an Expedition against Turks and In­
fidels. 
Croisade, Milice Sainte, the ho­
ly Militia, that went against the Turks and Infidels. 
Croisade, Croix de Soldats en­
rólez pour combattre contre les Enemis de la Foi, the badge of the Cross, which every Souldier wore in his Cassock or Coat of armour in the holy War. 
Croisat (m.) espece de mon­
noie, a kind of silver coin with a Cross stamped upon it. 
Croisée (f.) chose façonnée en Croix, a thing made cross-wise, or set across. 
Croisée de fenêtre, the cross­
barr of a window. 
Croisete (m.) sorte de plante, the herb Crossewort gentian. 
Croisillon (m.) croisillon de fenêtre, the small cross-barr of a window. 
Croisure (f.) the making of a thing in the form of a Cross. 
Crucifier, to crucify, to nail to the cross, or to put to death on the cross. 
Crucifié, crucify'd, or put to death. 
Crucifiement (m) a crucify­
ing, or nailing on the cross. 
Crucifix (m.) l'Image de Christ mourant sur la Croix, a Crucifix, or the representation of Christ dying upon the Cross.  

CROITRE, to grow, to grow up, or increase. 
Les plantes croissent peu à peu, plants grow up by degrees. 
Laisser croître sa barbe & ses cheveux, to let his beard and hair grow. 
Il n'est point d'arbre qui croisse si promtement, there is no tree that grows up so fast. 
Croitre, devenir grand (par­
lant des enfans) to grow tall. 
La Raison croit avec l'âge, Reason grows with age. 
Le Mal croit de jour en jour, evil increases daily. 
Creu, grown. 
Il est bien creu, he is very much grown.
La Riviere est creuë par les  



pluies, the River swells by the fall of rain. 
Creu (a masc. subst.) growth. 
Cela est de mon creu, that's of my setting, or planting, that's of my invention or doing. 
Creuë (f.) accroissement, a growth, increase, or augmenta­
tion. 
Creuë de riviere, the rising (or swelling) of the River. 
Creuës de tailles, an increase of taxes.  

CROIX. V. Crois.
 
* Cropion. V. Croupion, under Croupe.  

CROSSE (f.) Crosse de Pre­
lat, a Crosier, or Bishops staff. 
Crosse (potence) de boiteux, a crutch for an impotent person. 
Crossete (f.) crossete de Vi­
gne taillée sur le cep & plan­
tée en la bâtardiere, a small twig or shoot of the Vine cut off and transplanted.  

CROTE (f.) bouë, dirt, filth, or mire. 
Crote de chevre, de brebis, de lievre, &c. the dung (excre­
ments, or ordure) of goats, sheep, hares, &c. 
Croter, to daggle, or to dirty. 
Croter sa robe, to daggle his gown. 
Croté, daggled, dirtied.  

CROUASSER. V. Croasser.  

CROULER, secouër, to shake. 
Crouler, trembler, to shake, or to quake. 
Croulement (m.) a shaking, or the act of shaking.  

CROUPE (f.) Croupe de Cheval, the crupper of a horse.
Prendre quêcun en croupe (é­
tant à cheval) to take one up be­
hind him on horseback. 
Etre en croupe, to ride behind another on the same horse. 
Cheval qui porte en croupe, a double horse, a horse that carries double. 
Croupe de montagne, the top (or knap) of a hill. 
Croupiere (f.) a horse-crupper. 
Croupion (m.) the rump. 
Mal de croupion, the rump-evil, a disease which small cage birds are often troubled with. 
Croupie (f.) as, 
Prendre le lievre à la croupie, lors qu'il est à croupeton, to find a hare at relief, and then course her with Grey hounds. 
Croupeton (m.) the posture of one that sits upon his arse. 
Etre à croupeton, étre assis à croupeton, to squat (as a hare) to sit upon his arse. 
Croupir, to sit still a long while, to be idle. 
Croupir dans l'oisiveté, to grow rusty with idleness. 
Croupissant, de l'eau croupis­
sante, standing water. 
L'eau croupissante (ou l'eau qui croupit) se corromt, standing water is apt to corrupt.  

CROUTE (f.) crust. 
Croûte de pain, a crust of bread. 
La Croûte d'un ulcere, the scurf (or scab) of an ulcer. 
Faire prendre croûte à un ul­
cere, to cicatrize (or close) an ulcer. 
Croute de crepissure, the plaster of a wall. 
Bailler croûte à une muraille, to rough-cast a wall. 
Couvert de croûte, crusted, rough-cast.
 
* Croyable, & Croyablement. V. Croiable, & Croiablement, under Croire.

* Croyance. V. Creance, under Croire.  

CROYE. V. Craye.
 
* Cru, & Crue (from Croître) V. Creu, & Creuë, under Croî­
tre.  

CRU, ou Crud, crude, or raw. 
Cette viande est à moitié crue, this meat is half raw. 
Cuir cru, non conroyé, raw (or untanned) leather. 
Soie crue, ni lavée, ni teinte, raw silk. 
Chanvre cru, unsoped hemp. 
Armure à cru, a compleat ar­
mour. 
Armé à cru, all over armed, who is in compleat armour. 
Une réponse trop crue, a raw answer. 
Crudité (f.) crudity, rawness. 
Crudité (indigestion) d'esto­
mac, crudity (or indigestion) of the stomack. 
Un homme qui a des crudités d'estomac, a man that has a raw-stomack, or that is troubled with crudity's of the stomack. 
Cruement, rawly, barely, na­
kedly. 
Cruement, sans aucune conside­
ration, rashly.  

CRUAUTE (f.) cruelty, fier­
ceness, barbarousness, inhumanity, or unmercifulness. 
Traiter quêcun avec cruauté, to use one cruelly, barbarous­
ly. 
Exercer toute sorte de cruauté sur quêcun, to use one with all manner of cruelty. 
Cruel, cruell, fierce, barbarous, inhumane, or unmercifull. 
Etre cruel envers quêcun, to be cruel (barbarous, or unmercifull) to one. 
Vous étes plus cruel que les bê­
tes les plus farouches, you are worse than the wild beasts. 
Cruellement, cruelly, fiercely, barbarously, inhumanely, unmer­
cifully. 
Traiter quêcun cruellement, é­
tre cruel envers lui, to use one cruelly, to be cruel (or unmercifull) to him. 
Se comporter cruellement, to act in a cruel manner.  

CRUCHE (f.) an earthen pot, a pitcher.
 
* Crucifier, & ses derivés. V. Crois.

* Crudité. V. Cru.

* Cruë, ou accroissement. V. Croitre. 

* Cruel, & Cruellement. V. Cruauté.

* Cruement. V. Cru.  

CRY. V. Cri.  

CRYSTAL (m.) crystal. 
Crystal de roche, crystal of the rock. 
Crystalin, qui est de crystal, crystaline, of crystal, or like to crystal in clearness.

  
C U
CUBE (m.) figure Cubique, a Cube, or a four-square figure like a dye. 
Cubique, Cubical. 
Figure cubique, a cubical fi­
gure.  

CUEILLIR, to gather. 
Cueilli, gathered. 
Cueilleur (m.) a gatherer. 
Cuilleur de fruits, a gatherer of fruits. 
Cueillete (f.) a gathering. 
Cueillete d'une année, a years crop. 
Cueillete d'argent, collection of money.  

CUILLER (f.) a spoon. 



Il arrive souvent du desordre entre la bouche & la cuiller, di­
sturbance oft steps in between the cup and the lip. 
Cuillerée (f.) a spoon full. 
Une cuillerée de bouillon, a spoonfull of broth. 
Cuillerée, sorte d'herbe, spoon­
wort.  

CUIR (m.) peau vive, skin, or hide. 
Cuir, peau morte d'une bète, leather. 
Une piece de cuir, a piece of lea­
ther.  

CUIRASSE (f.) Cuiras, an armour for the breast and back.
Cuirasse à l'épreuve du mous­
quet, a Cuirass that is musket proof. 
Endosser une Cuirasse, to put on a Cuirass. 
Armé d'une Cuirasse, armed with a Cuirass. 
Cuirasse, ou Cuirassier, a Cuiras­
sier. 
Cuiraissier, armé de Cuiras­
se, a Cuirassier.  

CUIRE, bouillir, to seeth, or boyl. 
Cuire du vin jusques à la dimi­
nution des deux tiers, to boil two thirds of wine away. 
Cuire, cuire au four, to bake. 
Cuire, digerer, to concoct, or di­
gest. 
L'estomac debile ne cuit pas la viande, a weak stomack do's not digest the meat. 
Il y a des pierres qu'on ne sau­
roit cuire, there are some stones that cannot be boiled soft. 
Les ardeurs de la Canicule cui­
ront (ou brûleront) nos Vignes, the heats of the Dog star will parch our Vines. 
Ce froid cuira les Vignes, this frost will blast our Vines. 
Cuire, ou bouillir (dans un sens neutre) to boyl, neut. 
Les legumes ne cuisent pas dans toate forte d'eau, pulse will not boyl in every sort of wa­
ter. 
Cuire, causer de la douleur, to smart. 
Ma blessure me cuit, my wound makes me smart. 
Cuisant, sensible, smarting, sharp, piercing to the quick. 
Cuit, seethed, boyled, baked, &c. 
Cuisine (f.) a kitchin. 
Batterie de cuisine, kitchin tack­
ling. 
Cuisine, ou l'art de cuisiner, cookery, or the art of dressing of meat. 
Il entend bien la Cuisine, he is an excellent Cook, he has great skill in dressing of meat. 
Cuisine, viande, meat. 
Faire la cuisine, apprêter les vi­
andes, to dress meat. 
Cuisiner, to dress meat. 
Cuisinier (m) a Cook, a man Cook. 
Cuisiniere (f.) a Cook, a Wo­
man Cook. 
Cuisson (f.) action de cuire, seething, baking, &c. 
Cuisson de Vigne par la cha­
leur, a default in Vines, when the grapes not being covered with leaves by heat are withered. 
Cuisson de Vigne par le froid, the blasting of Vines with cold. 
Cuisson, douleur de chose cui­
sante, a smarting, or pain.  

CUISSE (f) the thigh. 
Le dedans de la Cuisse, the in­
ner part of the thigh. 
Le dehors de la Cuisse, the fore­
part of the thigh. 
Cuissar (m.) sorte d'armure pour la Cuisse, an armour for the thigh.  

CUISSIN. V. Coussin.
 
* Cuisson. V. Cuire.  

CUISTRE (m.) a pitifull fel­
low.  

CUIVRE (m.) copper.  

CUL (m.) the arse, or the breech. 
Le trou du cul, the arse-hole. 
Entre deux selles le cul à terre, between two stools the breech falls on the ground. 
Cul pelé, bald-arse. 
Le cul d'une épingle, the head of a pin. 
Cul, fond, bottom. 
Cul de lampe, the round bottom of a lamp. 
Une petite Tour faite en Cul de lampe, a little Tower winding downwards like a wreathed shell. 
Cul de sac, the bottom of a sack. 
Cul de sac, ruelle fermée d'un coté, a Lane, or Court which hath no way out. 
Culasse (f.) Culasse d'arque­
buse, the breech of a gun. 
Culasse de Navire, the Counter (in the Poop) of a Ship. 
Culbute, ou Culebute (f.) chûte la tête en bas & les piés en haut, a fall upside down, that is with the feet upwards and the head downwards. 
Culbuter, faire la culbute, to fall (or to toss) upside down. 
Culbuter quêcun, le faire tom­
ber la tête en bas, to make one fall headlong. 
Culbuté, tumbled (or tossed) up­
side down. 
Culot (m.) creuset à fondre l'or & l'argent, a crucible.
 
* Culte. V. Cultiver.  

CULTIVER, to till, manure, husband, or cultivate. 
Cultiver la terre, to till the ground, or improve it by culture. 
Une terre, quêque fertile qu'elle soit, ne sauroit rapporter si elle n'est cultivée, let a piece of ground be never so good of it self, it can never bring forth without til­
lage. 
Cultiver, faire valoir quêque chose, to cultivate something, to improve it. 
Cultivé, labouré, tilled, manu­
red, or husbanded. 
Cultivé poli, travaillé, compt, po­
lite, or elaborate. 
Un discours cultivé, a compt, or polite discourse. 
Culture (f.) l'art, ou l'action de cultiver, culture, the art or act of tilling or improving the ground. 
Culte (m.) worship. 
Rendre à Dieu un culte souve­
rain, to render God the supream worship.  

CUMIN (m.) sorte d'herbe, the herb called Cummin.  

CUPIDITÉ, (f.) convoitise, cupidity, lust, or concupiscence.  

CURAGE, (m.) sorte d'­
herbe, the herb Water-peper.  

CURATELLE (f.) Wardship, the office of a Guardian or Tu­
tor. 
Curateur (m.) a Guardian. 
Donner un Curateur à quêcun, le mettre en curatelle, to appoint a Guardian over one.  

CURE (f.) Benefice de Cler­
gé, a Parsonage, or Vicarage. 
Cure, Logis de Curé, a Parsons house. 
Curé (m.) a Parson, he that hath the spiritual charge of a Parish.  

CURE (f.) application de re­
mede, a curing, or using of reme­
dy's for health. 
Cure, façon de traiter les mala­
des, a Cure, or manner or curing sick people.  



Cure, guerison, a cute, or hea­
ling. 
Un Medecin qui a fait de bel­
les cures, a Physician that has done great cures. 
Cure, peloton de chanvre ou de cotton de la grosseur d'un oeuf de Pigeon, qu'on fait avaler à l'Oiseau de chasse pour le pur­
ger, a ball of hemp or cotton a­
bout the bigness of a pigeons egg, given for a purge to hawks. 
Curer (terme de Fauconne­
rie dit du l'Oiseau qui se dé­
charge de son rheume sur les cures qu'il a prises) to cast, as a hawk doth. 
Curer, nettoier, to cleanse, or scour. 
Curer les fossez, to cleanse (or scour) ditches. 
Se curer les dents & les oreil­
les, to pick his teeth and ears. 
Curé, cleansed. 
Cureur (m) cureur de re­
traits, one that empty's houses of Office, a Tom-turd. 
Curée (f.) a dogs reward, the hounds fees of (or part in) the game they have killed. 
Cure-dent (m.) a tooth­
pick. 
Cure-oreille (f.) an ear-pic­
ker.  

CURIEUX, curious. 
Curieux de quêque chose, curi­
ous of a thing. 
Curiosité (f.) curiosity. 
Curieusement, curiously.  

CUSTODE (f.) boëte où l'on tient l'Eucharislie dans l'Eglise Romaine, the box where is kept the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the Church of Rome.  

CUTICULE (f.) epiderme, the outward thin skin of the body, which being of it self insensible doth as it were spring out of the true and naturall skin.  

CUVE (f.) an open tub, a fat, or vat. 
Fait à fond de cuve, flat bot­
tomed, having a bottom like a fat. 
Cuveau (m.) Cuvette (f.) a little fat, or a little tub. 
Cuver le vin, le faire bouil­
lir dans la cuve, to let the wine work (or stand) in a vat. 
Cuver son vin, lors qu'on en a trop pris, to sleep himself sober, to digest his liquor, or pass over the fumes thereof by a good nap, or any other help.

  
C Y
CY. V. Ci.  

CYCLE (m.) a Cycle. 
Le Cycle Solaire, the Cycle of the Sun, which is the space of 28.years. 
Le Cycle Lunaire, the Cycle of the Moon, which is the space of 19. years.  

CYGNE, ou Cigne (m.) a Swan.  

CYLINDRE (m.) a Cylinder, a Geometricall body having for its bottom and top two equal parallel Circles, and his sides so equally rai­
sed from the top to the bottom, that wheresoever one cuts it parallel to the bottom or top, the cutting shall be a Circle. 
Cylindre de Jardin, a Roller.  

CYMAISE (f.) doucine, piece d'Architecture, a Wave, or Ogee, an outward member in Architecture fashioned somewhat like a Roman S.  

CYMBALE (m.) a Cym­
bal. 
Cymbalier (m.) joüeur de Cymbales, one that playeth upon Cymbales.  

CYME (f.) rejetton de plan­
tes, comme de choux, &c. the young sprouts of coleworts, or other herbs.  

CYNIQUE, Cynicall, Stoick-like. 
Un Cynique, ou Philosophe Cynique, a Cynick.  

CYPREZ (m.) sorte d'arbre, the Cyprus tree.
Cyprez, bois de cyprez, cyprus wood.  

CYTISE, sorte d'arbrisseau, the shrubby plant Citisus. 


  

>