




The New World 
of 
English Words, 
or a 
Generall DICTIONARY 
Contaning the: Terms Etimologies ---
Definitions of hard words, as they 
are deriued from other Languages, 
there proper significations through­
out the Artes & Sciences, whether 
Liberall or Mecanick - 
by E. Phillips -- 
Printed for Nath: Brooke at the
Angell in Cornhill 
1658 -








THE 
NEW WORLD 
OF 
ENGLISH WORDS: Or, a General 
DICTIONARY:
Containing the Interpretations of such hard words as are
derived from other Languages; whether Hebrew, Arabick, Syriack, 
Greeke, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, British, Dutch, Saxon, &c. their 
Etymologies and perfect Definitions: 

Together with 

All those Terms that relate to the Arts and Sciences; whether Theologie, Philo­
sophy, Logick, Rhetorick, Grammer, Ethicks, Law, Natural History, Magick,
Physick, Chirurgery, Anatomy, Chimistry, Botanicks, Mathematicks, Arithme­
tick, Geometry, Astronomy, Astrology, Chiromancy, Physiognomy, Naviga­
tion, Fortification, Dialling, Surveying, Musick, Perspective, Architecture,
Heraldry, Curiosities, Mechanicks, Staticks, Merchandize, Jewelling, Painting, 
Graving, Husbandry, Horsemanship, Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, &c.

To which are added 

The significations of Proper Names, Mythology, and Poetical Fictions, Histo­
rical Relations, Geographical Descriptions of most Countries and Cities of the World; 
especially of these three Nations wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles, and other 
most Memorable Passages are mentioned; as also all other Subjects that are useful, and 
appertain to our English Language.

A Work very necessary for Strangers, as well as our own Countrymen, for all Per­
sons that would rightly understand what they discourse, write, or read.

Collected and published by E. P.

for the greater honour of those Learned Gentlemen and Artists 
that have been assistant in the most Practical Sciences, 
their Names are affixed in the next Page.


Dedit Deus his quoque finem. Virgil.

London, Printed by E. Tyler, for Nath. Brooke at the Sign of 
the Angel in Cornhill, 1658.










The names of those learned Gentlemen and 
Artists, as also of those Arts and Sciences, 
to which they contributed their 
assistance.


ANtiquity's, Elias Ashmole, Esq;

Law Terms, Mr. Herne.

Magick, Mr. Turner.

Physick, Dr. Sparks

Chirurgery and Anatomy, Mr.Ed. Molins.
Mr. Will. Molins.

Chimistry, Dr. Currer.

Herbary or Botanicks, Mr. Morgan.
Mr.Coles.

Mathematicks, Mr. Moore.

Geometry, Dr. Wybard.

Astrology, Mr. Lilly.
Mr. Booker.



Chyromancy,
Physiogmony,
Mr. Sanders.

Navigation, Mr. Wilsford.

Fortification, Mr. Faulconberge.

The names of the Ma­
thematical instru­
ments. Mr. Greatorex.

Surveying, Mr. Eyre
Mr. Blagrave.

Musick, Dr. Coleman.

Architecture, Mr. Ed. Carter.

Perspective, Mr. W. Carter.

Heraldry, Mr. Knight.
Mr. Nower.
T. Rawlins, Esq.

Jewelling, Mr. Gyffard.

Painting, Mr. Walker.
Mr. Hales.

Graving, Mr. Fathorn.

Husbandry, Mr. Austen.

Cookery, Mr. May.

Horsmanship, Mr. Green.

Hawking
and 
Hunting, Mr. Gardener.

Fishing, Mr. Taverner.








TO THE 
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, 
AND 
IMPARTIAL SISTERS, 
THE TWO
UNIVERSITIES.


Most Equal Sisters,

NEver did any Volume raise it selfe to that 
heighth of reputation, at once to purchase 
every Reader for a friend or favourite: it is 
a known truth, and not to be denied that 
our Language hath in these later Ages been
advanced to the admiration, if not the emu­
lation, of other Nations, and whatsoever un­
natural reproaches have been stuck upon her beauties by the 
petulancy of Criticks, hath strangely, but chiefly, proceeded from 
the unworthy attempts of those that have obtruded on this Age
their transcriptions of Indexes, rather then Dictionaries, as if 
our Language were narrower then the rest of the Worlds, or
to be confined to their short-hand Epitomes: A high mis­
carriage through which the learned and unlearned have most 
unhappily suffered; certainly the Regalia of our Language 
could not have been worse injured then by being vitiated 
and corrupted by such spurious and imperfect Editions: for



if the Grandeur of such an undertaking be rightly considered,
no ordinary industry will be required, next the consulting
with the Monuments of ancient Records and Manuscripts de­
rived to us from reverend Authours, there will be occasion 
to peruse the Works of our ancient Poets, as Geffry Chaucer 
the greatest in his time, for the honour of our Nation; as 
also some of our more Modern Poets, as Spencer Sidny, Drai­
ton, Daniel, with our Reformers of the Scene, Johnson, Shake­
sphear, Beaumont, and Fletcher, and among the renowned An­
tiquaries, Cambden, Lambard, Spelman, Selden, and divers others. 
There will also be exacted from him that undertakes a task of 
this nature, a necessary knowledge of the Languages in which 
he is certain to incounter with a multitude of Criticisms, nor 
must he be wanting in his strictest search of most Dictionaries,
that he may be able to distinguish the terms, several derivations, 
differences, definitions, interpretations, proper significations of 
the words of our Tongue, how borrowed, how mixed with 
others, how with its own. Lastly, forraign Authours are to be 
made use of, and amongst them, the Germans are reputed most 
expert in the Mechanical Arts.

Thus, ever Honoured Sisters, you are not unacquainted what
Siftings, Anvelings, Traversings, there ought to be of Au­
thours, so that he that undertakes this Enterprize should first 
seriously perpend what difficulties he is to passe through, 
how dangerous it is for him to faile in such a Design, what 
a weight of disparagement he is likely to sink under: a 
Volume of this nature being of no lesse concernment, then 
not onely to informe young men in their deficiencies of 
the right knowledge of words, either for writing or dis­
course, but also to establish those of riper years in their pru­
dentials as an universally through-pac't Dictionary, and may 
serve for an Interpreter or Arbiter of their Studies and hu­
mane Transactions; so that a work thus rightly constituted 
may be said in some kind, to approach near to a Divine 
Skill, and that the rather as it doth in it selfe contain all 
those Idea's that concern the Speech or Pen, such as are use­
full to drive on and inforce with full vigour and strength, 
the affaires of mankind.

Illustrious Sisters, if we look upon the exemplary incourage­



ments of some of our Laureate Worthies, whose noble spirits 
have not suffered the ashes of Antiquity to be raked out of 
her sacred Urnes, as at this time the admired Workes of Mr.
Dodsworth and of Mr. Dugdale have informed the World. 
Some of these Heroick Persons out of a farther zeal to pre­
serve our Language from the barbarismes and ruinous defor­
mities of the times, to present her in her native glories, from 
their own more practical and experienc't insights in some of 
the Arts and Sciences, have contributed in what they were more 
particularly excellent, to the building up of this Volume, 
Their names I have affixed to their own learned indeavours, not 
onely as I my self acknowledge their opportune and incompa­
rable assistances, but that the Bookseller so much obliged to 
them for so unusual a curtesie, might expresse his humblest 
tenders of gratitude; as also that you, most Noble Sisters, would 
be pleased to take notice of this your learned Retinue:; and that 
there are Benefactours still surviving to celebrate your flourish­
ing felicities.

I am not ignorant, that though I am thus fortified with the
pregnant aid of those exquisite Persons, to which my own in­
feriour, though studious indeavours are joyned, that I shall ne­
verthelesse fall short of answering the curiosities of some 
critical expectations. Mr. Minshaw that spent his life and 
estate in scrutinizing into Languages, still remaines obnoxious 
to the misconstructions of many. But let such invading cen­
surers well consider the infinity of mechanical words, how e­
very Art hath its peculiar Terms, and then if they are in their 
right wits, it will seem almost impossible to them, for one man 
though a healthful person that hath spent the best part of the lea­
sure of his life, to erect such a Pyramid, more especially if those 
difficulties are rightly pondered that are to be waded through; the
conduct of costs in that continued converse that must be had with 
Artists, besides the great labour, with which the most generous For­
rainers that have gone about to manage such happy designs, have 
been wasted and tired out; these considerations being ingeniously 
weighed by the wiser sort of men, I hope the learned & charitable
Critick will intertain a favourable approbation of these labours, as 
he cannot find me wanting, at least of a more than ordinary in­
dustry to compleat this Work, both in examining and right di­



gestion of my own papers, as also for that tender care that hath 
been had of those happy contributions I received from others. 
Most Reverenced Sisters, my greatest ambition is your affecti­
onate esteem, which having but obtained, I shall ever strive to
imploy the best strength of my life and studies in your service; 
in the mean space I question not but I have already done my 
Country so much good service as to have stript away those ob­
solete termes that have defaced our language, not degrading too 
much from its primitive integrity, nor declining what with judge­ 
mentI might insert.

To conclude, I have illustrated and refined it, instated it in its 
proper majesty, rendred it admirably useful for all persons on all 
occasions, worthy of the greatest masteries of Rhetoricians and 
the tongues of our Vernaculous Oratours: with a no lesse honour­
able submission have I prostrated these my Indeavours at your 
Learned Feet.

EDW. PHILLIPS.






To the truly Noble, and Perfect Lover and 
Incourager of Arts and Sciences, Sir 
WILLIAM PASTON 
Knight and Baronet.


SIR,

IT hath not been the least of my care, that this present 
Work might be as happy in the fortune of its ad­
dresse, as in the publicknesse of its design, which is 
the General advancement of Learning and Arts; nor 
could it have been more advantagiously fortified a­
gainst the various and uncertain suffrages of the 
World, then by being adopted into the Patronage of 
such a Person, whose accomplishment in the Arts and 
Ingenuities renders him capable to judge of what is 
written well or amisse in any of them; and that this attribute doth belong 
properly to your self, is evident to the World by more then a few instances. 
Your admirable skill in Physick manifested in your frequent Cures of the 
most desperate Diseases, and those happy receits you have consecrated to the 
benefit of mankind; Your exquisite knowledge in Husbandry and Horseman­
ship; Your deep insight into the Mathematicks, and the more delicate sort 
of the Mechanicks, as appears by your excellent choice of Jewels, and your 
rare fancy and invention in Carvings, Turning, Paintings, and Annea­
lings, in which the very Artists you have imployed have submitted to 
your politer judgement; Your diligent search into the greatest curiosi­
ties of Nature; wherein how much you have exceeded all others of our 
Nation that have been famous in their Collections, your Musæum aboun­
ding with an infinite variety of the most choice and admired Rarities, 
can sufficiently testifie: And indeed, What qualities lesse noble then these 
I have mentioned, could spring from the vertuous inclinations of your 
youth, which for many years was spent in useful travels (not so much to 
see fashions, as to learn experience, and the true knowledge of men and 
manners) of which the Learned Mr. Greaves makes an honourable men­
tion in his Survey of the Pyramids of Egypt? These vertues, together 
with the enlargednesse of your mind in making your House the Center of
Hospitality to Strangers and Ingenuous Persons, are no lesse a true mark 
of the Noblenesse of your Family, then the Supporters of your Armes, a 
bearing which is very rare, and onely peculiar to the most ancient Houses.



Vpon this foundation it is that I build my confidence; but to me a 
person little meriting in my self the honour of your acceptance, my pro­
pitious Stars have been assistant on this occasion, and have so brought it 
about, that not I, but two Famous Vniversities and the greatest Artists of 
our time, should throw this Work at your feet, and in so doing they have 
obliged me by a favour which nothing can equal but the Honour of your 
receiving it from them by my hands. If what is here more particularly
contained of the more Noble Mechanick Arts, come not up to that heighth 
as to satisfie the curiosity of your excellent judgement in them, yet thus 
much our Volume may without arrogance pretend to, That there is here a 
fairer way begun then ever, for the promoting of that most useful part of
Learning; especially since it could not intend that alone, but takes in all 
the other parts beside: which all together with one consent, like the needle 
tending towards the North, present themselves to wait upon, you, who have 
so great an influence upon them, erecting a Monument to your fame, great
as the glory I aspire to in stiling my self,

Sir,

Your most humble, and most 
devoted servant,

EDW. PHILLIPS.







To the truly Noble and Acomplisht Gentlemen, 
Sir ROBERT BOLLES of Scampton, 
in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, 

AND 
EDWARD HUSSY of Cathorp, in the 
County of Lincoln, Esquire.


AT such a time chiefly it is, Most Honoured Sirs, 
that a Nation may be truly said to flourish, when 
those that are the most considerable in fortune and 
outward splendour, are also the most conspicuous for 
Learning and inward Worth; nor can the greatest 
Sciences and most noble Qualities be look't upon by 
any with so true an esteem and value, as by those 
who have themselves attained the highest perfection 
in them: and among the rest whom such qualifica­
tions make to be reputed the Ornament of the Age, it had been impossible
that the World should be unacquainted with two such Eminent Persons as 
your selves; who, being as inseparable in friendship and alliance as in the 
affinity of your vertues, could not, without injury to so happy an union, 
have been separated in this addresse. Though decency will not permit 
me to speak over-high of this Work wherewith I here present you; yet this 
I may say, That Fame hath usher'd it into the World, with the attest of 
so many Worthy hands, that never yet in English any Piece came forth with 
happier Auspices; to which there could have been nothing wanting to
Crown its fortune absolutely, but your most equal receptions, for which it is 
prepared, with this return of gratitude, That besides all those other Arts 
and Sciences, of which both of you are equal favourers and promoters, you 
will also have the satisfaction to finde a considerable account of those
accomplishments which are more especially agreeable to each of your pe­
culiar fancies; namely of that Divine and Seraphic quality (which 
first brought order and civility into the World, which mollifies the 
most barbarous and salvage natures, and calmes the unruly passions of 
the Soul) of which one of you is so great a favourer, and so absolute 
a Master in it, that your whole Retinue following your example, are



able performers in Musick, and may as truly be called your Quire as 
your Family; As also (which chiefly delights the other of you) that 
most manly and generous Exercise of Hunting, the sport of greatest 
Kings and Princes in all Ages, by which the youth of all Warlike 
Nations have been alwayes spurred on to martial Discipline, and the at­
cheivement of the most Heroick actions: Having therefore so great a 
veneration to whatsoever is excellent and worthy of highest praise, I 
could not omit to celebrate with my utmost indeavours, the owners of such 
perfections; nor could any consideration have more absolutely charmed 
unto your service, the 

Humble admirer of your Vertues 

Edw. Phillips.








THE 
PREFACE, 
By way of Introduction to the Right Know­
ledge of our Language.


THe very Summe and Comprehension of all Learning in 
General, is chiefely reducible into these two grand 
Heads, Words and Things; and though the latter of
these two be, by all men, not without just cause, acknow­
ledged the more solid and substantial part of Learning; 
yet since, on the other side, it cannot be denyed but that 
without Language (which is as it were the vehiculum or conveyancer of 
all good Arts) things cannot well be expressed or published to the 
World, it must be necessarily granted, that the one is little lesse neces­
sary, and an inseparable concomitant of the other; for let a Subject be
never so grave, never so useful, carrying in it never so clear and perfect 
a demonstration, yet if it be not pertinently worded, and urged with a 
certain power and efficacy to the understanding, but in a forced, tumul­
tuous, or disjoynted phrase, it will either not be understood, or so 
slightly and with such indifference regarded, that it will come short of 
working that effect which it promised to it self. And it is a thing mainly 
observable, that all those ancient Authours that have written the best
things, have left them to posterity in the purest and most genuine Lan­
guage. Among the Greeks, who have better deserved of the World for 
the excellency of their Works, than Plato, Xenophon, Thucydides? Who 
among the Latins have been more famous than Livie, Cicero, Salust? 
nor have all these been lesse admired for the properness and elegancy of 
their stile, than for the noblenesse of the things they delivered; neither 
have there been wanting of our own Nation, especially in these later 
Ages, those, who are not onely justly esteemed to stand in competition 
with the best of the Ancients for the verity and soundnesse of their mat­
ter, but, have also refin'd our Language to that heighth, that, for ele­
gance, for fluency, and happinesse of expression, I am perswaded it gives



not place to any Modern Language, spoken in Europe; scarcely to the 
Latin and Greek themselves. Now as for that subtile distinction used 
by some, between a Language and a Speech, I look upon it rather as an 
over-curious nicety, than any consideration of serious weight or moment; 
nor can I be induced to believe otherwise but, That whatever kind of
sermocination is generally used in any Country, may very properly be 
termed a Language; for if the commixture of a Language esteemed 
the most ancient, with that of a bordering or invading Nation cause it 
to degenerate into a Speech, even the Latin Tongue will hardly be 
exempted from that denomination, since it is no hard matter to prove 
that even that also descended from a Language yet more ancient than it
self; forasmuch as that Latin which was spoken immediately after the 
expulsion of the Roman Kings, when the League was made between Rome 
and Carthage, was so altered in the time of Polybius, which was 350
years after, that it was hardly to be understood; and from the time of 
Romulus we must needs think it suffered a far greater change: yet it 
was so far from being thought corrupted by this alteration, that it was 
judged not to have come to its ἀκμη, or flourishing heighth of elegance,
until the Age wherein Cicero lived. And if the change which is introdu­
ced by time, not onely not deprave, but, refine a Language, much more
will the alteration that is made by the interspersion of forraign words, 
especially coming from the more southerly and civil Climates, conduce 
to the sweetning and smoothing of those harsh and rough accents which 
are peculiar to the most northerly Countries. And besides, to find out the 
original and most unchanged Languages, we must have recourse as far
backward as the confusion of Babel, which was the first nativity of 
Tongues; and so make a vain search for things which perhaps are no 
where now extant.

True it is indeed, that Scaliger reckons up about 11 several 
Tongues (others 14) spoken in Europe, which have no affinity or 
intermixture one with another; the chief whereof, not to mention the 
Greek and Latin, which are now no native but acquired Languages, are 
the Teutonick or Dutch, the Slavonian, the Cantabrian, the old Brittish 
or Celtick; these are commonly called Mother Tongues, and those 
which are any way compounded of any of these Mother Tongues, or 
derived from them, some think fit to call Dialects, although notwith­
standing this composition or derivation, such a vast distance may be seen
between them, as renders them unintelligible to each other; whereas 
indeed a Dialect is but the self same Language, spoken in several Pro­
vinces of the same Nation, with some small difference; as the pronoun­
cing of a vowel either broader or finer, or some little variation of a 
word or syllable; in such a manner the people of Sommersetshire speak 
differently from those of Middlsex, yet both may very well be under­
stood of each other; and so the people of Florence from those of Rome: 
No otherwise in the Greek Language did the Dorick, Ionick, Attick, 
Aeolick, Dialects differ from one another.

But, not to insist any longer upon so nice a point, my intention 
is, as an Introduction to the particular scope and design of this Book, 
to speak something in general of the Original of our English Tongue, 
of the basis or foundation of it, of the reason of its several



changes, and how far it participates of other Languages, and of the 
peculiar Idiome or propriety thereof.

That, what was originally spoken in this Nation, was the ancient Brit­
tish Language, needs not to be doubted, nor is it improbable what some 
affirm, that it was very near, if not altogether the same with, the Gal­
lick, or Celtick, since both these people were by the ancient Greeks cal­
led by one common name, Celtæ; besides, if we consider the solid argu­
ments of Verstegan, and those that have writ most judiciously, concern­
ing the Original of the Brittains, nothing seems to me more consonant 
to truth, then that the Brittains anciently descended from the Gaules, 
and that Brutus rather a Gallick, then a Trojan Prince, changed the name 
of Albion into that of Brittain: but certain it is that of this ancient Brit­
tish, there remains scarsely any track, or footstep in the language spoken
at this day in the main part of England, but hath remained intire from the 
Saxon Conquest to this very time in that part, which is commonly called
Cambro-Brittania, or Wales, to which (being a mountanous Countrey, and 
strong for defence, and which onely of all the rest of the Island was left 
unconquered by the Saxons) a great number of the Native inhabitants 
betook themselves by flight, preserving both their ancient race and 
speech, which from the Countrey Wales, is now called Welsh. In the same 
manner the Cantabrian, or ancient tongue of Spain, notwithstanding 
the frequent invasions of that Countrey by the Carthaginians, Moors,
Romans and Vandals, is yet preserved in Biscay, Guipuscoa and Navarre;
and in the Mountains of Granata, called Alpuxarras the Arabick is still 
retained, together with the off-spring of the Moors, that in times past 
possessed the greatest part of Spain; as also in Armorica, or Brittany in
France, the old Gallick is spoken at this day, which very near resem­
bling the Welsh, is a great argument of the ancient affinity of these two 
tongues.

From this so total a subversion of the Brittish Empire by the English-­
Saxons, followed as total a subversion of the Brittish language, and even 
of the very name of Brittain (which from the ancient habitation of the 
Saxons near the Baltick Sea, was named Anglia, or England) a thing
which was neither effected by the Roman nor the Norman Conquest, for 
neither the Provincial Latin could extinguish the Native Brittish, nor the 
French brought in by King Williams followers, the Saxon which was then 
in use, for it is observable that where the Conquerours over-power the 
former inhabitants in multitude, their language also by little and little 
prevails over that of the Countrey, otherwise it wasts and spends it self 
till it be in a manner utterly lost, like a small quantity of water thrown 
upon a heap of sand. Since therefore these Saxons were a people of Ger­
many, and their speech very little, if at all differing from the rest of the
Germans, it is hence evident that our language derives its Original from 
the Dutch or Teutonick, which seems to be of greater Antiquity then any 
other language now spoken in Europe, and to have continued the same 
without any considerable alteration, and in the same Countrey where it 
was first planted, through a long tract of many ages; for, not to urge the 
opinion of Goropius Becanus, who affirmeth it to have been the first 
language of the world, and spoken by Adam in Paradise; it is certainly 
the common consent of most Authentick Writers, that the Dutch tongue



still in use, and possessing a large compasse of ground, is no lesse ancient 
then the very first coming in of the Teutones into Germany, under the 
conduct of Tuisco, which is no wonder, if we consider that the Teutones, 
or Germans, being the very first people that ever inhabited Germany, have 
continued in the possession of it to this very day uncorrupted, unsubdued
and (as their language, so themselves) unmixed with any forraigne Na­
tion. Nor is the large extent of this language lesse considerable, for as 
much as it is spoken throughout all Germany, Denmark, Norwey, Sweth­
land, Belgia, the Iland of Thule, now called Iseland, and divers of the
Northern Iles, besides those places into which it hath spread it self by 
conquest, as into Gallia by the Franck's, and by the Saxons into this 
Iland, where it yet remaineth in a very great measure.

And though our English tongue hath of late ages intertained so great 
a number of forraign words, that every age it seemeth to swerve more 
and more from what it was originally; yet if we compare it diligently 
with the Dutch, we shall soon finde that almost all the chief material 
words, and those which are oftnest used in the most familiar, and vulgar 
discourse, are all, either meer Dutch, or palpably derived from the 
Dutch. For example, the most primitive and uncompounded words, ap­
pellatives, the names of natural things, animals, vegetals, as Earth, Hea­
ven, Winde, Oak, Man, Bird, Stone, &c. words that imply a relation, as 
Father, Brother, Son, Daughter; Pronouns, and Monosyllable Verbs, as 
Mine, Thine, This, What, Love, Give, besides all our numerals, 
particles, conjunctions, and the like.

Concerning these words it is very remarkable, that most of them 
consisting but of one syllable; neverthelesse, the things that are un­
derstood by them are as significantly express't, as the same things in 
other tongues are by words of two, or more syllables; as the word 
Good is as proper as either Αγαθοσ in Greek, or Bonus in Latin, a 
matter of no small advantage: for if that sentence be judged most 
praise-worthy that containeth most matter in fewest words, why 
may we not commend that word, which consisting of fewest sylla­
bles, is yet of as great force as if it had more. No lesse considera­
ble is the proper, and most pertinent signification of some words which 
are produced by the coalition, or clapping together of two of these
monosyllables into one, as the word Wisdome, which is compound­
ed of these two words Wise, i. e. Grave, Sage, Prudent, and the 
old Saxon word Dome, i. e. judgement, or sentence, since wisdome
may most properly be said to be the result of a Grave, and solid
judgement.

By this that hath been said it is evident, that the Saxon, or
German tongue is the ground-work upon which our language is 
founded, the mighty stream of forraigne words that hath since
Chaucers time broke in upon it, having not yet wash't away the root: 
onely it lies somewhat obscur'd, and overshadow'd like a Rock, or Foun­
tain overgrown with bushes.

Whether this innovation of words deprave, or inrich our English 
tongue is a consideration that admits of various censures, accord­
ing to the different fancies of men. Certainly as by an invasion of
strangers, many of the old inhabitants must needs be either slain, or



forced to fly the Land; so it happens in the introducing of strange 
words, the old ones in whose room they come must needs in time
be forgotten, and grow obsolete; sometimes indeed, as Mr. Cambden 
observes, there is a peculiar significancy in some of the old Saxon
words, as in stead of fertility they had wont to say Eordswela, 
which is as much as the wealth, or riches of the earth, yet let us 
not bewail the losse of them for this, for we shall finde divers 
Latin words, whose Etymology is as remarkable, and founded upon, 
as much reason, as in the word intricate, which (coming from Tricæ 
i. e. those small threads about Chickens legs, that are an encombrance 
to them in their going) signifieth entangled; and it is worth the ta­
king notice, that although divers Latin words cannot be explained, but 
by a Periphrasis, as Insinuation is a winding ones self in by little and 
little, yet there are others, both French and Latin, that are match't 
with Native words equally significant, equally in use among us, as 
with the French Denie, we parallel our gainsay, with the Latin resist
our withstand, with Interiour, inward, and many more of this na­
ture: So that by this means these forrainers instead of detracting ought 
from our tongue, add copiousnesse and varity to it, now whether 
they add, or take from the ornament of it, it is rather to be referr'd 
to sence and fancy, then to be disputed by arguments. That they 
come for the most part from a language, as civil as the Nation 
wherein it was first spoken, I suppose is without controversy, and be­
ing of a soft and even sound, nothing savouring of harshnesse, or bar­
barisme, they must needs mollifie the tongue with which they incor­
porate, and to which, though of a different nature, they are made fit 
and adapted by long use; in fine, let a man compare the best English, 
now written, with that which was written three, or four ages ago, and 
if he be not a doater upon antiquity, he will judge ours much more 
smooth, and gratefull to the ear: for my part that which some attri­
bute to Spencer as his greatest praise, namely his frequent use of ob­
solete expressions, I account the greatest blemish to his Poem, other­
wise most excellent, it being an equal vice to adhere obstinately to old 
words, as fondly to affect new ones.

But not to dwell any longer upon their Apology, I shall now for 
the clearer Method proceed to the division of them, there are not 
many Nations in Europe, some of whose words we have not made bold 
with, as all of us together have borrowed from the ancients in 
great abundance, some we take from the Italians, as Abase, Abone, 
Abbord, Balustrade, Balcone, some from the Spanish, as Abandon, En­
velope, Disembogue, Chapin; many from the French, as Desire, Deny, 
Command, Embellish, Embossement; among the ancient languages we 
have from the Greek not a few, as those that end in μα, with us end in 
m. as επιραμμα Epigram, ἐνθύμημα Enthymem, those in ος with us in
t, as ἐπίθε Epithet, those in ος, with us end in er, as Αςρόλογοσ Astrolo­
ger, those in ασησ with us in ast, as παραφράςυς Paraphrast, those in ιςα in 
ist, γυμνοσοφίσα Gymnosophist, those in ικοσ in ick, as Dramatick, those 
in ιικοσ in isk, as Basilisk, those in αφον, or αφοσ in aph, as Chirograph 
Paragraph, those in αρχα in arch, as Monarch, those in ια, in y, or ie, 
as Philosophy, Rhapsodie, those in ισμοσ, or ισμα in ism, as Syllogism, 



Sophism; also their verbs in ιζειν, with us end in ize, as καυτερίζειν Cau­
terize; in imitation, of which some, out of a pretty Capricchio, have
given common words the same termination, as enfranchize, spiritualize, 
wantonize. The next thing to be observed of Greek words is 
their manner of composition, they are either compounded of these 
following prepositions, as (1) ἀνα, correspondent to the Latin Re, which 
in composition signifieth again, as Anaphora reductio, or a bringing back 
again, 2 ἀιτι, which, compounded with another word, implies an op­
position, as Antiperistasis, an opposing of any quality against its contra­
ry, 3 ἀμφι, both wayes, or about, as Amphibious, i. e. living upon ei­
ther element, land, or water, 4 ἀπο, which in composition signifies a con­
trariety, as from κάλυψις, a hiding, Apocalypsis, a revealing, 5 Δις, im­
plies a dilating, or a dividing, as Dioeresis, a dividing of one syllable 
into two, 6 κατα, answering in composition to the Latin, De as Cata­
phora, a carrying downward, 7 επι, in, or upon, as Epitaph, an inscrip­
tion upon any ones Tombe, 8 εκ, or εξ, out, as Ectype, a thing ta­
ken out of another Copy, 9 εν, in, or inward, as Engastrimyth, one that 
speaks inwardly, 10 μετα, which implies a changing, as Metamorpho­
sis, a changing of shapes, 11 παρα, which implies a comparison, as Pa­
rabola, a story brought for a similitude, 12 περι, about, as Periphe­
rie, a carrying about, 13 ωρο, before, as Prodromus, a fore-runner, 
14 προς, to, or toward, as Prosthesis, an adding unto, 15 ὐπο, under, 
as Hypogastrick, the lowermost part of the belly, 16 ύπερ, above, as 
Hyperphysical, that which is above nature. Or else of other words, 
as  πρῶτοσ, first, πολυς, many, ψεύδυς, false, and the privative α, for 
example, Prototype, an Original, or first Copy, Polygon, a figure that 
hath many angles, or corners; Pseudomartyr, a false witnesse, or con­
terfeit Martyr; Atrophy, a want of the nutritive faculty, these are 
the most material, and all that are in use in our tongue.

But for the Latin words they will require a larger account to be 
given of them; these are the main body of our Army of forraigne 
words, these are so numerous that they may well be thought to e­
qual, if not exceed the number of our ancient words; onely, here 
is the difference, That these are the more essential, those the more re­
mote, and rather the superstructure then the foundation. Of these La­
tin words there are many (as also some of the French, and others be­
fore mentioned) that by long custome are so ingrafted, and natura­
liz'd into our tongue, that now they are become free denizons, with­
out any difference, or distinction between them and the Native words, 
and are familiarly understood by the common sort, and most unlearn­
ed of the people; as nature, fortune, member, intend, inform, in­
vent, and the like, others there are which though frequently written, 
and used in common discourse by the politer sort, and infranchized at
least, if not naturalized, are not yet so very trite as to be understood by 
all, since divers ingenuous persons, addicted to the reading of books, are 
neverthelesse unacquainted with the Latin, and other forraign lan­
guages, and so are at a losse when they meet with unusual words, and
some people if they spy but a hard word, are as much amazed as if they 
had met with a Hobgoblin, and these are they, more especially, the cog­
nizance whereof is one part, though not the greatest, of this designe,



but that there are in the book some words ordinary and trite enough, 
for I thought it better in such a case as this, rather to exceed then to 
be too sparing, since an exuberance is easilier cut off then a defect sup­
plied; I had thought once to have omitted this branch of our follow­
ing work, as having been performed by others before, and that not 
without some diligence, but I thought it not enough to have added 
many more things then were yet ever thought on, but also to have 
the quintessence of what ever was offer'd at before, in another cast 
and better method, that it might be a complete work, and not want­
ing in any thing that could be desired in a designe so usefull to the 
Nation; besides, that even of these sorts of words there were many
wanting before, which were requisite to be inserted, many not so 
properly rendred as was convenient, divers cram'd in by the head and 
shoulders without any distinction, but as if they had been as good as the 
best; whereas in works of this nature men ought to fly all Pedantismes, 
and not rashly to use all words alike, that are met with in every English 
Writer, whether Authentick, or not, this is a bad example to the unad­
monish't Reader, and might incourage him to suck in barbarisme as 
soon as Elegance, but by long experience out of a continued course of 
reading the best Authors, and conversation with the better sort of com­
pany to examine throughly what words are natural, and ligitimate, and 
what spurious, and forc'st; nor is it proper to quote an Authour for a 
word that long custome hath sufficiently authoriz'd, but either such as
are grown out of use, or such as are used onely upon special occasions, 
or as terms of Art; and not upon the credit of every one neither, nor 
to quote any modern, or trivial Authour for words used by those more 
ancient, or of greater credit: I do not deny indeed, but that there are 
many words in this book (though fewer then in other books of this 
kinde) which I would not recommend to any for the purity, or reputa­
tion of them, but this I had not done, but to please all humours, know­
ing that such kinde of words are written, & that the undistinguishing sort 
of Readers would take it very ill if they were not explained, but with­
all I have set my mark upon them, that he that studies a natural and un­
affected stile, may take notice of them to beware of them, either in dis­
course, or writing; and if any of them may have chanc't to have escap't 
the Obelisck (as such a thing may happen in spight of deligence) there 
can arise no other inconvenience from it, but an occasion to exercise the 
choice and judgement of the Reader, especially being forewarned, who 
if he have a fancie capable to judge of the harmony of words, and their 
musical cadence, cannot but discern when a word falls naturally from the 
Latin termination, when forc't and torn from it, as Imbellick, which
might indeed come from Imbellicus, if any such word were, but how 
they can handsomely deduce it from Imbellis, is hard to resolve, if this 
be bad imprescriptible is worse, being derived, neither I nor any body 
else knows how, since Præscriptus is the nearest they can go: there are al­
so worth the pains of avoiding certain kinde of Mule-words propaga­
ted of a Latin Sire, and a Greek Dam, such as Acrilogie, Aurigraphy, 
and others ejusdem farinæ; but I have also met with some forged, as 
I shrewdly suspect, by such as undertook to explain them; so monstrous­
ly barbarous, and insufferable, that they are not worthy to be mentio­



ned nor once thought on, yet that ye may guesse at Hercules by his 
foot, one of them I shall produce, which is Suicide, a word which I 
had rather should be derived from Sus, a Sow, then from the Pronown
Sui, unlesse there be some mystery in it; as if it were a Swinish part for 
a man to kill himself.

What cautions more to give for the avoiding of such grosse words as 
these I know not, onely this in general, To be ever conversant in the best 
Authours, as Sir Philip Sidny, Sir Thomas More, Sir Water Rawleigh, 
my Lord Verulam, Ben Johnson, happy as well in his prose as verse, and 
for his instructions in well writing excellent; nor is this present age ut­
terly barren: not to mention our late Romances, which for stile are not 
quite to be rejected, neither are they void of delight and some ele­
gancies, onely intermixed with a kinde of grave majestical, and se­
rious folly.

Now for those words that are of a right stamp, and currant among 
us, that they may orderly be dinstinguish't by their Terminations, and 
not be known at randome, meerly, and by chance; I shall shew exact­
ly how they are formed from the Original Latin words, and reduce them
into certain classes, or ranks, where note that the Characteristick of a 
word alwayes consists in the end, or termination.

First, Our Adjectives are formed from the Latins, either by casting 
away the Final us, as from Promptus Prompt, from Justus Just, or 
changing us into ed, as Infatuatus, Infatuated, or into ous, as Obvius Obvi­
ous, sometimes into an, as Plebeius, Plebeian, or by changing ilis in­
to ile, as from Agilis comes Agile, from facilis facile, ax into acious, as 
efficax efficacious, bilis into ble, as tractabilis tractable, Docibilis Doci­
ble; alis into al, as Orientalis Oriental; ans, or ens, into ant, or ent, 
as constans constant, eloquens eloquent, or into our as inferior inferiour, 
rius into ry, as contrarius contrary, Transitorius Transitory.

Secondly, Noun substantives derived from adjectives, participles, verbs; 
or otherwise; of which those that in Latine end in tas, with us end 
in tie, or ty, as Imbecillitas, Imbecillity, Probabilitas, Probability, antia 
into ance, or ancy, as substantia substance, reluctantia reluctancy, entia 
into ence, or ency, as confidentia confidence, eminentia eminencie, ura into
ure, as commissura commissure; udo into ude, as magnitudo magnitude, 
or into our, as Author Authour, words ending in tio, of which there are 
a great number, have n added at the end, as separatio separation,
repletio repletion, instructio instruction, ambitio ambition, sometimes 
us, or um, is taken away from the latter end, as Conventus a Convent, 
Argumentum an Argument, Articulus an Article, Monstrum a Mon­
ster; to one, or other of these terminations, almost all Nouns whatso­
ever be reduced. 

Thirdly, For our Verbes, some there be that may most aptly, and with 
best ease be formed from the indicative mood, present tence of the 
active voice, as from Informo to Inform, and from contendo to contend, 
from præscribo to prescribe, from comtemno to contemne, from alludo 
to allude: Some fall more kindly from the infinitive mood, as from con­
vincere to convince, from reducere to reduce, because of the melting of 
the c. but there are other Verbs, such as from Colligere Collect, from in­
struere instruct, from consulere consult, from invenire invent, which can­



not, without much constraint, be deduced either from the Indicative, 
or Infinitive mood, but seem much more probably, by their near resem­
blance, to be formable from the participle passive, as Collectus, Instructus, 
Consultus, Inventus. In like manner may all those Verbs that come from 
the first conjugation of the Latins (whereof a great multitude are of late 
years grown in use) be formed, as to coacervate, to consummate, to ag­
gravate, &c. from Coacervatus, Consummatus, Aggravatus, rather then 
from the Infinitive, coacervare, consummare, aggravare, for as much as 
the final t seems to be the Characteristick letter; there are also sundry 
other Verbes that appear to have been most anciently received, and
most inured to our language, which, belike, were had from the Latins 
at the second hand, we taking them from the French, as they from the 
Lat. as chiefly those that end in y or ie: for example, to signifie, to glorifie, 
to mollifie, which we borrow from the French, signifier, glorifier, mol­
lifier, and they from the Latin, significare, glorificare, mollificare; be­
sides, those both Verbes, and Nouns which we borrow from the French
meerly, as to refresh, to discourage, to discharge, to furnish, to garnish, to 
refrain, despite, distresse, hostage, menace, &c.

Fourthly, Concerning our Adverbs, there needs no more to be said 
but this, that whereas in Latin they most commonly end in è, or èr, we re­
tain our old termination ly, as for successivè, we use successively, for dili­
gentèr, diligently, these must be understood to be such onely as are de­
rived from Nown Adjectives, for with the ordinary Adverbs of time, 
place, &c. our tongue meddles not. As for those in tùs, as divinitùs, 
and in im, as confertim, viritim, &c. we cannot expresse them by one 
word, except partim, i. partly.

Fifthly, and lastly, there are a sort of words and expressions, which 
we take from the Latins, whole and intire without any diminution, or 
change, either in the same nature as Cicero, and some of the Latin wri­
ters do from the Greeks (as namely when they had not a significant 
word of their own, wherewith handsomely to expresse what they in­
tended) or else when a word falls not naturally into our termination; 
as in the words elogium, and encomium: for the first indeed we say indif­
ferently, either an elogium, or an elogie, but with encomium we do not 
yet make so bold as to say an encomie, and to render it in English would 
be too tedious a circumloqution, As to say, a speech made in praise of an 
other man, and therefore it is better to use the very word encomium; so 
Privado in Spanish, and Inamorato in Italian, retain their own termina­
tions with a better grace then any change could bring them, Privad or 
Inamorat, not sounding so agreeably to the eare; also by a certain odd, 
and strange construction we oftentimes turn a Latin Verb, and sometimes 
a sentence into an English Noun; especially with the help of an Article, 
as to give a bene discessit, to sing Lachrymæ, such a one was charged with 
a non est inventus, and many more of this nature, very acceptable to 
such as delight to have their writings and discourses larded with old 
ends of Latin; this manner of expression comes somewhat near that
Grammar rule, where a whole clause comes before, or followes a
Verb, and many times denotes the beginning of some publick form 
of words, of this sort are the Latin names of divers Writs, consist­
ing of a tedious sentence, which put me in minde of the Spaniard,



whose long name made him to be taken for a great company of men 
together.

I shall conclude this discourse of our Latin-derived words, with the 
manner of their composition, as I did before, in my mention of the Greek 
words, and this I do that the Reader may not be puzled at the missing 
of every compound word, so long as he knows of what words they 
are compounded; it is therefore to be noted that they differ not in their 
composition from the Original Latin words; being alwayes joyned with 
one of these following prepositions a, or ab, from, or away, as Version 
being a turning, Aversion is a turning from, duction a leading, abduction 
a leading away, ad to, wherein d is commonly changed into the same 
Letter, that the word to which it joyned begins with, as from plica­
tion being compounded with ad, ariseth application an applying, not 
adplication; de from, or of, as detruncation a cutting off, the rest are e, 
ex, extra, in, dis, contra, ob, per, sub, supra & ultra. Seldom it is that ac­
cording to the manner of the Greeks, a Noun is joyned in composition 
with a Verb, or one Noun with another, onely the word semi is often 
used, which, in composition, implies as much as half, as semicircular being 
in the form of a half Circle.

This is as much as needs to be said of forraign words, in respect of 
their dependence upon our tongue, and their frequent use in speaking 
and writing; I might in the next place proceed to as ample an account 
of the words of Art, which I count the more curious part of the design, 
and that which was most wanting; but in regard that to do this hand­
somely, would require a particular discourse of the Arts, and the divi­
sion of them, and because that a sufficient account of the book is given 
elsewhere, I shall passe them over briefly.

The words which we use in most Arts, are taken from one, or other 
of those languages above mentioned; in those which are commonly 
called the liberal Arts, we borrow a very considerable number from the 
Greek; in Rhetorick all the Tropes and Figures, as Synecdoche, Ironie, 
Metonymie, in Logick, Enthymeme, Sorites, and the word Logick it 
self; in Physick Eupepsie, Dyscrasie, and the names of most diseases; in 
Astronomie, Antipodes, Periscians, and the word Astronomie it self, 
and so in divers other Arts. In Astrology many from the Arabicks, as 
the names of the most conspicuous Starres in each constellation, viz.
Aldebaran, Alnath, and some in Astronomy, as Nadir, Almicantarats. 
In sundry of the Mathematical Arts, and the politer sort of Mechanicks, 
we have many words from the French and Italians, as in Architecture, 
and Fortification, Pilaster, Foliage, Cupulo, Parapet, &c. all our Terms of 
Heraldry, we have chiefly from the French, as Couchant, Saliant, En­
grailled; and as also in Jewelling, Inlaying, Painting, as Carrat, Naif, 
Boscage, Affinage, Marquetry, &c. but for the Handycrafts, and seve­
ral of those, which are called Artes Serviles, they have their Terms pe­
culiar onely to themselves, &c. such as are known to few but the se­
veral Professours, as the names of Tools and Instruments, belonging to 
all kinde of Manufactures, of which to the attaining but of one tenth 
part, the search of an age would scarce suffice, but very many of the 
chiefest are to be found in this book. Of this nature also are the Terms 
used by Sea-man; as Abast, Afmost, Larboard, to spring a Leak; by Hun­




ters and Forresters; as Lappise, Foreloin, Bloudyhand, Dogdraw, &c. of 
both which last, there are likewise not a few.

The last consideration of words is our proper names, which have hi­
therto been wanting in English, and under these are comprehended both
Mythology, History, and Geography, to which may be added the expli­
cation of Hebrew, and Saxon names.

As for Orthography, it will not be requisite to say any more of it, then 
may conduce to the Readers direction in the finding out of words, which 
is that we many times use a single e, where the Latins use an oe, or an æ, 
as preparation for præparation, Amebean for Amœbæan; but if the æ, or œ 
be observed, it is not amisse; some use either indifferently: in the same 
manner i is oft used for y, as Limphatick for Lymphatick, o for u, as 
secondine for secundine.

Thus I have, in as brief a Method as I could devise, run through the 
whole Oeconomy of our forraign words, and have ranged them all into 
their several orders and distinctions; so that there is scarce any word, 
but may be reduced to one, or other of them, for I thought it in vain to 
publish to the world a Dictionary of hard Terms, if I did not withall 
lead men the way to the right use of it, that they might inform them­
selves distinctly, and not sit down contented with a confused notion of 
things. In this work, which, for the generality of it, must stand the bront 
of many a curious inquisition; both for the present, and future ages, 
I regard not my own fame equal to the renown and glory of the Na­
tion, which cannot but be much advanced by such like indeavours, and 
as I am not conscious to my self to have been wanting in industry; so I 
shall be ready without any difficulty to acknowledge what ever over­
sight I may be fairly convinced of; Provided, I may scape such censures, 
as have any thing of the Pedant in them; nor shall I think it enough to 
have come off fairly here, without suddenly attempting other things of 
equal concernment with this present design, which I commend to the 
judgement of the learned, the ingenuity of those that are inclined to 
learning, and the fortune of that intertainment, which the World shall 
think fit to give it.

Edward Phillips.









A Brief and Familar 
ADVERTISEMENT 
TO THE 
READER.


LEarned and Courteous Reader, continual experience con­
firmes that as Science is first derived to us by notions, so 
it is made known to us by words: without our right know­
ledge of the later it is impossible for us but that in our dis­
course, writing, or reading, we must either be gravelled, 
or strangly to seek; and though the knowledge of a prece­
dent sentence in the turning over of an Authour cannot be denyed
sometimes to be a more then ordinary help: yet without our more par­
ticular ingenuity, in respect of the various acceptance of words, there 
will be required a recourse to the Dictionary, as we cannot other­
wise be advised or satisfied. Hence it hath proceeded a Maxim 
from the Learned, That he that is ignorant of words, shall never 
have his minde rightly instated to judge of things; so, true it is, 
That every mans judgement for the chusing of words ought like a 
finger in the Margent of a Book to point for the wisest election, more
especially where Etymologies are not added, and Historical observations 
on antiquitated words are wanting.

Discreet Reader, not to insist on many particulars, I have endea­
voured throughout this Work to be so far thy assistant, as that what 
others have omitted in all their former undertakings I have inserted, 
A large Poeticall, as also a Geographicall Dictionary, the later not 
onely for the most parts of the World, but also diligently reflecting 
and giving useful descriptions of the Antiquities of Cities, Towns, 
and other eminent Places of England, Scotland, and Ireland, so that 
for a small expence Strangers as well as our own Countrymen may 
travell in this Dictionary. To include all words, especially those 
that relate to the Mechanicks, is an impossible task.



Indeed as I have indeavoured to wave obsolete terms which some
make it their businesse to pick up at any rate, so I hope I have not 
been wanting in useful words, but have so compleated this Volume, 
that he that hath but a competent knowledge of the Greek and La­
tin, the English will quickly surrender it selfe to his interpretation.
Some Critticks perhaps will expect the names of Authours in the tra­
verse of this Worke to be often set down as single testimonies for 
the fantasticalnesse of their own words; such an undertaking I look 
upon as no lesse needlesse, then abusive and ridiculous.

Courteous Reader, I shall not trifle with such niceties and imper­
tinencies as one of our late Writers hath done, taking notice of hard 
words promiscuously as they are scattered in English Bookes. To use
his own words. In the Turkish History I met with Janizaries, Ba­
shæs, Seraglios; in the French, in the Spanish, in the Roman, Hi­
stories, in which he likewise instances particulars. and so in other 
Subjects runnes on to what purpose I know not, wasting so much of 
his Readers time and patience, when he knowes those words to be 
in his Alphabet, which if persons are so learned as to finde out
A, B, C, they may without his anticipating easily enforme them­
selves of.

To passe by such vanities, the Saxon words, as in reference
to our Lawes, cannot be accounted so obsolete as some would have
them. For my own part, I have made it my businesse with my great­
est care and diligence to consult with ancient Manuscripts; nor have 
I wanted in these scrutinizings the assistance of Grand Persons. As 
touching some of our late Modern Authorizers of words. The Vi­
count of St. Albans, Sir Kenelme Digby, Mr. Selden, Dr. Brown, 
and others, whatsoever Termes we have received from them, the 
Learned do acknowledge them to be good Bullion stampt and well 
minted, so that as they have past the censure of the present, they 
will command the test and honour of future Ages; and if we do but
seriously consider how our Language is inricht from forreign words, 
brought home to our doores, from the Greek, Latin, French Ora­
tors and Poets, even from such a distance, we cannot but have 
more inlarged and proper respects to our own Native Laurels; it is 
our happinesse that being a terror to other nations, we are now free 
from invaders that formerly altred our Language, otherwise our 
clothes should not be more varied then our Speech, as the tyranny 
of Strangers if it were possible would apparel our very thoughts. 
Certainly it is a higher prerogative for our Nations to have these 
forreign Languages as it were onely in the Landskip, that though we 
honour the smoothnesse of the French, the neatnesse of the Italian, 
the gravity of the Spaniard, yet still we remain so happy as to be 
our own Dictionary.

Not to dwell longer on this discourse, it is the expression of Mr. 
H. B. in his endeavours tending this way, That a Dictionary for 
the English Tongue, would require an Encyclopedie of knowledge, 
and the concurrence of many Learned heads. Such an Encyclo­
pedy I present thee Reader with from the Muses, as it was deli­
vered me from the forked top of their Parnassus; for I shall ever



acknowledge such peculiar aides as I received from severall Learned 
Persons, otherwise I can faithfully assert for the building up of this 
Volume, next to the use of grand Dictionaries, I have onely been behold­
ing to the imperfect remaines of a Gentleman who long since begun this 
Work: First his sicknesse impeding, and then impartial death cut­
ting him short of finishing his Design, the best Schollars that then 
perused his Labours, did with one voice render him this honour; 
That his Collections were choice, That he had taken up nothing but 
what was Authentick, and that the Learned themselves, in some re­
spects, might be obliged to him for his Studies.

To conclude, Courteous Reader, this Volume which the so many years 
industry of my self and others hath brought to such a perfection, is for 
thine, and the general good, now at last, made publick; I wish thee all 
happinesse in thy necessary search and use of it. Farewell.



COurteous Reader, faults are usual in the 
printing of Generall Tracts, but in Dicti­
onaries and Works of this kind, I am truly 
sensible that, as they will seem more strange 
to thee, so they reflect more on the Authours credit; 
to purchase thy more favourable construction, I have
collected an Alphabetical Index of the Capital Errata,
which is placed at the end of the Book.







THE NEW WORLD 
Of English Words. 
Or, a General
Dictionary.

Containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and 
perfect Interpretations of the Proper significations of hard English 
words, throughout the Arts and Sciences, Liberal; and Mechanick, 
as also all other subjects, that are usefull, or appertain to the Lan­
guage of our Nation.


A. A.

AAron, the son of Amram, and
brother of Moses,
he was the first High-Priest of the Jews, being chosen to
that dignity by the budding of his Rod, the word signifies
in Hebr. a Teacher, or Mountain
of fortitude.

Aaron, a great Emperour of the
Saracens, who
leading into Asia an Army of 300000. men,
compelled Nicephorus the Greek Emperour, to make
peace with him, on Ignominions, and dishonourable
terms.


A. B.

Aba, a Tyrant of Hungaria, who
being slain by his own subjects, and buried in the next
Church, not long after was digged out of the earth again,
where being found with his winding-sheet, and other
cloathes uncorrupted,
and unchanged, and all his wounds cured, he was honoured
with a nobler burial, and
his bones translated to a Monastery, built by himself, and
there interred.

† Abaction, (Latin) a driving, or
forcing away.

Phillips does not explain the meaning of the † code, which occurs 92 times in the text. 



Abaddon, an Hebrew word signifying a
destroyer, and used in the New Testament for the Devil.

Abæ, a Town of Phocis, a Province
in Greece, which was not destroyed by
Philip of Macedon, because the people
were known never to have committed sacriledge.

Abæa, a Town in the Bay of
Messena, wherein was the most ancient Oracle of
Apollo, burnt at length by the Army of
Xerxes.

Abagas Can, King of the Tartars,
he, having recovered the
Dominion of the Turks, and taken Parvana
Governour of Turcia, because he betrayed it to
the Soldan of Aegypt, cut him in pieces,
boyled him among his other viands, and eat him.

Abalus, an Isle in the German
Ocean, in which it is reported, that there are Hills from
which doth drop great store of Amber.

To Abandon, (Ital.) to forsake, also to
resign one's self up wholly to any
prevailing
passion.

† Abannition, (Lat.) a punishment
inflict­



ed by the Greeks upon the committers of
Man-slaughter, namely the banishing them for a
twelve-moneths space.


Abantias, the Isle of Eubæa near
Bœotia in the Mediterranean Sea, so
called from the Abantes, a people which coming
out of Thrace, inhabited there.

Abarimon, a Countrey in
Scythia,
hear the Mountain Aemaus, the people are very
salvage, and although their feet are
reverted,
or turned backward, yet they are
exceeding swift.

Abarstick, (old word) insatiable.

Abas, the son of Metanira, whom
Ceres turned into a
Lizard, because he laugh'd at those divine rites, which
his Mother instituted to
her worship; also the twelf King of the Argives,
being the son of Lynceus by his wife
Hypermnestra, he was the Father of
Proetus and Acrisius, &
Grandfather of
Perseus, that freed Andromeda.

To Abase (Ital.) to bring low.

Abast (a term in Navigation) when any thing
is done, or placed toward the stern, in respect of any
that are towards the stem.

To Abate, to make lesse, or
diminish.

Abatement, a term in Heraldry, being an
accidental mark annexed to Coat-armour, denoting a stain
in the bearer.

Abatos, an Island in Egypt, in the
Marishes of
Memphis, where King Osiris was
buried.

Abawed, (old word) daunted, ashamed.

Abbæ, a word used in holy Scripture, and
signifieth in the Syriack tongue,
Father.

Abbington, see Abington.

To Abbord (Italian) to approach near the
shore, also to grapple with a ship.

Abbot, a spiritual Governour over a
religious house of
Monkes.

To Abbreviate (Lat.) to abridge. to make
short.

Abdals, a kind of religious people among
the Persians, who make profession of
poverty, and lodge in
Churches, they derive their name from Abdala,
father of Mahomet.

Abdalmatalis, the Grand-father of
Mahomet, a Man of
so rare a beauty, and perfect
composure, that he wonne the admiration
& love of all the women that saw him.

Abdelmonus, a King of Africa,
whose Father was a Potter;
to whom, while he was a young man, Aventumerth, a
famous Astronomer,
foretold that he should obtain the Kingdom, and afterward
assisted him in the compassing of the design.

Abdera, a Town of Thrace, where
Democritus was
born, the people whereof were counted a foolish
people.

Abdevenam, the head of the twelf
Mansion, a term in
Astrology.

To Abdicate, (Lat.) to renounce, or
refuse.

Abdolonymus, a certain Gardiner of
Sydon, by a long
descent continuing of the bloud Royal, whom
Alexander the Great, after he had taken that
Citie, caused to be proclaimed King thereof.

Abdomen, in Anatomy, signifies all that
part of the belly, that contains the natural bowels, being
composed of a skin, fat, eight muscles, and the
peritonæum.

Abducted, (Lat.) led away.

Abecedary. belonging to the A. B. C.

To Abedge, (old word) to abide.

Abel, the name of one of Adams
sons, and signifieth in Hebrew vanity, also the name of a
place, and signifieth in Hebrew mourning.

Abent, (old word) a steep place, or
hanging Hill.

* Abequitation, (Lat.) a riding
away.

Phillips does not explain the meaning of the asterisk, which occurs twice in the text as a prefixed code. 



Aberconwey, q. the mouth of
Conwey, a Town in Cærnarvonshire, built
upon the mouth of the River Conwey, by
Edward the first, out of the ruines of an old
Town, called Cærhæn,
i. ancient Citie, in Latin
Conovium.

Aberfraw, a Town in the Isle of
Anglesey, anciently a very famous place, and the
Royal seat of the Kings of Guineth, or North
wales.

Abergevenny, or Abergenny, so
called, because it is
situate at the very meeting of the Rivers Vsk,
and Gebenny, or Gobanny, it is called in
Latin Gobanium, and is fortified with a very
strong Castle, which hath been the seat of many great
Lords and Earles.

Aberration, (Lat.) a going astray.

Abessed, (old word) cast down,
humbled.

Abetting, (old word) a setting on, or
incouraging.

* To Abgregate,  (Lat.) to lead out of the
flock.

Abhorrency, (Latin) a loathing, or
hating.

Abidst, (old word) suffered.

Abia, the daughter of Hercules,
and Nurse to Hyllus, the son of Hercules
by Deianira, she lived in a Citie called
Ira, which afterward
she named by her own name, and built a Temple in
it.

Abject, (Lat.) vile, or base.

Abii, a people in Scythia, who live
without any house, and
provide for nothing:



Homer calleth them the most just people.


Abject, (Lat.) vile, or base.

Abigail, a Womans name in the Old
Testament, &
signifieth in Hebrew a fathers joy.

Ability, (Lat.) power, strength.

Abington, or Abbendon, a pleasant
Town situate upon the River Isis in
Bark-shire, and so called as some say from one
Abben, and Irish Heremite, or rather
from an Abbay,
built here by Cissa, King of the West
Saxons, whereas in old time it had been called
Sheovesham.

Abintestate, (Lat.) without a will.

Abit, (old word) dwelleth.

To Abjudicate, (Latin) to give away by
judgement.

To Abjure, (Lat.) to forswear, also in
Common-Law it is to forsake the Realm for ever, when one
hath committed fellony,
or to fly to the Church, or Sanctuary, or place
priviledged for that purpose.

Ablacted, (Lat.) weaned.

Ablectick, (Lat.) adorned, or garnished for
sale, as ablectæ ædes, Plaut.

Ablegation, (Lat.) a sending away.

Ablepsie, (Greek) blindnesse of the
mind.

Abligurie, (Lat.) spending in belly
chear.

Ablocated, (Latin) let out to hire.

Ablution, (Latin) washing away.

Abnegation, (Latin) a stiff denying.

Abnodation, (Latin) untying of knots,
also pruning of Trees.

Abode, (Latin) a place of
habitation.

Aboeocrites, a Captain of the
Boeotians, who with a thousand of his men, was
slain near Chæronea, in a fight against the
Aetolians.

Abogen, (Saxon) bowed.

Abolition, (Latin) an abrogating, or
utterly destroying.

Abomination, (Latin) an abhorring, or
detesting.

To Abone (Ital.) to make ripe.

Aboord, (a Term in Navigation) within the
ship.

Aborigines, a people brought into
Italy by Chamexenus the
Egyptian Saturn, and thought to have been the
most antient people of
Italie.

Abortion, (Latin) the birth of a Childe
before its time.

Abradacarba, a spell in Cornelius
Agrippa against Agnes.

Abraiamins, a kind of Enchanters among the
Indians.

To Abrase (Latin) to shave, or pare
away.

Abravanus, a River in Galloway in
Scotland, now
called Rian.

Abricot, (French) a certain sort of plum,
requiring much of the Sun's warmth to
ripen it.

To Abridge, (French) to make short, to
abreviate.

Abrodiætical, (Greek) feeding
delici­
ously.

Abrogation, (Latin) an abolishing.

Abrotonum, (Greek) the name of an
Athenian woman,
the mother of Themistocles, also the herb
Southernwood.

Abrupt, (Latin) suddenly breaking
off.

Absalom, the son of David, an
Hebrew word signifying the father of peace.

Abscession, (Latin) a going away.

Abscission, (Latin) a cutting away.

Absconsion, (Latin) a hiding out of the
way.

Absis, (a Term in Astronomy) is, when the
Planets moving to their highest, or their lowest places
are at a stay. The high Absis
is called the Apogæum, the low Absis
the Perigæum.

Absolute, (Latin) perfect.

Absolution, (Latin) a pardoning.

Absonant, (Latin) disagreeing, sounding
from the purpose.

To Absorb (Latin) to sup up all.

Absoris, a Town built by the
Colchians, when they were sent with
Absyrtus in pursuit
of Medea.

Abstemious, (Latin) temperate,
sober.

Abstention, (Latin) the keeping back of an
Heir from the possession of his land, a Term in
law.

Abstersive, (Latin) cleansing.

Abstinence, (Latin) temperance.

Abstorted, (Latin) wrested by force.

Abstract, (Latin) a small book, or
writing, taken out of a
greater.

To Abstrude, (Latin) to thrust away.

Abstruse, (Latin) dark, obscure.

Absurd, (Lat.) foolish.

To Abvolate, (Latin) to fly away.

Abus, the name of a great and famous River
in York-shire, commonly called
Humber, whence
Northumberland took its name.

Abysse, (Greek) a bottomlesse pit.

Abyssini, a people in Aethiopia,
in the subjection of
Prester John, who is called in the
Aethiopian language Negasch Chauvarianni, i.
e. Apostolick Emperour, and is
accounted one of the
Chief Monarchs of the World.


A. C.

Acacalis, a Nymph by whom Apollo
had two sons, Philarides and
Philander.



Academia, a Wooddy place, about a mile from
Athens, built by Academus, where
Plato was born and taught Philosophy, whence
the word Academy is taken for any publick
Shool, or University.


Acadinus, a Fountain in Sicily, in
which they used to try the truth of an Oath, by writing
the words of him that swore upon a Table of wood, and if
the wood did swim, they took the words for truth, but if
it sunk, they took it to be a false Oath.

Acarnar, the bright Starre of Eridanus,
vide Eridanus.

Acastus, the son of Peleus, King
of Thessaly, a
famous Hunter with Bow and Arrows, he married
Hippolita, who loving Pelius,
because he yielded not to
her love, accused him to her husband, for having offered
violence to her, wherefore Acastus threw him to
be devoured of wilde beasts, but Mercury coming in the
interim, freed Pelius
with Vulcans sword, who returning slew Acastus
and Hippolita.

Acatalepsie, (Greek)
incomprehensibility,
impossibility to be comprehended.

To Accelerate, (latin) to hasten.

Accent, (latin) due sound over any word, or
letter.

Acceptation, (latin) acceptance.

Acceptilation, (latin) a verbal
acquittance between
the Debtour and the Creditour.

Accessary, (latin) a Term in Common-law,
signifying guilty of a fellonious Act, not actually, but
by participation, as by advice,
concealment, or the like.

Accius Tullius, Prince of the
Volsci, who with the help of Coriolanus
made War with the Romans.

Accidental, (latin) hapning by
chance.

Acclamation, (latin) an applause, a
crying out for joy.

Acclivity, (latin) a stopping place, a
steep descent.

Acco, an old woman, who beholding her face
in a glasse, and seeing her beauty
decayed, fell mad.

Accollade (French) a clipping about the
neck, which was formerly the way of
dubbing Knights.

To Accommodate, (latin) to fit, or to
lend.

To Accomplish, (French) to fulfill.

Accomptable, (French) lyable to give an
account.

Accordable, (latin) easie to be agreed
on.

Accort, (French) heedy, wary.

To Accost, (French) to approach, to draw
near.

Accoutred, (French) dress't,
attir'd.

To Accoy, (old word) to asswage.

Accretion, (latin) a growing, or sticking
unto.

To Accrew, (French) to increase, to be
added unto.

To Accumb, (latin) to sit down at a
Table.

Accumulation, (latin) a heaping
together.

Accurately, (latin) exactly.

Accusation, (latin) an accusing, or
blaming.

To Accustome, (Ital.) to be wont, to
use.

Ace, that point in the dice where one
onely is expressed,
ammez ace, quasi ambos as, both an ace, or two
aces.

Acephalik, (Greek) having no head, or
beginning.

Acephalists, (Greek) a sort of Hereticks, whose first founder is
unknown.

Acerbity, (latin) sharpnesse, or
sournesse.

Acerote, course brown bread.

Acersecomick, (Greek) one whose hair is
never cut.

To Acervate, (latin) to heap up.

Acetars, (latin) sallets of small
herbs.

Acetosity, (latin) sharpnesse, or sournesse
in taste.

Achapt, (French) a law Term used in
contracts, or bargains, and signifieth to buy.

Achates, a stone of divers colours,
resembling a lions
skin.

Achelous, the son of Oceanus and
Terra, he fought a single Combat with Hercules for
Deianira, he first changed himself into a Serpent, then into a Bull, one of whose Horns
Hercules cut, and dedicated it to plenty the Companion of Fortune, but afterward
Achetous giving him Amalthea's Horn
received his own again, also the name of a River in Epirus rising from the
Mountain Pindus, and is said to be the first River that broke out, after
the general Deluge.

Acheron, the son of Ceres, without
a father, whom, when she
had brought forth in a dark cave in Sicily, not
daring to behold the light
he was sent to Tartarus, and there turned into a
River over which the Souls of men are carried, it is
commonly taken for Hell.

To Achieu, (French) to perform.

Achilles, the son of Peleus and
Thesis, whom his mother while he was an infant,
dipt all over in the river Styx, so that he
became invulnerable all
over, save in that part of his heel, by which she held
him, he was put to the Centaur Chiron, to be
instructed



in warlike affairs and musick; and being grown to age,
his Mother hearing he should die in the Trojan wars put
him into Womans apparel
and hid him among the Daughters of Lycomede
where he ravish't Deidamia, and begot
Pyrrhus, being seduced from thence by the craft
of Vlisses, he fought against the Trojans, slew
Hector, and performed many other great exploits
in that war.


Acid, (Latin) sharp, biting.

Acis, the son of Faunus, and the
Nymph Timethis, the comliest of all the Sicilian
Shepheards, whom Polypheme loved but afterwards kill'd him
despising his love.

To Ackele (old word) to cool.

Acolastick, (Greek) Riotous.

Acolyte, (Greek) one that is forbidden to
say Divine service, yet may bring light, &c.

Acontius, a young man of the Iland of
Cæa, who going to Delos to the Feast of
Diana fell in love with Cydippe, but not
being able to come at her, writ his mind upon an Apple and
threw it to her.

Aconite, a poisonous herb call'd
Sibbardsbane.

Acquists, (French) things purchased or
obtained.

To Acquiesce, to rest or rely upon.

Acquisition, (Latin) a purchasing or
obtaining.

Acre such a quantity of Land as may be
plow'd in a day by one yoke of Oxen.

Acrilogie (Greek) bitter speaking.

Acrimony, (Latin) bitterness
eagerness.

Acrisius, the son of Abas King of
Argos, and father of Danæ Jove's
Paramour; he, having heard that he was to be
kill'd by the hand of him that should be born of her, shut
her up in a brazen Towr, but Jupiter descending
in a showr of gold through the lights lay with her and
begat Perseus, who afterwards cut off the
Gorgons head, and coming with it to
Argus changed Acrisius into a stone.

Acroamatick, (Greek) one that
hearkens attentively to
any thing, also harmonious.

Achronick, from the Greek
Ἀκρονκοσ is when a Star sets with the Sun and
riseth at Sun setting.

Acronychal, (Greek) a term used in
Astronomy, the Achronycal rising of a Star is, when it
riseth at the time of the Sun-setting.

Acrostick, (Greek) a certain number of
verses which begin with the Letters of any ones
name.

Actifs, an order of Fryars, that feed on
Roots, and wear tawny habits.

Action, (Latin) a deed, also the right of
reckoning that which is due and owing to a man.

Actisanes, a King of the Aethiopians who
beat Amasis tyrannizing over the
Aegyptians and deposing
him, reigned over them himself very justly, and made many
severe Law's for the governing of the
Kingdome.

Act, (Latin) a deed, also a Decree of
Parliament or Inferiour
Court.

Actæon, the son of Aristeus &
Autonoe,
who going a hunting and coming by chance to see Diana, as she was bathing her self in a Fountain,
was changed into a Hart, and torn in pieces by his own
Dogg's whence.

Actæoned, is often taken for
hornified.

Activity, (Latin) nimbleness, stirringness,
agility.

Actium, a promontory of Epirus
where Augustus having overthrown Antonie
and Cleopatra, built a City and called it
Nicopolis.

Actius Nævius, a South-sayer, who in the
presence of Tarquin cut a Whet-stone with a
Pen-knife.

Acton Burnel, a Castle in
Shropshire, famous for having had a Court of
Parliament call'd there in the time of Edward the
First, it was so called as belonging anciently to the
Burnels, a family heretofore of great name and
antiquity.

Actor, (Lat.) doer of any thing, also a
Stage-player.

Actual, (Lat.) that which is dispatched by
act and deed.

Aculeate, (Lat.) carrying a sting.

To Acuminate (Lat.) to sharpen.

Acupictor (Lat.) a worker of
needle-work.

Acute, (lat.) sharp-pointed also,
sharp-witted. An
Acute disease the Physitians call that which by reason of
its vehemency immediately
grows to a hight and so presently decays or kils: also an
Acute-angle is when two lines do inclose less than a
square, thereby becoming more sharp.

Acyrological, (Greek) speaking
improperly.


A D

Adacted (Lat.) driven by force.

Adage, (Lat.) a vulgar saying.

Adam, the name of the first man
signifying in (Heb.) 
red earth.



Adjudication, (Lat.) an adjudging or
determining.


Adamant, (Lat.) a precious stone,
otherwise call'd a
Diamond.

Adamantine, hard, inflexible, made of
Adamant.

To Adamate (Lat.) to love tenderly.

Adamites, a Sect of Hereticks whose
profession was to come
into their Synagogue stark naked both Men and Women. It
was first instituted in Bohemia about two
hundred years ago.

Adashed, (old word) ashamed.

Adawed, (old word) awaked.

To Adcorporate (Lat.) to joyn body to
body.

To Addecimate, (Lat.) to take
Tithes.

Adderbourn, a River in Wiltshire
anciently called
Nadder.

An Addice, a Coopers axe.

To Addict, (Lat.) to give our self to any
thing.

Additament, (Lat.) a Supply, a thing
added.

Addomestique, (French) made tame or
familiar.

To Addoulez (French) to sweeten
mollifie or
asswage.

Address (French) a dextrous carriage in the
manageing of any business, also an application to any
person, Artamenes.

Adelantado, (Spanish) The Deputy of a
Province, for any King or General.

Adeling, an old Saxon word signifying a
Kings son.

Adelrad, or Ethelred, (Sax.) Noble
Advice, a proper
name.

Ademption, (Lat.) a taking away.

To Adent, (old word) to fasten or
joyn.

Adeption, (Lat.) a getting or
obtaining.

To Adequate, (Latin) to make equal, to
level.

Ades, King of the Molossians whose daughter
Cara was ravish't by Pirithous.

To Adhere, (Lat.) to stick fast, or cleave
unto any thing.

Adjacent, (Lat.) lying near unto,
bordering upon.

Adiaphorie, (Greek) indifferent.

To Adjourn (French) to warn one to
appear at the day
appointed, also to put off a day. A word used in Common
Law.

Adjument (Lat.) assistance.

Adjunct, (Latin) a quality adhering to any
thing, as heat to fire, greenness to grass, &c. a term
used in logick.

To Adjure, (Latin) to swear earnestly, also
to put another to his oath.

Adjutant, (Lat.) ayding or assisting to
another.

To Adjust, (French) to make fit, to state
an account rightly.

Adjutory, (Latin) helpful.

Adle, (old word) empty, shallow.

Admetus, a King of Thessalie, whose herds
Apollo was said to keep nine years together, he
was degraded of Divinity, for killing the
Cyclops.

To Administer, (Latin) to dispose, to
guide, to do service.

Administration (Latin) a Term in Law, the
disposing of a mans goods or estate, that died intestate,
or without any Will.

Admirable, (Lat.) full of wonder.

An Admiral, (French) a General at
Sea.

To Admit, (latin) to allow of.

Admonition, (French) a giving
warning.

Adnihilation, (latin) a bringing or
reducing to
nothing.

Adolescency, (latin) the age of
youth.

Adolph or Hadulph, (Sax.) happy
help, a proper name.

Adon, or Adonai, an Hebrew word,
signifying, Lord, or
God.

Adonis, the son of Cinaras, &
(King of Cyprus Myrrha) who hunting in the
Italian woods, and being kill'd by the tusk of a Boar, was
afterwards by Venus turned into a Flowr.

Adoption (lat.) the choosing of him, into
ones family and inheritance, who is not a natural
son.

Adorable (lat.) to be worship'd or ador'd,
also being attributed to a mortal, it signifies worthy of
all honour and respect. Artam.

Adornation, (latin) decking,
adorning.

Adoxy, (Greek) ingloriousness,
shame.

Adruming, (old word) churlish.

Adrastia, the daughter of Jupiter,
and Necessity a sharp punisher of wickedness,
otherwise called Nemesis, whom the
Egyptian Priests made to
be Arbitress of all human affairs, and placed her above
the Moon.

Adrian, a proper name, see Hadrian.

Adrian, or Adriatique Sea, the
Sea that parts Italie from
Dalmatia.

Advancement, (French) a raising or
promoting.

Advantagious, in favour of another,
Atramenes.

Adventitious, (latin) that which may be
brought from another place.

Advent, (latin) an arriving, whence
Advent-Sunday is that Sunday wherein



there us'd to be a preparation in the Church for the
approaching Feast, and all suites in Law were remitted
for that time.


Advenale, a Coat of defence,
Chaucer.

Adventitious, (latin) coming unexpected or
by chance.

Adventure, (French) chance, luck.

Adverse, (latin) contrary, opposite,

Adversant, Id.

To Advertise (latin) to give advice.

To Advesperate, (latin) to wax
night.

To Advigilate, (latin) to watch
diligently.

Adulation, (latin) flattery.

Adult, (latin) to come to ones, full
ripeess of age.

To Adulterate, (latin) to corrupt.

To Adumbrate, (latin) to shadow.

Adumbration, signifies in Heraldrie a cleer
exemption of the substance of the charge or thing born, in
such sort that there remains
nothing thereof to be discovered, but the bare proportion
of the outward lineaments. This is also call'd
Transparencie.

Aduncous or Adunque, (latin)
hooked.

Advocate, (latin) a Term in Law, he that
defendeth another mans cause.

Advouson, (French) signifieth in
Common-law, a right, to present to a benefice.

Adust, (latin) burnt, parch't.

Adynamous, (Greek) weak,
impotent.


A E

Aeacus, the son of Jupiter by
Aegina, he was said to be so just, that, when he
was dead, he was chosen one of the infernal Judges, with
Minos and Rhadamanthus.

Aedone, the Wife of Zethus the
Brother of Amphion, she slew her son
Itylus in the night thinking him to have been
Amaneus the son of Amphion, but
afterwards acknowledging her error, she desired to die,
and was changed into a Thistle.

Aeeta, the King of Colchos the son
of Sol by Persa the daughter of
Oceanus, he begat
Medea, Absyrtus, and Calciope, to him
Phryxus brought the golden Fleece, which, with
the help of Medea was won from him by
Jason and the Argonaut's and he
deposed from his
Kingdom.

Aega, a Nymph, the Daughter of
Olenus and Nurse of Jupiter.

Aegæon the son of Titan and
Terra, who at one lift threw a hundred Rocks
against Jupiter, but being overcome, was bound by
Neptune to a Rock in the Aegæan-Sea.
Aegæum, or the Agæean-Sea is that Sea
which is vulgarly call'd the Archipelago.

Aegeus, the son of Neptune, King
of Athens, who had by his Wife Aetha the
daughter of Pitheus, a son named
Theseus, the greatest Hero of that time, whom he
thinking to have been slain when he returned from
Crete threw himself into the Sea, and was by the
Athenians made one of the Sea-Gods.

Aegiale, the Wife of Diomed, who
by reason of her adultery
with Cyllebarus, was forsaken of her Husband who
after the war of Troy went into
Italy.

Aegilope, (Greek) a kind of disease in the
eye call'd the lachrymal fistule.

Aegina, the daughter of Aesopus
King of Boeotia, whom Juriter injoy'd by
turning himself into fire.

Aegipanes, (Greek) certain wooddy Deities
adored by the Ancients, having feet like Goates.

Aegisthus, the son of Thyestes and
Pelopeia his daughter, he slew Atreus by
his fathers command, and afterwards kill'd
Agamemnon at a
banquet, by the help of his Wife
Clytemnestra.

Aegle, one of the daughters of
Hesperus, King of Italie, who with her
sisters Arethusa and Hesperethusa
possest most pleasant gardens in Africa, where
there were golden apples, kept by a watchful Dragon whom
Hercules, sent by Euristheus, slew, and
took away the Apples.

Aegles, the name of a great Wrastler who
though he were born dumb, being once to enter into the
combat, and seeing a great deceit in the lots, he, through
a great desire of speaking, spake distinctly and so
continued while he lived.

Aegrimony or Aegritude (lat.) 
sickness of body or mind.

Aegyptus, the son of Belus, the
brother of Danais. He having fifty daughters,
gave them in marriage to his brothers fifty sons, but they
having receiv'd instructions from their father
Danaus, each one killed their Husband, the first
night of their marriage,
except Hypermnestra who saved her Husband
Lynceus, who afterwards driving out
Danaus, possest the Kingdome of Argos;
also a famous Country of Lybia, once a great
Kingdome, now a Province under the Turks dominion.

Aeneas, the son of Anchises, and
Venus, who after much wandring came to
Latium, overcame Turnus, married
Lavinia the daughter of Latinus, and
reigned thir­



ty years after his Father-in-law's death.


Aeneator, (lat.) a Trumpeter.

Aenigmatical, (Greek) full of Aenigma's
i. e. dark speeches or riddles.

Aeolipile, a kind of Instrument called the
Hermetical bellows, whereby it is
experimented whether
there be a vacuum in nature.

Aeolus  the son of Jupiter, and
Sergeste who was called the God of the
winds.

Aepalius, a King who being restor'd by
Hercules to his Kingdome, adopted Hyllus
Hercules his elder Son into the succession of his
Kingdome.

Aequanimity, (lat.) equalness of spirit or
temper.

Aequator, a great circle or line
encompassing the
Globe equally distant from the Two poles.

Aequilateral, consisting of equal
sides.

Aequilibrity, (lat.) an equal poising or
weighing.

Aequiponderancy, (lat.) the same as
Aequilibrity.

Aera, a Term in Chronologie signifying the
beginning of a great Empire, or some remarkable event,
from which people compute
the number of years, as the Jews reckn'd from
Abraham's journey out of Chaldea, or
from their deliverance out of Egypt, &c. the
ancient Greeks from the first Olympiad, the Christians
from the birth of Christ.

Aerial, (lat.) belonging to the air.

Aeromancy, (Greek) a foretelling of things,
by some certain sign's in the air.

Aeruginous (lat.) rusty, cancred.

Aerumnous, (lat.) full of troubles and
miseries.

Aesacus, the son of Priamus, who
being in love with a beautiful Virgin call'd
Hesperia, never
left following her in the Woods, but she flying from him
was at length kill'd by the bite of a Serpent, he
impatient of his loss threw himself from a high Rock into
the Sea, where Thetis taking compassion on him,
transform'd him into a Dive-dapper.

Aesculapius, the son of Apollo and
Coronis, he, being taught by Chiron the
art of Physick, restor'd
Hippolitus the son of Theseus to life,
who, because the had refus'd the
embraces of
Phædra his Mother-in-law, was by her meanes torn
in pieces by wild Horses, but Jupiter was so
incens't at this cure that he slew Aesculapius
with a thunderbolt.

Aesica, an ancient City of
Cumberland (upon the River Esk) where
the Tribune of the Austures in old time kept
watch and ward against the Northern enemies.

Aesia, a River in France now
call'd Oyse.

To Aestuate (lat.) to burn; to rage like
the Sea.

To Aestivate, (lat.) to keep ones summer in
a place.

Aethalis, the son of Mercurie to
whom it was granted, that he should sometimes converse
among the number of the dead.

Aetherial, pertaining to the sky.

Aethiopia, a large Country of
Africa, first called Aetheria, afterward
Aethiopia from Aethiops the son of
Vulcan.

Aethon, the name of one of the Horses of
the Sun, also the name of a man so given to fart, that he
could not abstain in the Capitoline Temple.

Aethra, vide Hyades.

Aetna, a Hill in Sicilie, that
always casts up flames of fire.

Aetolia, a Country in Greece
bordering upon Epirus.


A F

Affability (lat.) curtesie in
speech.

Affaire, (French) a business of
importance.

Affectation, (lat.) an overcurious
imitation.

Affectionate, (lat.) bearing a good
affection to any
one.

Affeerours, (a Term in law) signifying those which are appointed in
`Court-leets upon Oath, to set Fines upon the heads of
those that, have committed crimes
punishable by vertue of
that Court.

Affiance (French) trust, confidence, also a
betrothing.

Affictious (lat.) dissembled,
counterfeited.

Affidavit, (a Term in law:) to make
Affidavit, is to
testifie a thing upon Oath.

Affinage, (French) a refining of
metals.

Affinitie, (lat.) likeness, also kindred by
marriage.

Affirmation (lat.) an absolute
maintaining or
affirming.

To Affix (lat.) to fasten unto.

Affluence (lat.) plenty.

Afflux, a flowing upon or a flowing
together.

To Afforrest (a Term in law) to lay waste a
piece of ground and turn it into
forrest.

Affray, (French) fear, also tumult or
assault.



Affrication, (lat.) a rubbing against any
thing.


Affront (French) wrong, or abuse.

Affrontednesse, impudence,
shamelesnesse.

Afgodnesse, (Sax.) impiety,
ungodlinesse.

Africa, the third part of the world, so
called from Afer, who peopled it with an army, it
being before called Libya.


A. G.

AGa, a great Officer among the
Turks, called the Captain of the
Janizaries.

Agamemnon, the son of Atreus and
Europa, King of
Argos and Mycenæ, he was
chosen General of the Greeks in the Trojan expedition, and
after he came home, slain by Aegystus at a
banquet, vide Aegysthus.

† Agamist, (Gr.) a despiser of
marriage.

Aganippe, a Fountain in Boeotia,
sacred to Apollo, and the Muses.

Agaric, a Samarian root, that helps
concoction, also a
soft excrescence of the Larix, or larch
tree.

Agast, (old word) dismaid with fear.

Agate, a precious stone formerly found in
Ganges, a River of Lycia.

Agatha, a Womans name, signifying in Greek 
good.

Agathonian, lascivious, so called from
Agatho, a minstrel
full of ribaldry.

Agathocles, a Tyrant of Sicily,
whose father was a Potter,
he first gave himself to robbing, but afterwards by his
stoutnesse and eloquence, he was advanced to the Kingdom,
he made war with the Carthaginians,
but seeking to inlarge his Dominions, he was betrayed, and
died for grief.

Agave, the daughter of Cadmus and
Hermione, she
was married to Echion the Theban.

Age, the measure of mans life, from his
birth to his death, a man, by the Common-Law, is liable to
answer for any misdemeanour,
at the fourteenth year of his age, and to inherit at the
21th.

† Agelastic, (Greek) one that is
perpetually sad, one
that never laugh's.

Agemoglans, the Children of Christians, who
while they are young, are seiz'd on by the
Turkish Officers to be made Janizaries,
or for some other service of the Grand Signior, the word
in the Turkish language signifieth
untaught.

Agent, (Lat.) a Factor, or dealer for an
other man.

Agesilaus, a King of the
Lacedemonians, who overthrew
Tissaphernes
the Persian General,
at the River Pactolus, and the
Athenians and
Boeotians at Coronea; also a stout
Athenian, and brother of Themistocles;
he being judged to be sacrificed at the Altar of the Sun,
for killing Mardonius, held his hand a good while
in the fire without changing his countenance, and affirmed
that all the Athenians were such as himself,
whereupon he was set free.

To Aggerate, (lat.) to heap up.

To Agglomerate, (lat.) to rowl up
together.

To Agglutinate, (lat.) to glue
together.

To Aggrandize, to make great, also to cry
up, or augment the fame of any action.

To Aggravate, (lat.) the same, also to
burthen, also to make the worst of a thing in speaking of
it.

To Aggregate, (lat.) to assemble
together.

Aggressour, (lat.) an assailer of another,
a beginner of a businesse.

Agility, (lat.) nimblenesse.

An Agiler, a marker of men Chaucer.

Agilt, (old word) committed.

Aginatour, (lat.) a retailer of small wares
from Agina, that whereon the beam of a pair of
Balances hangeth.

Agiographer, (Gr.) see Hagiographer.

Agipe, (old word) a Coat full of
plaites.

Agis, a King of the Lacedemonians,
who made cruel wars with the Athenians, and was
at length killed in Prison by his own Countrey-men.

Agist, (a Term in Common-law)
signifying to take in,
and feed the Cattel of strangers in the K. Forrest, and to
gather money due for the same, to the Kings use.

Agitation, (lat.) a frequent motion, also a
disturbance and inquietude of minde.
Artamenes.

Aglais, one of the Graces.

Aglais, the Daughter of Magacles,
she would dayly devour ten pound of flesh, half a peck of
bread, and four Gallons of wine at a meal.

Aglet, (French) the tag of a point, also a
little plate of metal.

Agnail, a sore between the finger, or toe,
and the nail.

Agnation, (lat.) kindred, or near
relation by the fathers
side.

Agnes, a womans name, signifying in Greek
chaste.

Agnition, (lat.) an acknowledging.

Agnodice, a Virgin, who putting her self
into mans apparel, grew famous in physick by the
instruction of Herophilus.

Agnomination, (lat.) a surname, a name
wherewith a man is signalized for any
famous act.



Agnus Castus, an Herb which preserveth
chastity.


Agonalia, (latin) feasts, in which there
were great wrestlings, and other exercises of
activity.

Agony (Greek) anguish of minde.

To Agonize, (Greek) to play the
Champion.

Agonothet (Greek) a Master of the
Revell's.

Agramed (old word) aggrieved.

The Agrarian law a law made by the Romans
for the distribution of lands among the common
people.

Agreeable, (French) suitable to a mans
Genius, or Inclination.

To Agredge, (old word) to aggravate.

Agrestical (lat.) clownish, rude.

Agriculture, (lat.) tillage,
husbandry.

Agrippa, one that is born with his feet
formost, also the name of several Kings.

Agrise, (old word) afraid,
astonished.

Agrose, (old word) grieved.
  
Agroted, (old word) cloyed.

To Agryse, (old word) to cause one to
quake.


A. J.

Ajax, the son of Telamon, and
Hesione daughter of Laomedon, he was one
of the stoutest of all the Greeks that went to
the Trojan War, he fought with Hector,
and had a contest with Vlisses, for the armes of
Achilles, but Vlisses having gain'd them
by his eloquence, Ajax run mad, and made a huge
slaughter among a flock of sheep, thinking
Vlisses and Atrides to have been among
them, also the name of the son of Oileus King of
the Locri, who for vitiating Cassandra
in the Temple of Pallas, was slain with Thunder
by the Goddesse, whose Priestesse she was.

Aide, (French) help, also a subsidy, or
tax.

Aidoneus, King of the Molossi, he
sent Theseus to prison, because he, and
Pirithous would have taken away his daughter
Proserpina,
not far from the River Acheron, which gave
occasion to the fable, to say that he descended into Hell
to fetch away Proserpina, the daughter of
Dis.

Ailesbury, a Town situate not far from the
River Tame in Buckingamshire, it was won by
Cutwulph the Saxon, in the year 572. and
hath been famous in times past, by
being the habitation of St.
Edith, the daughter
of Frewald.

Ailesford, a Town in Kent, not far
from the River Medway, it was heretofore named in
the British tongue Saissenæg-haibal,
from the great overthrow that was given by
Vortimer the Brittain, son of
Vortigern to Hengist, and his
English Saxons in this place.

Aire, besides, one of the four Elements, it
signifies a certain distinction in the Garb and
countenance, between one person and another.

Ayry, a nest of Hawks.

Akmanchester, i. e. the City of
Sick-folk, a name anciently given by the
Saxons, to the Citie of Bath.


A. L.

Alabandic, a kinde of a Rose with
whitish leaves.

Alabandine, a kinde of blue, and red stone,
provoking to bleed.

Alabaster, a kinde of clear white
Marble.

Alacrity, (lat.) chearfulnesse.

Alahab, (Arab.) the Scorpions heart.

Alamæ, (Arab.) the left foot of
Andromeda.

Alan, a proper name, signifying in
Slavonish a
Greyhound, others contract it from Aelian, i.
Sun-bright.

Alastor, the name of one of the sunnes
horses.

Alata Castra, the Citie of
Edenborough in Scotland.

Alay, (a Term in hunting) when fresh Dogs
are sent into the cry.

Alazony, (Greek) vain-glory.

Alba Julia, the Citie of
Westenbergh in Germany.

Alba, Regalis, a Citie in Hungary,
now called Stolwistenbergh, where the Kings use
to be Anointed, and Crowned.

Albania, a Countrey between
Illyricum and Macedonia, whose chief
Citie is Dyrrachium,
now called Durazzo, there is also another
Albania in the East, between
Cholcos and
Armenia, from whence the people of the former
Albania are said originally to spring; also the
Kingdom of Scotland was in ancient times called
Albania.

Albanus, a River in Armenia, also
a Lake in Italy, called Lago di Castel
Gandolf, also the name of the first Brittish
Martyr from the Lat. Albus, i. e. white.

St. Albans a Town in
Hertfordshire, so called from the
Brittish Martyr above mentioned,
whereas formerly it was called Verulam.

Albe, a white Garment, which the Priests
were wont to wear.



Albeito, (Arab.) the mouth of the Swan.


Albert, a Saxon proper name,
signifying all bright.

Albion, the ancient name of
England, by reason of the white Rocks upon the
Seaside, or from Albion the son of Neptune, or from
Albina, one of Dioclesians 50
daughters.

Albugineous, (lat.) belonging to the white
of the eye, or to any other white
substance.

Albutius, the name of a very covetous man,
who would beat his servants before they had committed a
fault, telling them that perhaps he should not be at
leasure, when they had committed any.

Alcaic, verse, a certain kinde of verse, so
called from Alcæus the first Inventor,
consisting of two
dactyls, and two trochees.

Alcakengi, a winter Cherry.

Alcander, a young Lacedemonian,
who having put out one of Lycurgus his eyes, yet
being intertained by him as his near servant loved him
afterwards with a great deal of respect.

Alcathous, the son of Pelops, who
being suspected to have slain his brother Chrysippus
fled to Megara, where killing a Lion that had
slain Euripus the son of Megareus, he
was by Megareus made his son in law, and
succeeded him in the Kingdom.

Alceste, the wife of Adonetus King
of Thessaly, who
willingly offered her self up to die for her
husband.

Alchedi, (Arab.) a Star in the goat.

Alchenit, (Arab.) a Star in the right side
of Perseus.

Alchobel, see Reception.

Alchocodon, is an Arabian word,
and signifies the giver
of years, and is plac't that he hath most essential
dignity in the place of the Hyleg, and with some
aspect doth behold that place.

Alchorad, (Arab.) a contrariety of the
light of the Planets.

Alchimy, (Greek) the art of dissolving
metals, to separate the pure from the
impure.

Alcippus, vide Damocrita.

Alcithoe, a Theban woman, who was turned into a Bat, for
contemning Bacchus his Orgies.

Alcmena, vide Amphytryo.

Alemæon, the son of Amphiaraus and
Eriphite, he killed his mother for having betrayed
Amphiaraus, and afterwards runne mad; but being
cured by Phlegias, he married
his daughter Olphæstbæa,
giving her a Bracelet of his mothers, but afterwards
falling in love with one of Achetous his
daughters, called Callirhoe, he promised her the
Bracelet which he had given his former wife, on condition
she would marry him, but going to fetch it, he was slain
by Temon and Axion, Alphesibæas
brothers.

Alconor, one of the 300. Argires, who
fought against the Lacedemonians, onely he, and
Chromius being left alive, and all his enemies
killed, excepting Othryades.

Alcoran, (Arab.) the book wherein the
Turkish religion is delivered, first written by
Mahomet, the Turks great Prophet.

Alcyon dayes, quiet times.

Alcyone, the daughter of Neptune, the wife
of Ceyx, who sayling to the Oracle, was drown'd
by the way, and chang'd into a bird, called a
King-fisher.

Alduas dubis, a River dividing the Helvetians
from the Sequani, called in French Leo
doux.

Aldborrow, see Isurium.

Aldingham, a Town in Lancashire,
an ancient Hereditament belonging to the family of
the Haveringtons, or Harringtons,
unto whom it came from the
Flemmings by the Cancefelds.

Aldebaran, (Arab.) the south eye of the
Bull.

Alderanainim, (Arab.) the right shoulder of
Cepheus.



Alectryomancy, (Greek) a certain kinde of
divination among the ancients, which was done by a
Cock.

Alectorius, a precious stone of a
waterish colour, found in
the maw of an old Capon.

Alectryon, a young man, who kept the door,
while Mars was familiar with Venus, but Mars incensed that
he was taken through his negligence, changed him into a
Cock.

Alegement, (French) ease,
releasment.

Aleger, a Liquor made of sowr Ale.

Alembick, (lat.) a Still.

Alestake, (old word) a Maypole.

Alexander, son of Philip, King of
Macedon, he
overthrew the Persian Monarchy, took Babylon
Susa, and Persepolis, and after he had
extended his Conquests as farre as India, he
returned to Babylon, and there died, the word
signifies in Greek helper of men.

Alexandria, a Famous Port Town of
Egypt.

Alexipharmac, (Greek) a Medecine
against poyson.



Alferes, (Spanish) an Ensign bearer.


Alfred, (a Saxon word) signifying all
peace.

Alfreton, q. Alfreds Town, a Town
in Darbyshire, built by King Alfred, as
some think, the Lords whereof were called
Barons de Alfreton, the second of whom built the Abbay de
Bello Capite, or Beauchief.

Algareb, (Arab.) the Star in the right wing
of the Crow.

Algarfe, (Arab.) the head of the fifteenth
mansion.

Algate, (old word) if so be,
notwithstanding,
altogether.

Algates, (old word) ever, even now, for all
that.

Algebar, the left foot of Orion.

Algebhe, (Arab.) the head of the tenth
mansion.

Algenib. (Arab.) the right wing of
Pegasus.

Algebra, a Syriac word, signifying the art
of figurative numbers, or equation.

Algid, (Lat.) num with cold, chill.

Algomeissa, (Arab.) the little Dog.

Algon, (Arab.) the head of
Medusa.

Algorithme, (a word compounded of
Arabick and Spanish,) the art of reckoning by Cyphers.

Algrim, (old word) the same as
Algebra.

Alguze, the left foot of Orion, an
Arabick
word.

Alhabar, (Arab.) a Star in the mouth of the
great Dog.

Alhibade, a rule on the back-side of a
Geometrical instrument to take heights and depths.

Alicante, one of the chief Towns of
Valentia in
Spain, where there is plenty of Mulbery's, of
which they make Alicant wine.

Alice, (Germ.) a womans name
contracted from
Adelize, i. noble.

Alienation, (Lat.) an estranging.

Alifed, (Sax word) alowed.

Aliment, (Lat.) nourishment.

Alimony, (Lat.) a pension alowed for
subsistance, from a husband to his wife,
being parted from
him.

Alioth, (Arab.) a star in the tail of
Helice, or the Bear.

All-a-bone, (old word) a made
request.

Allaborate, (Lat.) to labour much about a
thing.

Allantoides, the tunicle that wraps, and
covers the head, buttocks feet, and more eminent parts of
the birth.

Allabanny, the same as Albany,
that part of Scotland, called the Highlands, so
called either from Albion, or from the
Brittish words, Ellan Ban, i. white
Island.

Allay, a mitigation, or asswaging
also the tempering of gold,
or silver, with a baser metal to augment the weight of
it.

Allective, (Lat.) alluring,
inciting.

Allegation, (Lat.) a proving, an
alleaging.

Allegory, (Greek) a mysterious saying,
wherein there is couched something that is different from
the litteral sense.

Alleluja, (an Hebrew word) signifying,
praise ye our Lord, also the name of an Herb, called
Wood-sorrel.

An Alley, (French) a narrow passage.

All-good, a pot Herb, otherwise called good
Henry.

All-heal, an Herb, otherwise called clowns
woundwort.

Alliance, (French) an association, either
by kindred, or by Covenant.

† Alliency, (Lat.) an inticing
unto.

Alligation, (Lat.) a binding unto.

Allington, a Town in Hamtshire,
scituate upon the River Avon, anciently called
Allaun.

Allision, (Latin) a dashing against any
thing.

Alliteration, (lat.) a word used in
Rhetorick,
being a playing upon the same Letter.

Allobroges, the people of Savoy,
and Dauphine in
France.

Allocamel, (Greek) a beast in the
Indies, having the head of a Mule, and the body
of a Camel.

† Allocation, (lat.) a placing
towards.

Allocations, the allowances of Officers
under a Prince, or great man.

Alloquie, (lat.) a talking unto, or
parlying with any one.

Allodial, lands (a Term in law) free lands
for which no fines, or services are due.

Allome, a kinde of mineral, being a salt
sweat of the earth.

Allot, to assign to every one his proper
patrimony.

Allusion, (lat.) a speaking in reference to
another thing.

An Almain, a German, also (a Term in
Musick) being a kinde of aire, which hath a slower time
then either Corant, or Saraband, also
Alman Rivets are a certain kinde of Armour rivetted with braces
of mail.

Almanack, (a German word) signifying as
much as Calender, or a Prognostication by observing the
course of the stars.



Almaner, (Arab.) the sight
of a Planet in his Epicycle.


Almantica, (Arab.) see Zodiack.

Almanzor, (Arab.) Defender, it being the name of divers Princes, and
great men among the Moors.

Almicantarats, (Arab.) a Term in
Astronomy, being those
lines which passe through the Meridian paralel with the
Horizon.

Almner, a Kings, or Princes Officer that
looks to the distribution of Alms, or
fragments of meat to the
poor.

Almond, a certain kinde of
Thracian Nut so called.

Almugia, (Arab.) the scituation of
Planets in the Zodiack, so
as to behold each other face to face.

Almuten, of a house, is that Planet, which
hath most dignities in the signe ascending, or descending
from the Cusp of any house, but Almuton of a
figure is that Planet, which in essential dignities, or
accidental is most powerfull in the whole Scheme of
Heaven.

Alnath, (Astronomick) a star which is to be
seen in the Horns of Aries.

Alnewick, a Town in
Northumberland, scituate upon the River
Alne, famous for a battel between
William King of Scots, and the
English under Henry the second, it is
fortified with a strong Castle, where
Malcolm the third
was slain when he besieged it, it is also called
Alanwick and Anwick.

Aloes, Sea Housleek, Bitterwort, an Herb
whose juyce congeals in a Gum very
profitable in Physick,
also a Wood called Lignum
vitæ-Aloe, Zocatrina, is that which is brought out
of the Island Zocatara.

Alogie, (Greek) a being irrational, or void
of reason.

Alopecie, (Greek) a disease called the
Scurf, or Foxes evil, wherein the hairs fall off from the
head by the roots.

Alosha, a certain drink made of water and
hony, much used in Spain in hot
weather.

Alpha, the first of the Greek
letters.

Alphabet, the order of letters,
A.B.C.

Alpharaiz (Arab.) the right shoulder of
Pegasus.

Alpharez, (Arab.) the navel of
Pegasus.

Alpheta, (Arab.) the shining star of the
Crow.

Alpheus, a famous River of
Arcadia, which running a great way into the Sea,
meets at length with Arethusa, a River in
Sicilie, nearunto Siracuse.

Alphitomancie, (Greek) a divination by
tarly meal.

Alphonsus, from the Gottish word
Helphuns, i. our
help, the name of divers great Kings of Spain and
Naples.

Alphonsin-Tables, certain Astronomical
calculations invented by Alphonsus King of
Aragon.

Alphrad, the bright star in
Hydra.

Alps, great Hills that divide
France from Italy.

Alrameck, (Arab.) a star in the
constellation of
Bootes.

Aliacaba, (Arab.) the Pole-star, or the
tayl of cynosure.

Alresford, a Town in Hantshire;
given by Kinewalce
the religious Saxon King to the Church at
Wenta.

Alteration, (lat.) a changing.

Altercation, (lat.) a contentious
dispute.

Alternation, (lat.) a changing by
turns.

Althæa, see Meleager.

† Altiloquent, (lat.) speaking
loftily.

† Attitonant, (lat.) an Epithet
anciently given to Jupiter, and signifies
thundring from on high.

Altitude, (lat.) heighth, also a Term in
Astronomy, being the heigth of the sun, or any of
the stars from the Horizon.

† Altivolant, (lat.) soaring, or
flying aloft.

Alveary, (lat.) a Hive of Bees.

Alveated, (lat.) channelled, or trenched from Alveus, a
channel.

Alume, a certain astringent mineral,
somewhat whitish and
transparent.

Alumnation, (lat.) a fostering, or
nourishing.

† Alutation, (lat.) a tanning, or
dressing of leather.

Alytarch, (Greek) a keeper of rule and
order in publick Games and Ceremonies.


A. M.

Amayne, a Term used by men of War
incountring another
ship, and bidding them yield.

Amalgaminge, an old word used by
Chaucer, signifying a mixture of
Quicksilver, with
other metals.

Amalthea, the Nurse of
Jupiter, she fed him with Goats milk, and he
afterwards as a reward gave her the horn of a Goat, which
had this faculty, that whatsoever she desired she should
have it, whence Amalthean
horn hath been taken for an embleme of plenty.

Amand, (lat.) to send one away.

Amanuensis, (lat.) a secretary, one that
writes for another.



Amaritude, (Lat.) bitternesse.


Amassement, (French) a crouding, or heaping
of several things together.

Amate, to discourage.

Amazons, certain warlike women of
Asia, that dwelt near the River
Thermodoon, who burnt off their right paps, and
killed all their Male Children, that they might have no
man among them, their most renowned Queens were
Mathesia, Orithya, Penthesilea, whom
Achilles slew, coming to help the Trojans,
Menalippe and Hippolyta, whom
Hercules overcame, and gave Theseus to
wife.

Ambacti, among the ancient Gauls, were
those servants and dependants, which
belonged to their chief Nobility.

Ambage, (Lat.) a far-fetch't
circumstance of words.

Amber, a hard yellow Gum, of which they
make beads and bracelets, some think it to be the Gum of
Poplar Trees, others the juyce of a certain stone that
grows like Corral.

Ambergreece, a sweet perfume, or
Aromatick juyce, which
some hold to be a kinde of bitumen, rising from Fountains
in the bottom of the Sea, and becoming hard by floating
upon the water.

Ambianum, the Citie of Amiens in
Picardie.

Ambidexter, (Lat.) one that useth both
hands alike, also (a Term in Common-law) signifying a
Juror that taketh of both parties
for the giving of his verdict.

Ambient, (Lat.) encircling, compassing
round, an Epithete properly belonging to the
aire.

Ambifarious, (Lat.) that which hath a
twofold meaning.

Ambiguous, (Lat.) uncertain,
doubtfull.

† Ambilogy, (Lat.) an obscure saying,
a dark speech.

Ambition, (Lat.) an excessive thirst of
honour.

Amblothridium, a Medicine provoking travel
before the time.

Amblygone, (Greek) a Term in
Geometry, signifying a
figure that hath a blunt, or obtuse angle.

Ambracia, a Citie of Epirus,
vulgarly called
Lacta.

Ambresbury, q. Ambrose, his Town,
a Town scituate upon the River Avon in
Wiltshire, built by Ambrose Aurelian,
here Alfritha King Edgars wife erected a
stately Nunnery to expiate
the murther of her son in Law King Edward, in
this Nunnery afterwards
Eleanor widow of K. Henry the third,
devoted her self to God.

An Ambrey, a cup-board.

Ambrose, the name of an ancient Bishop of
Milain, and one of the fathers, the word
signifieth in Greek Divine, or immortal.

Ambrosia, an Herb called
Artimisia, Wood sage, it is a word often used by
the Poets to signifie the meat of the Gods.

Ambulatory, (Lat.) a place to walk
in.

Amburbial, sacrifices were certain, ancient
sacrifices wherein the beast went about the Citie before
he was sacrificed.

Ambuscado, (Spanish) an ambush, or men
secretly so disposed as to rush out upon an enemy
unawares.

Ambustion, (Lat.) a singing, or burning
round about.

Amen, (a Syriack word) signifying 
verily, or so be it, and
therefore it is used after
every prayer.

Amenity, (Lat.) delightfulnesse,
pleasure.

Amenused, (old word) diminish't.

Amercement, or Amerciament, 
(a Term in Law) a penalty, or pecuniary
punishment set upon the
head of an Offender against
the King, or Lord in his Court.

America, the fourth part of the world
discovered about the year 1492. by
Americus
Vesputius, a Florentine and
Christophorus
Columbus; a Genoese.

Amery, in (lat.) Almaricus,  a
proper name, from the German word Emeric.
i. alwayes rich and
powerfull.

An Amesse, a Priests hood, or Cap, which he
weareth in the Quire.

Amethyst, (Gr.) a precious stone, so
called, because it is said
to represse drunkness.

Amiable, (Lat.) lovely.

Amicable, (Lat.) friendly.

Amict, see Amesse.

Amy, in (Fr.) Aime, i. beloved, a
name common, both for man and women from Amadeus,
by which name many of the Dukes of Savoy have
been called.

Amission, (Lat.) losse.

Ammodite, a creeping insect of a sandy
colour, and full of black spots.

Ammoniac, a kinde of Gum, which is brought
from Lybia, near the Temple of Ammon,
also a kinde of Salt like Allum, which is found in
Africa.

Amnesty, (Greek) a burying in silence, and
Oblivion, all former injuries and
dammages.

Amnios, the second Tunicle that enwraps the
birth, and covers it all over.

Amoebean, (Greek) Amoebean verses
are those which answer one another.

Amorist, a lover, an amorous man.

Amoroso, (Ital.) the same.



Amort, (French) dead, whence, one that is
melancholy, or in a dumps, is said to be all
Amort.


Amortize, to kill, a word used by
Chaucer.

Amotion, (Lat.) a removing out of the
way.

Ampelite, a kinde of pitchy, cleaving, and
black earth, wherewith they use to anoint Vines to kill
the worms.

Ampelusia, a promontory in
Mauritania.

Amphiaraus, the son of Oileus, he
was a great Prophet, who was desired by
Adrastus, to go
to the War of Thebes, but he knowing he should
not return, kept himself private, till being betrayed by
his wife Eriphile,
who was bribed with a golden bracelet,
he was forced to go, but the first day he came to
Thebes, he was swallowed up alive by the
earth.

Amphibious, (Greek) living indifferently
upon both Elements, land and water.

Amphibologie, (Greek)see Amphilogie.

Amphictions, (Greek) the Councel of
Greece, consisting of men chosen out of the
twelve chief Cities, for the making of laws, and deciding
of all controversies: It was instituted by
Amphyction the son of Hellen, or as
others say by Acrisius.

Amphion, the son of Jupiter and
Antiope,
who being married to Lycus, and after vitiated by
Epaphus, was imprisoned by Dirce Lycus's
2. wife, but being set at liberty by Jupiter, she
fled to the Hill Cytheron, where she brought
forth Twins, Zethus and
Amphion, who to
revenge their mothers injuries,
tormented Dirce by tying her to a wilde Bull's
tale, but Bacchus pitying her, changed her to a
Fountain, Amphion became
so rare a Musician, that he was said to build the
Theban Walls, by playing upon Mercuries
Harp.

Amphiscians, (Greek) those people that live
under the Equator, where the shadow's are cast both wayes,
North and South.

Amphitheater, a place made for the
acting of stage-playes, and
publick spectacles differing from a common Theater, as
being more perfect, and built in a full circle, the other
onely in a semicircle.

Amphitrite, the daughter of Nereus
and Doris, the wife of Neptune, she sitting at
the foot of Atlas, was brought to him by a
Dolphin, and made Queen of the Sea.

Amphitryo, the son of Alceus
Prince of Thebes, who married Alcmena,
daughter of Electryon and Lysidice, upon
that condition that he should revenge the death of her
brothers upon the Teleboans and
Taphians, but while he was in the War,
Jupiter coming to
her in the likenesse of her husband,
and lying with her, she brought forth Twins,
Hercules son to Jupiter, Iphiclus to
Amphitryo.

Amphiction, a King of Athens, the
son of Deucalion, he succeeded Cranaus
in the Kingdom.

Amphora, an ancient measure of liquid
things, the Italick Amphora contained five
Gallons, the Attick Amphora seven Gallons and a
half.

Ampliation, (Lat.) an enlargement, also a
deferring of judgement, till the cause be better examined,
a word used in Common-law.

Amplification, (Lat.) a making large, or
amplifying.

Amplitude, (Lat.) largenesse, also a
Title of Honour used among
the Latins.

Ampullous, (Lat.) swelling like a bottle
also puft up with pride.

Amputation, (Lat.) a curtailing, a
lopping off.

Amsanctus, a place in the midst of
Italy, where are many waters full of Brimstone,
which send forth a pestilent and noisome smell, and are
inclosed round about with Woods, which gave occasion to
the Poets to faign that the infernal Ghosts had their
abode there.

Amstelodamum, the chief Citie of
Holland, now
called Amsterdam.

Amulet, (Lat.) a kinde of composition
somewhat like a Pomander to wear about one, which
preserveth from the plague, poyson, or inchantment.

Amulius, King of the Latin's, he
disposest his brother Numitor of the Kingdom, and
made a Vestal of his Neece Rhea Silvia, but she
being got with Childe by Mars (as it was
reported) brought forth Romulus and
Remus, who afterwards reigned.

Amycus King of the
Bebrycii,
the son of Neptune and Melie, who challenging all
strangers to fight with him with whirlebats, was at length
slain by Pollux.

Amymone, one of the fifty daughters of
Danæ, she was ravish't by Neptune, and brought
forth Nauplius.

Amyris, an inhabitant of Sybaris,
who foretelling the ruine of his Countrey fled away with
all his goods.


A N

Ana, a Greek adverb, used by
Physitians in their
bills to signifie the like quantity
of each, also a kind of Indian beasts with long
teeth, and sharp nails.



Anabaptists, a Sect of Hereticks first
begun in Germany,
as some say, by one Nicholas
Stork, in the year 1521. their chief
Tenet is that men ought
not be baptized, till they are able to render an account
of their faith.


† Anabathrum, (Greek) a place
whereunto we ascend by
steps.

Anacardium, (Greek) a kinde of bean growing
in Malaga.

Anachorite, (Greek) a kinde of religious
person that gives himself up to a religious life.

Anacreon, a famous Lyrick Poet of
Teus in Jonia, who was choaked with the
husk of a raison.

† Anacrisis, (Greek) question of the
guilty, either by torment, or by
interrogation.

Anachronisme, (Greek) a word used in
Chronology, signifying a false collection of time.

Anadem, (Greek) a Garland.

Anadesme, (Greek) a swath, a cloath, to tie
up wounds.

Anadiplosis, (Greek) a figure in
Rhetorick, i.
e. when one verse begins with the same word the last
ended with.

Anætis, a Goddesse among the Lydians, to
whom the chiefest Noble men used to Dedicate their
daughters.

Anaglyphick (Greek) belonging to the art of
Carving, or Embossing.

Anagnostick, (Greek) a Curate, or one that
serveth to read to another.

† Anagogical, (Greek) skilled in deep
matters, well read in mysterious learning.

Anagram, (Greek) a transposing the
letters of any ones name,
so as to make another word
of it, which art some say was invented
by Lycophron.

Anagraph, (Greek) a register, an
inventory.

Analects, (Greek) scraps, which are
gathered from the Table,
also Metaphorically
taken for any collections.

Analemme, (Greek) a Mathematical
instrument to finde out
the course, or elevation
of the Sun, or any Planet.

Analogisme, (Greek) a logical argument from
the cause to the effect.

Analogie, (Greek) proportion,
correspondence.

Analysis, (Greek) a resolution of
doubtfull matters, also
a distribution of the whole into parts.

Ananias, (Hebr.) the grace of the Lord a
proper name.

Anapæst, (Greek) a foot in a verse,
consisting of two short
syllables and one long.

Anaphora, (a Rhetorical figure) being a
repetition of the same sound, in the
beginning of several
sentences, or verses, also the ascention of the signs,
from the East by the dayly course of the firmament.

Anapologetical, (Greek) having no
excuse, without any
Apology.

Anarchy, (Greek) a disorder in
government, a being
without rule, or Prince.

Anarand, a Brittish proper name,
corrupted from
Honoratus, i. e. Honourable.

Anaretas, see Interfector.

Anathema, (Greek) with e short, is
a person solemnly curs't, or devoted to
destruction.

Anathema, (Gr.) that which is offered to an
Idol.

Anatocisme, (Greek) the yearly receipt of
usury, when at the years end the use is become
principal.

Anatomy, (Greek) the dissection of a body,
for the more exact discovery of all the inward
parts.

Anaxarete, a beautifull Virgin of
Salamis, who
disdaining the love of Iphis, was the cause that
he hang'd himself before the her door, and was afterwards,
for her hard heartednesse turned into a stone.

Anaximander, a great Milesian
Philosopher, the
Successour of Thales.

Ancoeus, the son of Neptune, he being much
given to Agriculture, and going to drive a wilde
Boar out of a Vineyard he had planted, was slain by the
Boar.

Ancaster, a Town, or long street in
Lincolnshire,
by Antoninus called Crocolana, in which
the memory of Antiquity is continued
by the Roman Coines, and Vaults under ground oftentimes
discovered.

Anchises, the son of Capys, he was
carried by his son Aeneas from the sack of
Troy, but died in his journy toward
Italy.

Anchoret, see Anachorite.

Anchurus, the son of Midas, he
after Midas was
warned by the Oracle to throw what he had most precious
into a great gap of the earth, about Celenon in
Phrygia, & had thrown in his gold in vain,
her rode into the Abysse, which had swallowed
many men, and afterwards it closed up.

Ancus Martius, the fourth King of the
Romans.

Ancil, (Lat.) a kinde of sheild, or
buckler, made after the
fashion of a decrescent Moon, the first of this form was
reported to fall from heaven into the hands of
Pompilius,
Numa, in the time of a great plague, who by the
instinct of the Goddesse Ege­



ria caused eleven more to be made, and committed them to the
keeping of the 12.  Salii.


Ancona, the chief Citie of Picenum
in Italy, first
built by the Sicilians.

Andalusia, a Countrey in Spain,
first called Bætica.

Andradswald, a Wood in Sussex,
anciently 120 miles in length, memorable for the death of
Sigebert, King of the West Saxons, who
having been deposed, was stabbed in this place by a
Swinheard.

Andrago, (Lat.) a woman of manly
countenance and
carriage.

Andrastes, or Andate, a certain
Goddesse worshipt by the ancient Brittains, as
the Goddesse of victory.

Andrew, (Greek) a proper name,
signifying
manly.

Androdamant, (Greek) a kinde of
precious stone.

Androgyne, (Greek) one of both Sexes, one
that is both man and woman.

Andromache, wife to Hector, she
was after his death married
to Helenus the Prophet
and son of Priam.

Andromeda, the daughter of Cepheus
King of Aethiopia, she was for her pride exposed
to the cruelty of a Sea-monster, but
delivered by Perseus.

Androna, (Greek) a place that was
anciently made in ships,
onely for men to be in.

Anelate, a kind of a wood knife.

Anemone, (Greek) a kind of flower,
called a wind
flower.

Anfractuosity, (Lat.) an intricate turning
and winding.

Angel, in gold, is a piece of Coyn that
hath an Angel stamp't upon it, and beares the value of 10
shillings.

Angelica, an Herb so called.

Angelical, (Greek) belonging to an
Angel, i. a
messenger, the Angels are also taken
in holy Scripture for those immortal spirits, which wait
upon Almighty God in the highest heavens, they are divided
by Saint Paul, into nine several orders,
Seraphim, Cherubim,
Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Powers, Principates,
Arch-Angel, and Angel.

Angelot, (French) a kind of small Cheese
commonly made in France.

Angle, a corner, also a Term in
Geometry, being the
concurse of two lines meeting
together, so as that they do not make one line.

Angles, also are the most powerfull
houses; for a Planet
therein hath more power, and efficacy then another (in any
other house) that is but equally dignified. The Angles are
these, viz. The first house, or the East Angle,
the tenth, or the South Angle, the seventh house, or the
West Angle, and the fourth, or the North
Angle.

Anglia, a part of great Brittain,
now called
England.

Anglesey, an Island lying over against
Cærnarvon in Wales, it was anciently
the seat of the Druides, and was called by the
Brittains, Ynis Dowil, and the land of
Mon, in Latin Mona. It was first
attempted by Paulinus Swetonius, and afterwards
brought under the Roman Empire by Julius
Agricola, many ages
after it was Conquered by the English-men, and
thence derived this name as it were the
English-mens Island.

Anguineous, (Latin) pertaining to a
snake.

Anguish, (Latin Anguor, French
Angoisse) grief,
agony.

Angular, (Lat.) full of Angles, or
Corners.

Angus, a County in the South-part of
Scotland, called in Latin Angusia,
anciently Aenia.

Angust, (Lat.) narrow.

Anhelation, (lat.) a difficulty in fetching
ones breath.

Anility, (lat.) feminine old age.

Animadversion, (lat.) a lending ones
attention, as it were a
turning ones mind that way, also a correcting.

Animal, (lat.) a creature indued with life
and sence.

Animalillio, (Spanish) a little
animal.

Animosity, (lat.) stoutnesse, stomack,
willfulnesse.

Anlace, (old word) a dudgeon, a half
dagger.

Annals, (lat.) Histories of passages acted
from year to year.

Annandale, a County in the North part of
Scotland, so called as it were the Vale by the
River Anan, it was in old time
inhabited by a people called Selgovæ.

Annarian law, a law among the
Romans, concerning the age, wherein a man might
sue for, or exercise any publick Office.

Annates, (lat.) first fruits paid out of
spiritual benefices.

Anne, (Hebr.) the proper name of a
woman, signifying gracious,
full of mercy.

Anneal, to paint upon glasse.

Annexation, the uniting of lands, or other
Rents of the Crown.



Anselm, (Germ.) defence of Authority, a proper
name.


Annibal, a great Captain of the
Carthaginians,
and the son of Amilcar, he overthrew
Sempronius at Trebia, Flaminius at the
Lake Thrasymene, and Paulus Aemylius, at
Cannæ, he was beaten by Marcellus, and
afterwards at
Zama, by Scipio Africanus, at last
flying to Prusia, King of Bythinia, he
there poysoned himself.

Annihilation, (latin) a reducing to
nothing.

Anniversary, (lat.) down yearly, at a
certain time, or
celebrated every year.

Annon, a Carthagian that coveted to be a
God, and taught birds to sing Annon is a
God.

Anodynous, as much as to say pain-easing or
without pain. Anodynous Medicaments are such as
are appropriated to give ease by stupifying the sences,
such are Soporifics, and
Narcotics.

Annotation, (lat.) a nothing, or marking,
an Exposition upon any writing.

Annoy, to trouble, hurt.

Annueler, (old word) secular.

Annuity, (lat.) a yearly Pension; in
Common-law, the
difference between Annuity and Rent, is this, that Rent is
payable out of land; Annuity charges onely the
person of the Grantor.

Annul, (lat.) to make void, q.
annihil.

Annulet, (lat.) a little Ring, or any thing
made in the form of a Ring.

Annunciation, (lat.) a telling, or
declaring a thing, as it
were a doing, a message unto, also the day of the Virgin
Marie, which falls on the 25th. of
March.

Anoysance, or Nusance, (French) a
hurt, or damage in law, it signifieth a trespasse upon a
Neighbours ground, by stopping up his water, or hindring
his light.

Anomalous, (Greek) unequal, uneven.

Anonymous, (Greek) namelesse, without a
name.

Anopsie, (Greek) privation of sight.

Anorexy, (Greek) one of the
Symptomes of the stomack, being a want of
appetite.

Antæus, the son of Neptune and
Terra, who fighting with Hercules
recovered strength as often as he touch't his mothers
earth, but at length Hercules holding him up from
the ground killed him.

Antagonist, (Greek) an adversary.

Antalope, a Syrian Heart, swift of
foot, and having long Horns.

Antarctick, (Greek) a word used in
Astronomy, the
Antarctick Pole, being the Southern Pole, so
called, because it is contrary
to the Arctick Pole, & the
Antarctick Circle, contrary to the
Arctick Circle.

Antares, (Arab.) the Scorpions heart, a
Term in Astrology.

Anteacts, (lat.) deeds, or actions done in
times past.

Anteambulation, (lat.) a walking
before.

Antecedaneous, (lat.) foregoing.

Antecedent, (latin) the same also
excelling, having a
relative, also a Term in Logick,
the first proposition of a Syllogisme.

Antecessours Forefathers, Acestors, as it
were, Foregoers.

Antecursor, (lat.) a forerunner.

Antedate, to date a Letter before the
time.

Antedeluvian, (lat.) being before the
floud.

Anteloquie, (lat.) a Preface, also a Term
among stage players, signifying their turn, or cue.

Antemeridian hour, (lat.) hour
before-noon.

Antenor, a Trojan Prince, who
coming into Italy with the Heneti, and
Paphlagones built Antenorea, since
called Padua.

Anteoccupation, (lat.) see præoccupation.

Anterior, (lat.) foremost, on the foreside.

Antevene, (lat.) to prevent, to come
before.

Anthem, (Greek) a Divine song,
wherein each verse is sung
by Church-men in their courses.

Anthologie, (Greek) a treating of flowrs,
also a florid discourse.

Anthony, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Greek
flourishing.

Anthropomorphites, (Greek) a Sect of
Hereticks that began in
Aegypt, in the year 395. their chief Tenet was,
that God had a Corporeal shape.

Anthropopathy, (Greek) a being indued with
the passions, or affections of men.

Anthropophagi, (Greek) men eaters.

Antiaxiomatisme, (Greek) that, which is
against any known Axiome.

Antichrist, (Greek) an opposer of
Christ.

Antichthones, (Greek) a people that dwell
on that part of the earth, which is opposite to ours,
going with their feet directly against
ours.

Anticipated, (lat.) prevented.

Anticlea, the daughter of Diocles,
who being defloured by Sisyphus, brought forth
Vlysses.

Antidicomarians, a sort of Hereticks that
were against the Virgin Mary.



Antidote, (Greek) a Medicine given to preserve
one against poyson, or infection.


Antigonus, one of Alexanders
Captains, who afterwards became possessour of
Asia.

† Antigraph, (Greek) a Copy, a
Counterpane.

Antike work, a Term in painting, or
Carving, it being a
disorderly mixture of divers
shapes of men, birds, flowr's, &c.

Antilogie, (Greek) a contradicting, or
opposing.

Antimony, a certain kinde of stone
inclining towards
silver, and found in silver Mines.

Antinomians, (Greek) a Sect of people that
hold legal  services to be unprofitable, and that
God sees no sin in children, this Sect was begun somewhat
above a hundred years ago, by one John Islebius a
German.

Antioeci, those that dwell under half of
the Meridian, and paralels of a like distance from the
Aequator, but the one North-ward, and the other
South-ward.

Antipagments, (lat.) garnishings in Posts
or Doors wrought in Stone, or Timber.

Antipast, the first dish that is served up
at a meal.

Antipathy, (Greek) a secret contrariety in
nature, a contrariety of humours and
inclinations.

Antiperistasis, (Greek) a philosophical
word, signifying the strengthning, and
opposing of any quality
against its contrary, as of cold against heat, or the
like.

Antiphrasis, (Greek) a figurative speech,
having a contrary meaning.

Antiphone, (Greek) see Anthem.

Antipilanes, or Antepilani, (Lat.)
a sort of Souldiers in the fore part of the Roman
Army.

Antipodes, (Greek) see Antichthones.

Antiquate, (Lat.) to abolish, to
abrogate.

Antique, (Lat.) old, out of fashion.

Antisabbatarians, a sort of Hereticks, who
deny the Sabbath.

Antiscions, are degrees beholding one
another equally distant
from the two Tropicks,
and so much as a Planet shall want of either of the
Tropicks, so much on the other side the Tropick shall the
Antiscion of the Planet fall, and shall give virtue to any
Star, or Planet that is in the same
degree, or casteth any
Aspect thereto.

Antistrophe, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure,
namely when several Members of a sentence end all with the
same word.

Antithesis, (Greek) a figure in
Rhetorick, wherein one
letter, or word is put for another.

Antithesis, (Greek) things opposed.

Antitrinitarians, a Sect of Hereticks,
which deny the Trinity, which comprehend
under them, the Arians, Sabellians, and
others.

Antitype, (Greek) an example like to the
pattern.

Antivestæum, the utmost promontory of
Brittain, lying upon the Western Ocean, it hath
been called in former times by the Brittish Bards
Penringuæd,
the Promontory of bloud, by the Welsh Historians
Penwith, i. the Promontory on the left
hand.

Antonians, an order of religious men,
instituted by Saint
Anthony, an Aegyptian Monk, in the year
1324.

Antonomasia, (Greek) a Rhetorical
figure, wherein instead of
a proper name, another name is put.

Antrim, the name of a County in
Ireland.

Antwerp, a famous Citie in
Brabant, which was pull'd down by the Duke of
Alva, but restored again by the the Duke of
Parma.

Anubis, a Heathen God, whom the
Aegyptians
worshipped for Mercurie in the shape of a
Dog.

Anweald, (Sax.) Authority.

Anxiety, (Lat.) vexation, anguish,
grief.

Anyger, a River of Thessaly, where
the Centaures washed their wounds after they had
been wounded by Hercules, which
caused the waters ever
after to have an ill taste.


A O

Aonia, a part of Boeotia, where
the Muses Well is, whence the Muses are called
Aonides.

Aorist, (Greek) indefinite, also among the
Greek Verbs there are two tenses
Aoristus primus,
and Aoristus secundus.

Aornus, a Lake in Italy, near the
River Po, whose waters are infected with a deadly
noysomnesse: into this Lake, the Poets feign that
Phæton fell being struck with
thunder, and that his
sisters weeping for him were changed into poplars dropping
Amber.


A P

Apamia, a Town of Bythinia, so
called by Nicomed, the son of
Prusia.

Apatny, (Greek) freenesse from passion, or
affection.

Apelby, a Town in Westmorland,
anciently called
Abballaba, memorable for its
pleasant scituation upon the River Eden, and for its Antiquity, the
Aurelian Maures



keeping their station there in the time of the Romans.


Apelles, a famous painter of the Island
Cous, who having the picture of Venus
unfinish't, no man
durst undertake it after him.

Apennage, (French) a Childes portion, the
Law of Apennages in France, is that, which
forbids the Kings younger sons to have partage with the
Elder.

Apennine, a great Hill running through the
midst of Italy.

† Apepsie, (Greek) incoction, crudity
of the stomack.

Aphæresis (Greek) the taking away of a
letter from the beginning of a word.

Aphelium, a point wherein the Sun, or any
other Planet is most distant from the Earth.

Aphetical, (Astrological Term) belonging to
the Planet, that is disposer of life in a Nativity.

Aphorisme, (Greek) a brief select
sentence, expressing the
property of a thing.

Aphrodite, (Greek) the name of
Venus, as being ingendred of the froth of the
Sea.

Apina, and Trica, two Towns of
Apulia destroyed by Diomed, with so much
ignominy, that they
became a proverb of contempt.

Apis, King of Argos, the son of
Jupiter, and Niobe, he was otherwise
called Osiris, and took to wife Isis,
leaving the Kingdom of Achaia to
Aegialeus, he went into Aegypt, and
civilizing the people reign'd there.

Apocalyps, (Greek) a revelation, or
unfolding of a dark
mystery, a title given to the last book of the holy
Scriptures, written by St. John in the Isle of
Patmos.

Apocryphal, (Greek) doubted of, whose
original is unknown.

Apodictical, (Greek) demonstrable, easie to
be made plain.

Apogæum, (Greek) a Term in
Astronomy, being that
point of Heaven, where the Sun, or any Planet is farthest
from the Center of the
earth.

Apograph, (Greek) a Copy taken from another
pattern.

Apollo, the son of Jupiter and
Latona, born in Delos, at one birth with
Diana, coming to
age, he slew the Serpent Pytho, and afterwards
the Cyclops, for which he was deprived of his
Divinity, and kept the sheep of Admetus, King of
Thessaly, upon the banks of Amphrysus,
he loved Daphne, who flying from him was turned
into a Lawrel-Tree, also he loved Hyacynthus, a
boy of a rare feature, whom killing by mischance, he
turned into a flowr; he was called the God of physick, of
Musick and Archery, and guided the Chariot of the
day.

Apollyon, (Greek) a name in Scripture,
attributed to the Devil, it signifying,
destroyer.

Apologue, (Greek) a tale, a moral fable,
such as that of Menenius Agrippa, and those of
Aesop.

Apologie, (Greek) a justifying answer, an
excuse, or defence.

Apopheret, (Lat.) a present, a New years
gift.

Apophlegmatisme, (Greek) a Medecine, to
purge away flegme, and waterish humours.

Apophtegme, (Greek) a short and witty
sentence.

Apoplexy, (Greek) a taking away of sence
and motion from the animal parts of the body: for which
reason the dead palsie is called by this name.

Aporetick, (Greek) doubting.

Apostasie, (Greek) a revolting, a falling
away, or defection from ones duty, or first
profession.

Aposteme, (Greek) the gathering of
corruption into any one
part of the body.

Apostle, (Greek) a Messenger, a word most
peculiarly appropriate to the twelve
Disciples of Christ, who
were sent to preach the Gospel.

Apostrophe, (Greek) a figure, wherein there
is a converting ones speech from one party to another, a
mark of the cutting off some Vowel at the end of a
word.

† Apotheke, (Greek) a shop, or store
house, wherein any thing is laid up.

Apotomy, (Greek) a Mathematical word, a
cutting off part of a line.

Apozeme, (Greek) a decoction, a Term used
in Physick.

Appal, to dismay, also to decay.

Appareil, (French) a preparation, a
making ready, also the
summe at the foot of an account, which remains charged
upon a house, or Colledge.

Apparitour, (Lat.) one that summons people
to appear at a Court.

Appartment, (Ital.) a division, or
separation, also so
much of a great house as is set apart for the
intertainment of one person, or one family.

Appeach, to accuse one of any crime.

Appeal, a word used in Common-Law, and signifies to remove a cause
from an inferiour Judge,
to a Superiour, also a suing within a year and a day, of
one, who is next of kin to a party that is
murthred.



Apellative, (Lat.) a Noun Appellative, is a
Term used in Grammar, signifying a name that's common to
a great many.


Appellour, vid. Approver.

Appendant, (Lat.) a Term used in Civil Law,
and in Logick, as when a field is
apendant to a freehold,
an adjunct to a subject.

Appendix, (Lat.) an Addition, a thing that
depends upon another.

Appetency, (Lat.) earnest desire.

Appeteth, desireth, a word used by
Chaucer.

Appian way, a high-way leading from
Rome through Campania, as far as
Brundusium,
which Appius Claudius in his
Consulship paved and walled.

Applauds, expressions of extraordinary
praise and congratulation toward the
performers of great atchievements. Artam.

Application, (Lat.) the making an
addresse to any person,
or the applying of one thing to another.
† Applombature, (Lat.) a soldering
with Lead.

Appoast, (French) to subborn, to
procure.

Apposen, to demand.

Apposite, (Lat.) put to, also to the
purpose.

Appostile, (French) a small addition to a
discourse in writing, set down in the
margent.

Apprehension, (Lat.) understanding, also
according as it is used with expressions,
either of danger, or
happinesse, it denotes either
fear, or joy. Cassandra.

Apprentice, skill, Chaucer.

Appretiation, (Lat.) a high valueing, a
setting a high price upon a thing.

Approbation, (Lat.) liking.

Approperate, (lat.) to hasten.

Appropinquate, (lat.) to draw nigh.

Appropriation, (lat.) a taking to ones
self, also a Term in law, a converting the profit of an
Ecclesiastical living to ones proper
use, onely maintaining a Vicar.

Approver, (Lat.) a Term in Law, one who
confessing himself guilty of Felony, accuseth another, he
is also called appellour.

† Appuyed, (French) stayed,
supported.

Aprication, (Lat.) basking in the
Sun.

Aprize, (old word) adventure.

Apsonus, a Citie near the Euxin
Sea, where Medea slew her brother
Absyrtus.

Ap-thanes, the Superiour sort of the
Nobility of
Scotland were anciently so called, the lower sort
Vnder-Thanes.

Aptitude, (Lat.) fitnesse.

Aptote, (Greek) a Term in Grammar, being a
Noun not declined with cases.

Apulia, a Region in Italy,
vulgarly called
Puglia, formerly called Iapygia from
Iapyx the son of Dædalus.


A Q

Aqua Cælestis, a liquor which the
Chymists call rectified
wine.

Aquarius, one of the twelve signs in the
Zodiack, whereinto the Sun enters in
January.

Aquatile, (Lat.) that lives in the
water.

Aqueduct, (Lat.) a Conduit that
convey's
water by a
pipe.

Aqueous, (Lat.) waterish.

Aquila, (Lat.) (an Eagle) in Astronomy, it
is one of the heavenly signs.

Aquileia, a Citie in Italy, which
being besieged by Maximinus held out so stoutly,
that when they wanted ropes for the
moving of their Engins, the
women suffered their hair to be cut to supply the
want.

Aquiliferous, (Lat.) an Epithete of the
Roman standard, that bears the picture of an Eagle upon
it.

Aquisgrane, a Citie in Gulick, now
called Aixcovit,
built by Granus, as some
suppose, the brother of
Nero.

Aquitania, the third part of
France, now called Guien.

Aquite, (old word) to match.

Aquiter, (old word) a Needle case.

Aquosity, (Lat.) waterishnesse.


A R

Arabesque, (French) a curious
flourishing, or
branched work in painting, or Tapestry.

Arabia, a Countrey in Asia, so
called from Arabus the son of Apollo,
reaching from India to Aegypt, it is
divided into three parts, Arabia Petræa, Arabia
deserta, and Arabia foelix.

Arable, (Lat.) plowable.

Arace, (old word) to deface.

Araneous, (Lat.) full of Spiders
webs.

Arausia, the Citie of Orange in
France, now under the Princes of
Nassau.

Aray, order, from the (French)
Arroy.

Aray, to apparel.

Arbela, (Hebr.) a womans name,
signifying, God hath
revenged.

Arbitratour, (Lat.) an Umpire, a
Commissioner, chosen
by mutual consent to decide
controversies between party & party.



Arblaster, a word used by Chaucer,
signifying a
Cros-bow.


Arborist, (Latin) he that hath skill in
Trees.

Arcadia, a Countrey of
Peloponnesus, famous
for shepherds, and for the residence of Pan, the
God of shepherds, it was first called Pelasgia,
from Pelasgus an ancient King, afterwards
Arcadia from Arcas, son of
Jupiter and Calisto, daughter of
Lycaon, King of this Countrey.

Arcade, (French) an Arch.

Arcane, (Lat.) mysterious, secret.

Arch Dapifer, a chief sewer, one of the
prime Offices of the Empire, which
belongeth to the Count
Palatine of the Rhene.

Arch Duke, a title belonging to the house
of Austria.

Archebald, see Erchembold.

Arches, or Court of Arches, the
chief Consistory
belonging to the Arch-bishop of
Canterbury for the
debating of spiritual causes.

Archetype, (Greek) the first figure, or
Original.

Arch-flamin, Prince, or chief of the
Priests among the Heathens, by some
called Pontifex
Maximus, of whom Numa Pompilius,
was the first instituter.

Archimandrite, the chief of a
Hermitage.

Architectonick, belonging to the chief
Overseer of buildings.

Architecture, the Art of building,
containing under it all
those Arts that conduce
any thing to the framing of a house, or Temple.

Architrave, a word much used in
Architecture,
the chapiter of a Pillar, or chief beam in a
building.

Archive, a place where ancient Records are
kept.

Archontes, (Greek) certain Governours
created in Athens, after Kingly
Government was
abolish't.

Archonticks, certain Hereticks, so called
from Archon the first of that Sect, which
began in the year 334. they
denied the Resurrection,
and held the world to be the work of Princes.

Archytas, a famous Mathematician, whom
Horace mentions in one of his Odes, he made a
wooden Dove to fly by art.

Arcitenent, (Lat.) carrying a Bow and
Arrow's.

Arctation, (Lat.) a streightning.

Arctick, as the Arctick Pole, or
Northern Pole, and the Arctick Circle, or
Northern Circle, so called from the Star Arctos,
or the Bear.

Arcturus, a constellation near the
Northpole.

Arcuate, to bend, to make after the fashion
of an Arch.

Arcubalist, an Engine, anciently used in
war, which was to cast forth great stones.

Ardenna, a great Forrest in Germany,
reaching from the River Rhene, to the Citie of
Turney, which is 500 miles. There is
another great Forrest in
Warwick-shire, so called, the word signifying in
the ancient, and Gallick tongue a Wood.

Ardour, (Lat) heat, vehemency,
burning desire.

Arduity, (Lat.) steepnesse.

Arefaction, (Lat.) a drying.

Arelatum, a Citie of France, in
the Province of
Narbon, now called Arles, the seat of
the Kings of Basilica, the last wherof
called Boso, was
thrust into a Monastery by the Emperour Otho, for
striking the Bishop.

Areopagites, certain Judges of a Council in
Athens, instituted by Solon, they were
so called from Areopagos, a street in
Athens, where they sate.

Aret, (old word) an account.

Aretaphila, a womans name, signifying in
Greek a friend of virtue.

Arethusa, the daughter of Nereus,
and Doris, the wife of Alpheus, she was
fain'd to be a River of Sicily. Also a Fountain
in Armenia, wherein nothing can be made to
sink.

Argent, Silver, or Coin, also a Term in
Heraldry, whereby they expresse white.

Argentina, a Citie in Germany, by the
Rhine, first subdued by Casar,
afterwards by Allila, who called it
Stratsburgh, which name it retains to this
day.

Argile, a County of the North part of
Scotland, lying over against the Coast of
Ireland, and therefore called by the
Natives Arguithil, i. near the Irish, in Latin,
Argathelia.

Argiletas, a place near the Palace in
Rome, so called from Argos, Captain of
the Argives, who having been intertained by Euander, was at length
slain, and buried there.

Argillous, (Lat.) clayie, of a clammy
substance.

Argoil, Clay, a word used by
Chaucer.

Argonautes, see Jason.

Argos, a Citie of Peloponesus, not
farre from Athens, where many famous Kings
reign'd.

Argus, the son of Actor, whom
Juno set as a spy, over Io, being turned
into a Cow.

Argute, (lat.) full of wit, subtile.



Argyra, an Island in India, full of
Gold and silver. Also a Nymph, whom Selenius
being in love with died for grief, and was changed by
Venus into a River.


Ariadne, the daughter of Minos and
Pasiphæ, see more of her in Theseus.

Arided, (Arab.) a Term in Astrology, the
tail of the Swan.

Aridity, (lat.) drynesse, sterility.

Aries, (lat.) an Engin anciently used for
the battering down of Citie walls, so called from
Aries a Ram, by reason of the
likenesse it had to that
beast, also one of the twelve signs.

Arietation, (lat.) a butting, a battring
with the Engine Aries.

Ariminum, an ancient Town of
Flaminia in Italie, now called
Rimini.

Ariobarzanes, one of Darius his
Captains, who was slain by the Greeks.

Ariolation, (lat.) a sooth-saying.

Arion, a famous Musician of the Isle of
Lesbos, he was in great favour with
Periander
Tyrant of Corinth, as he was sayling from
Italy, the Mariners conspired to kill him for his
riches, but he casting himself into the Sea, was carried
by a Dolphin to Tænarus; a Town of
Laconia.

Arist, (old word) he arose.

Aristæus, the son of Apollo and
Ceres, he was King of Arcadia, and found
out the use of Bees, but because Euridice flying
from him, was slain by the bite of a
Serpent, the Nymphes
destroyed his Bees, to appease, whom he having sacrificed
four Oxen, and four Heifers, a multitude of Bees sprung
from the dead Oxen.

Aristides, an Athenian, famous for
Justice.

Aristocracy, (Greek) the Government of a
Common-wealth, wherein the Nobles bear chief sway.

Arite, (old word) to Arest, or stay.

Arithmetick, (Greek) the art of
numbring.

Arithmancy, (Greek) a divination by
numbers.

Armada, (Span.) a great Navy.

Armagh, a County in
Ireland.

Armenia, a Countrey of Asia,
divided into the greater, and
the lesser Armenia.

Armiger, (lat.) a Squire, one that
beareth a Knights
Arms.

Armilet, a little Bracelet for the
arm.

Arminians, a Sect of Hereticks instituted
by Jacobus Arminius, in the year 1605. they hold
free grace, and universal redemption.

Armipotent, (lat.) strong in arms,
powerfull.

Armoniack, or Gumme Armonick, a
certain Gum issuing from a
plant, called fennel Gyant.

Armorick, a Countrey in France,
now called Brittain.

Armory, a place where armes are laid up and
kept.

Armuzia, a Countrey on the Borders of
Carmania, along the River Andanis, where
are many pleasant Vineyards.

Arobe, a Portugal measure of
Sugar, containing 25
Bushels.

Aromatick, (lat.) Odoriferous, having a
spicy smell.

Arquebuze, a little Gun, a Caleever.

Arragon, a great Province of
Spain, heretofore
a Kingdom by it self.

Arraighn, to set at the Bar of Justice, to
make guilty.

Arran, a County in the North-part of
Scotland, anciently called Heglota, as
being scituate in the River Clata,
now called Cluid.

Arrasse, a certain rich cloath, so called
from Arras, a Town of Artesia, where it
was made.

Arrearage, (French) a debt due upon an old
account.

Arrendare, signifieth in the practick of
Scotland, to set lands to any one for
yearly Rent.

Arreptitious, (lat,) suddenly caught, also
snatching away privily.

Arrere, (old word) apart, aside.

Arrest, (French) a stay, a resting quiet in
a place, also a putting a stop to
proceedings, in
Common-law it signifieth an execution
served upon a mans goods, or person, also a decree, or
final sentence of a Court.

Arretteth, layeth blame, an old word used
by Chaucer.

Arrians, a Sect of ancient Hereticks
instituted by one
Arrius a Lybian, about the year 315.
they deny the son to be of the same substance with God the
father.

Arride, (lat.) to manifest ones consent of
a thing by smiling.

Arrogate, (lat.) to assume too much to ones
self.

Arsenal, (French) a kinde of
Cittadel, where Armour and Ammunition is laid
up.

Arsenick, a mineral, called Orpiment, in English
Rats-bane.

Arseversie, upside down,
preposterous.

Arsmart, an Herb, otherwise called water
pepper.

Arson, (French) a saddle-bow.

Artaxerxes, the son of Xerxes, King of
Persia, he had three sons by his wife, and



112 by his Concubines, he made Darius his
Successour, who rebelling from his father, because he
had taken from him his Concubine
Aspasia, was slain with 50 of his brothers.


Artemisia, Queen of Halicarnassus,
and wife to Mausolus, she built so stately a
Sepulcher for her
deceased husband, that it was held for one of the seven
wonders of the world, Artemisia is also the name
of an Herb, called Mugwort.

Artemisian (moneth), the moneth of
May.

Arten, to constrain an (old word) used by
Chaucer.

Arteries, (Lat.) those hollow
membranous Vessels like
to veins, in which the most thin, and hottest part of the
bloud together with the vital spirits pass through the
body.

Arteriotomy, (Greek) a cutting of an
Artery.

Arthritical disease, the Gout from
Arthritis, a
Greek word which signifies a joynt.

Arthur, a famous, warlike King of the
Brittains, who beat the Saxons in divers
set battails, this word signifieth in the
Brittish tongue strong man.

Articular, (Lat.) joynted.

Articulate, (lat.) to joynt, also make
Articles of
agreement.

Artificer, (Lat.) a work-man.

Artillery, great brasse Guns,
Cannons.

Artisan, or Artist, a master of
his Art.

Arval brothers, a fraternity of Roman
Priests, twelve in number, who besides their performance
of publick sacrifices, were appointed Judges of
Land-marks.

Arvisian wine, a sort of Greek
wine from Arvis, now called Amista, in
the Island Chios.

Arundel, in Latine Aruntina
vallis, a Town in Sussex, so called as it
were Arundale,
i. a dale lying upon the River Arun, it hath
a strong Castle, which Robert de
Belismo, keeping
against King Henry the first, he thereupon
forfeited his estate, and was proscribed.

Arundiferous, (Lat.) bringing forth
Reeds.

Aruspicy, (Lat.) a certain kinde of
divination (anciently
much in use among the Romans) by looking into the bowels
of beasts.


A S

Asabaracca, the Herb called
Folefoot.

Asbate, (old word) a buying.

Asbestes, a people of Lybia about
Cyrene, where the Oracle of Jupiter
Ammon was.

Asbestos, a kinde of precious stone of an
Iron colour, which being once fir'd cannot be
quencht.

Ascanius, the son of Aeneas, by
Creusa the daughter of Priamus, he
raigned in Italy 30 years, and built
Alba.

Ascaunces, (old word) as though.

Ascendant, an Astrological Term, it
being the point of the
Ecliptick, which riseth at some determinate
moment, when any one is born, it is also called the
Horoscope, it signifieth also Metaphorically, a
predominant, or powerfull influence over any one:
Cleopatra.

Ascertain, to assure.

Ascetick, (Greek) belonging to a Monk, or
Monastery.

Asclepiad, a verse consisting of four feet,
Spondee, Choriambus, and two Dactyls.

Ascribe, (Lat.) to attribute, to
impute.

Ashdown, or Assendown, which some
interpret the Mount of
Asses, a Town in Essex, where a great
battel was fought between Edward Iron-side, and
Canutus the Dane.

Asia, one of those four parts, into which
the whole world is divided, it was so called from,
Asia, wife, to Iapetus, and daughter of
Oceanus, and Thetis.

Asinine, (Lat.) belonging to an
Asse.

Askaunce, (old word) if by chance.

Askaunt, (old word) as, to look askaunt, to
look side-wayes.

Askes, (old word) ashes.

Asmodeus, (Greek) a friend of carnality,
the name of a certain spirit.

Asmotographers, (Greek) composers of
lessons to any instrument.

Asopus, a River of Boeotia running
by Thebes, which the Poets faign'd to have been
the father of Aegina, whom Jupiter
deflowr'd.

Asotus, (Greek) prodigal,
intemperate.

Aspect, (Lat.) a sight, also ones
countenance, or
presence, also a position of the stars, one toward
another.

Aspectable, (Lat) that may be seen, or
beheld.

Asper, a certain kinde of coyn, bearing the
value of a penny farthing of our money.

Asperation, (lat.) a making rough, or
sharp.

Asperity, (lat.) roughnesse.

Aspernate, (lat.) to despise, to
scorn.

Aspersion, (lat.) a sprinkling, or
bespattring, it is
also taken Metaphorically, for a casting a blemish upon
other mens reputation.



Asphaltites, a Lake in Judæa, where
Sodom and
Gomorrha stood, having been full of brimstone,
ever since it rained down upon
those Cities.


Asphodil, the name of a certain flowr,
otherwise called
Daffadil, or Narcissus.

Aspick, a little venemous Serpent.

Aspiration, (lat.) a breathing, also a note
over a Greek vowel, which hath the force of an
h.

Asportation, (lat.) a carrying away.

Assail, to set upon, to assault.

Assart, a Term in law, signifying an
offence committed in a
Forrest by plucking up the Woods by the roots, also to
Assart, is to set in order, to make glades in a
Wood, to lop off the branches of a Tree, to clear a ground
of shrubs.

An Assassine (Ital.) a Robber, or Murtherer
that kills another for gain.

Assay, (French) to prove, to try; an
Assayer of the King is an
Officer of the Mint, for the true trial of silver.

Assectation, (lat.) a following any one, an adhering to anothers
opinion.

Assentation, (lat.) a complying with anothers
opinion out of flattery, or dissimulation.

Assert, (lat.) to affirm, to
maintain.

Assesse, (Fr.) to set down a rate, to
tax.

Assestrix, (lat.) a Midwife, a
woman that is assistant to another.

Assets, (French) a Term in Common-law,
signifying goods sufficient wherewith the Heir,
or Executor may
discharge the Ancestors, or Testators Debts, or
Legacies.

Asseverate, (lat.) to affirm earnestly.

Assiduous, (lat.) dayly, observant, diligent.

Assigne, (French) a term in law, he that is
constituted by another, to do any
businesse, an assign
indeed is he whom the person
appoints, assign in law is he, whom the law
appoints.

Assimilation, (lat.) a likening, a resembling.

Assise, Order, Chaucer.

Assised, sure, firm, Idem.

Assist, (lat.) to help.

Assize, (French) a Term in law,
signifying a sitting of
Justices upon their Commission,
it is taken also for a Writ, also a setting down the price
of any commodity.

Association, (lat.) a being frequent in
company with another.

Assoyle, to acquit, to pardon, also to
answer,
Chaucer.

Assoylen, to declare; Idem.

Assuefaction, (lat.) an inuring, a
bringing one to any thing
by custome.

Assuetude, (lat.) use, custome.

Assume, (lat.) to take to ones self.

Assumpsit, a voluntary promise, whereby a
man takes upon him to perform any thing to another.

Assumption, (lat.) a taking to, also the
minor proposition of a syllogisme.

Astarites, a certain Chrystalline stone
having in the midst of it the resemblance of half a
Moon.

Asterisme, (Gr.) a constellation of stars.

Asterisk, (Greek) a little star, also a
mark in writing, having the form of a star.

Asterius, the name of a certain King of
Creet.

Asterlagour, a word used by Chaucer, signifying an
Astrolabe.

Astert, (old word) passed.

Asthma, (Greek) a certain disease, which causeth difficulty of
breathing.

Astipulation, (lat.) an agreement, an
assent, also a
witnesse.

Astonish, (lat.) to dismay, to
stupifie.

Astræa, the daughter of Jupiter
and Themis, or as
some say of Astræus and Aurora, she
was, for her Justice, taken up into
heaven, and plac't among
the twelve signs.

Astræus, the son of Crius (one of
the Titans) and
Eurybæa, he married Aurora, and begat
the winds, and the stars.

Astragal, a word used in
Architecture, as also in fortification, being a
certain ring, or circle about the neck of a Pillar, or a
piece of Ordnance.

Astriction, (lat.) a binding to.

Astriferous, (lat.) star-bearing.

Astringent, (lat.) binding, or making
costive.

Astroit, a precious stone, called in Latin Asteria,
wherein little streakes like the beams of a star
appear.

Astrolabe, a Mathematical instrument, to finde the motions, and
distances of stars, or to take any heights and depths
by.

Astrologie, (Greek) the art of
foretelling things to
come, by the motions and distances
of the stars.

Astromela, a Citie of the Province of Narbon in
France.

Astronomy, (Greek) an art teaching the
knowledge of the courses of the stars.

Asturia, a Province of Spain near
Portugall, so
called from the River Astura, the
Pyrenean Mountains are also called
Asturias.

Astute, (lat.) subtle, witty,
crafty.

Astyages, the father of Mandana,
and Grand-father of Cyrus.



Asyle, (Greek) a sanctuary, a place of refuge
for offenders.


Asyndeton, (Greek) a Rhetorital figure,
where comma's are put instead of
conjunction
copulatives.


A T

Atalanta, the daughter of
Schoeneus King of Scyrus, she being
swift of foot, it was proposed
among her suiters, that he, who could out-run her, should
have her for his wife, but many of them being overcome, at
length Hippomenes the son of Megacles,
who had received three golden Apples of Venus,
that had been gathered in the Hesperian Garden,
let them fall in the midst of the Race, and by that means
arrived at the end before her, also the name of a great
Huntresse of Arcadia, who gave the first wound to
the Caledonian Boar, and was
afterwards married to
Meleager.

Atchievement, (French) the performance of
some great exploit.

Atcheked, (old word) choaked.

Ateles, an Island famous for the
abundance of precious
Oyntments that grew there.

Aterst, (old word) in earnest, in
deed.

Athamas, the son of Aeolus, and
King of Thebes, he had by his wife Nephele,
Phryxus, and
Helle, who were so persecuted by Ino,
the daughter of Cadmus, whom their father married
that they fled away upon the Golden Ram, but
Helle falling off into the Sea, gave the name to
Hellespont, See Ino.

Atheisme, (Greek) ungodlinesse, a being of
no Religion.

Athelney, or Athelingy,  i. the
Isle of Nobles, a little
Island made by the River Thone
in Sommersetshire, where King Alfred
shrouded himself, when the Danes overran the
Kingdom, as Marius did anciently in the Lake of
Minturnus.

Athens, a famous Citie of Greece,
first called
Cecropia from Cecrops, afterwards
Athenæ from Athenæa, or
Minerva, who first found out the use of the
Olive-tree.

Athletical, (Greek) belonging to
wrastling.

Athol, a County in the South-part of
Scotland, bordering upon Perth, and
watered by the River
Amund.

Athos, a high Hill between
Macedon, and Thrace, which casts a
shadow as far as the Isle of Lemnos, upon the top
of this Hill is a Citie, now called Monte
Sancto.

Athroted, (old word) cloyed.

Atlantick Islands, two Islands upon the
Borders of Lybia, formerly called the
Fortunate Islands, or
the Hesperides, where were said to be the
Elysian fields.

Atlantick-Sea, a part of the
Mediterranean-Sea,
lying West-ward, it begins at the River Molucha,
and finishes at the promontory
Ampelusia.

Atlas, the son of Iapetus and
Asia, daughter
of Oceanus, who was faign'd by the Poets to
support heaven upon his shoulders,
also a Mountain of Mauritania, now called
Anchisa, by others Montes Claros,
into which the Poets faign
Atlas King of Mauritania,
to have been turn'd.

Atmosphære, (Greek) that same Region of
the aire, where vapours and exhalations are
ingendred.

Atom, (Greek) a mote in the sun-beams, also
a word used in Philosophy, being the smallest part of a
body that can be imagined.

Atonement, as it were, a making at one, a
reconcilement, or causing to agree.

Atramental, (Lat.) belonging to Ink.

Atrate, (Lat.) made black, also one in
mourning.

Atrick, an Usher of a Hall.

Atrocity, (Lat.) fiercenesse.

Atrophy, (Greek) a kinde of
consumption of the
body, which is caused by the meat, not turning into
nourishment.

Attachment, (French) a laying hands on, in
Common-law it signifieth a laying hold on by the force of
a Writ, it differeth from an Arrest, which lieth on the
body, and from a distresse which is upon land and goods,
this being upon body and goods.

Attainder, (French) a Term in law,
signifying the conviction of any person of fellony, or any
Crime whereof he was not convicted before.

Attaint, try'd, found out.

Attamed, (old word) set on broch.

Attaque, (French) an assault, an
incounter.

Attemperate, (Lat.) to make fit. to mix a
just proportion.

An Attendant, a servant.

Attenes (old word) at once.

Attentive, (Lat.) diligently
hearkning.

Attenuation, (Lat.) a making lesse.

Atterly, (old word) extreamly.

Attestation, (lat.) a proving by
witnesses.

Atthis, the daughter of Cranaus,
King of Athens, she died unmarried, and from her
the Countrey was called Attica, whereas it was
formerly called Actica from Actæus, the
first King thereof.



Attick, neat, elegant, from Attica, or
Athens, which was the Nursery of
Eloquence.


An Attiring, a dressing, or apparelling,
from Tiara, a Persian Ornament for the
head, also a Term in Heraldry.

Attoure, (old word) towards.

Attournment, (French) a Term in
Common-law, a turning
Tenant to a new Lord.

Attraction, (Lat.) a drawing to, an
allurement.

Attraits, (French) the same, also those
charming qualities, which have power to draw the
affections of men. Artamenes.

Attrebatii, the ancient name of those
people that inhabited that part of England, now
called Bark-shire.

Attrectation, (Lat.) handling, also a
wanton carriage towards a
woman.

Attribute, (Lat.) to give, to
impute.

Attrition, (Lat.) a rubbing, or wearing
against another thing.

Attwitte, (old word) to make
blame-worthy.

Atwin, (old word) asunder.


A V

Available, profitable.

Avant, (French) forward, also a Term of
disdain, as much as to say, away, out of my sight.

Avarice, (Lat.) covetousnesse.

Avaricum, a Town of Gallia,
Aquitanica, now called Bourges, by some
Chasteauneuf.

Aubades, (French) songs, or
instrumental musick,
sung, or play'd under any ones Chamber-window in the
morning, from Aube the morning.

Aubeney, or Albeney, see D'anbeney.

Auctour, (Lat.) an increaser, also the same
as Author.

Aucupation, (Lat.) fouling, also a greedy
looking after gain.

Audacity, (Lat.) boldnesse.

Audley, see Awdley.

Audience, (Lat.) hearing, also a great
concourse of people coming to hear any Oration delivered
in publick.

Auditor, (Lat.) a hearer, also an Officer
of the King, or any other great personage, appointed to
hear, and examin the accounts of all under Officers, and
to make up a general book,
which shews the difference between
their receipts and allowances.

Audry, the name of an English
Saint, the first foundresse of Ely Church, some
think it contracted from the Saxon word,
Ethelred.

Avenant, agreeable.

Avenage, (French) a certain quantity of
Oates, which a Landlord receives in stead of some other
duties.

Avenio, a Citie of Gallia
Narbonensis, which hath been the seat of divers
Popes, now called Avignon, this Citie hath seven
Palaces, seven Parishes, seven Monasteries, seven
Colledges, seven Inn's, and seven Gates.

Aventinus, one of the seven Hills of
Rome.

Avenue, (French) a Term in
fortification,
signifying the space that is left for
passage to and fro, in,
and out a Camp, Garrison,
or Quarter.

Aver, (old word) bribery.

Aver, (French) affirm, to justifie.

Average, from the old Latin word
Averia, which
signifies a beast; it being a service,
which a Tenant does unto the Lord by horse, or carriage of
horse, and so the Kings Averages are
the Kings carriages by
horse, or cart, it is also a contribution that Merchants 
and others make, towards the losses of those, who have
their goods cast into the Sea for the safeguard of the
ship.

Averdupois, (French) it signifies in
Common-law, a weight
of 16 Ounces, whereas Troy-weight hath but 12. also such
Merchandizes as are
weighed by this weight.

Averie, a place where Oates, or
Provender for the Kings
horses was kept, or a Christian name, signifying as much
as given in wish from the
Dutch Alberia.

Averment, a Term in law, when the
Defendant offers to
justifie an exception pleaded in abatement of the
Plaintiffs act.

Avernus, a Lake in Campania near
Baiæ, whose vapours were so deadly, that birds
were kill'd as they flew over, which made the ancients
think it to be a descent into Hell.

Averpenny, money contributed towards the
Kings Averages.

Averruncation, (Lat.) a Term in
Husbandry, it being a
lopping off of superfluous branches.

Averruncus, a certain God among the Romans, who was said to avert all
evils, as Hercules among the Greeks, was
called Alexicacus.

Aversion, (Lat.) a secret hatred without
any apparent reason, it may be taken in the same sence as
Antipathy. Artamenes, also a turning away.

Aufidena, a Citie of Italy among
the Caraceni,
which is yet standing.



Augeas, King of Elis, the son of
Sol and Nauphridame, he had a stable
which held 3000 Oxen, which Hercules cleansed
by bringing in the River Alpheus, but being
denied his pay, he killed Augeas, and made his
son Phileus King.


Augmentation, (Lat.) an increasing, the
Court of augmentation, was a Court
erected by Henry
the eighth, for the increase of the Revenues of the Crown,
by the suppression of
Abbies and religious houses.

Augre, a Carpenters tool, a wimble.

Augrim, the same as Algorithme,
skill in numbring.

Augrimstones, stones to cast account
with.

Augurie, (Lat.) South-saying,
Divination by the
voices, or flying of birds.

Augures-staff, a certain wand, which the
Augures used to hold in their hand, when they
made their divinations.

August, Royal, Majestical, Illustrious,
from Octavius Augustus,
the second Roman
Emperour, after whom
all the succeeding
Roman Emperours, were
honoured with that Title, also the name of the sixth
moneth from March, otherwise called
Sextilis.

Augustal's, (Lat.) feasts kept in honour of
Augustus.

Augustan Confession, (Lat.) the confession
of faith made by the Protestants at
Auspurgg in
Germany, in the year 1530.

Augustin, or Austin, the name of
one of the fathers, who was Bishop of Hippo, also
a proper name of divers men from Augustus, i.
Majestical.

Augustin, or Austin Fryers, an
Order of Fryers, of the institution of St.
Austin.

Augustinians, a Sect of Hereticks, otherwise
called Sacramentaries, who hold that Heaven Gates are not
opened till the general
Resurrection, they were instituted by Andreas
Carolostadius,
in the year 1524. afterwards confirmed by
Augustin a Bohemian.

Aviary, (Lat.) a great Cage, or place where
birds are kept.

Avice, a womans name, in Latin 
Hawisia, or Helwisa, contracted from
Hildevig, signifying
in Saxon, Lady Defence.

Avidity, (Lat.) covetousnesse,
greedinesse of
gain.

Auiso, (Spanish) an advertisement, or
advice.

Aulick, (Lat.) belonging to the
Court.

Aulis, a Haven in Boeotia, where
the Grecian
Princes met, and joyned forces to go to the siege of
Troy.

Aulnegeor, (French) an Officer of the King,
who looks to the Assize of Woollen Cloath, made throughout
the land, and hath two Seals ordained him for that
purpose.

Aumener, (old word) a Cupboard.

Aumer, (old word) Amber.

Auncient demeasn, a Term in Common-law,
signifying a publick Tribute by a
Tenure, whereby all
Mannours belonging to the Crown, in the dayes of
Edgar, or Saint Edward did hold.

Auntreth, (old word) maketh
adventure.

Avocation, (Lat.) a calling away.

Avoirdupois, see Averdupois.

Avouch, (French) to maintain, to
justifie.

Avowable, justifiable.

Avowry, a Term in law, when one takes a
distresse for Rent, and he, who is
distrained sues a
Replevy, now he that took the distresse justifying the
act, is said to avow.

Aurea Chersonesus, a Peninsula of India, by some called
Melepa, by others Japan.

Aureat, (lat.) Golden.

Aurelia, a Citie of Gallia
Celtica, so called
from Aurelius the Emperour, now
called Orleance,
it is scituate upon the bank of the River
Loir.

Aurenches, the name of an ancient
family, who were
heretofore Barons of Folkstone
in Kent, they are stiled in Latin,
Recordes de
Abrincis.

Auricular, (lat.) belonging to the ear,
whence Auricular confession.

Auriferous, (lat.) Gold-bearing, an
Epithet belonging to the
River Tagus.

Auriflamb, the holy Standard of
France, which used to be born in the Wars against
Infidels, having on the top a purple Ensign, it was lost
in a battle against the Flemings.

Auriga, a Constellation in the firmament
upon the Horns of Taurus.

Aurigation, (lat.) the guiding of a
Chariot, or Coach.

Aurigia, a Town of Hispania
Boetica, now called Arion.

Aurigraphy, (Greek) a writing in
Gold.

Aurney, or Aurigney, contracted
from Alderney,
an Island in the Brittish Sea,
anciently called
Arica.

Aurora, the daughter of Hyperion
and Thea, mother of Lucifer and the windes, she
snatch't away Tithonus, the brother of
Laomedon, whom, when he was old, she
restored to youth by the
virtue of Herbs, and had Memnon by him.

Aurum potabile, Gold made liquid, and
Medicinable.



Auscultation, (lat.) a hearkning unto, or
obeying.


Auses, a people of Africa, among
whom the Virgins used to combat in honour of
Minerva, those that were killed were
accounted no maids, and
she that fought most valiantly was carried in a Triumphant
Chariot, about the River
Tritonis.

Ausones, a very ancient people of
Italy, Neighbours to the Osci and
Circeii,
being that part where now
stands Beneventum,
they were so called from Auson, the son of
Vlysses and Capso, who built
Arunca thereabouts.

Auspical, (lat.) belonging to
Sooth-saying.

Auspitious, (lat.) lucky, happy, from
Auspices
Sooth-sayers.

Austere, (lat.) sour, crabbed,
stern.

Austral, (lat.) Southern.

Austrasia, that part which contains
Brabant and Lorrain, it was anciently
reckoned a part of France, and was a Kingdom of it self, having
Mets for its chief seat, there being anciently in
France four Kingdoms,
Austrasie, Soissons, Orleans, and
Paris.

Austria, a part of Germany by
Danubius, anciently called the upper
Pannonia,
in this Countrey is seated the imperial Citie of
Vicenna.

Austromancy, (Greek) a kinde of
divination by observing
the South-winde.

Authentick, (Greek) allowed, approved by
good Authors.

Autoleon, a Captain of the
Crotoniates, making war against the Locri, who
alwayes left a room void for Ajax, as if he had
been present himself, but Antoleon breaking
into the empty place, was
wounded by Ajax his Ghost.

Autolicus, the son of Mercury and
Telauge, the
daughter of Lucifer, he received this gift from
his father, that whatsoever he stole he might change it
into what form soever he would to keep himself from
being deprehended, he
ravish't Anticlia, the daughter of
Sisyphus, who being with childe was given to
Lærtes, and brought forth
Vlisses.

Autology, (Greek) a speaking of, or to ones
self.

Autogeneal, (Greek) self-begotten.

Autocrasie, (Greek)
self-subsistence.

Automatous, (Greek) having a motion within
it self.

Antonoe, the daughter of Cadmus,
King of Thebes and Hermione, she was
married to Aristeus, and brought forth
Actæon.

Autonomy, (Greek) a living after ones own
law.

Autoptical, (Greek) self beholding.

Autremite, another attire, a word used by
Chaucer.

Autumnal, (Lat.) belonging to Autumne, one
of the four quarters of the year.

Auturgie, (Greek) a self-working.

Avulsion, (Lat.) a pulling away
from.

Aux, (a Term in Astronomy) the same as
Absis, See Absis.

Auxiliary, (Lat.) aiding, or assisting, as auxiliary forces were such
as were sent the Romans from other Countreys, their
confederates, and
ally's.

Auxilium ad filium militem faciendum, &c. a Writ directed
to the Sheriffe of every County, where the King, or other
Lord hath Tenants, to leavy of them reasonable aid toward
the Knighting of his eldest son, or marrying of his eldest
daughter.

Award, judgement, arbitration.

Awaite, a watching circumspection, also a
tarrying.

Awaites, ambushments.

Awdley end, the name of a stately house in
Essex, once an Abby, afterwards the
dwelling house of the
Aldethelighe's, or Awdly's, an ancient
family, it is now in the possession of the Earles of
Suffolk.

Awhaped, (old word) amazed.

Awhere, (old word) desire.

Awning, a sayl made of Canvasse, which is
spread over the ship above the deck to keep away the
sun.

Awreketh, (old word) revengeth.

Axillary, (Lat.) belonging to the arm
pit.

Axinomancy, (Greek) a divination by
hatchets.

Axiome, (Greek) a position in a
sentence, a maxim in any
art.

Axicle, (Latin) a little board, lath, or
shingle.

Axis, (Lat.) an Axel-tree, the Diameter of
the world.

Axminster, or Axanminster, a Town
in Cornwall, famous for the Tombs of the
Saxon Princes, slain at the battle of
Brunaburg.

Ay, (old word) an Egg.

Ayde, the same as aid, help, succour, also
a Term in law, signifying a subsidy, lone, or tax due from
subjects to their Soveraign, or from Tenants to their
Landlord.

Aye, (old word) for ever.

Azamoglans, those that are destined to be
Janizary's are so called, before they are inrolled in
pay.



Azebone, (Arab.) a Term in Astrology, the head
of the 16th. mansion.


Azimeck, (Arab.) the starre, called the
Virgins spike.

Azemen, degrees in Astronomy, are those
degrees, which, when the native is infected with any
inseparable disease, as blindnesse, dumnesse,
&c. or defective in any member, are supposed
to ascend at his birth.

Azimuth, a Term in Astronomy, the
Azimuth Circles
are those, which meet in the vertical point, and passe
through all the degrees of the Horizon.

Azure, a sky-colour, a light blue, it is
most properly termed Azure in blazon, or
Heraldry.

Azyme, (Greek) unleavened,
unmingled.

Azymes, a solemne feast kept for seven
dayes, wherein it was not lawfull to eat leavened
bread.


B

BAal, an Assyrian word, signifying
Jupiter, or
Lord.

Babel, or Babylon, so called from the
confusion of languages,
which was there caused, it
was anciently the chief seat of the Assyrian
Monarchs, being built by Nimrod, and afterwards
walled by Semiramis, it is now called
Bagadeth, or Bagda.

Bablac, a Town in Oxfordshire,
situate upon the River Isis, where Sir R.
Vere, Earle of Oxford, Marquesse of
Dublin, and Duke of Ireland, being in
great favour and Authority with King Richard the
second, was defeated by the Nobles, forced to swim over
the River, and to fly his Countrey.

Babys, the brother of Marsyas, he
committing the like
insolency as his brother, was also to have been flead by
Apollo, but that he was saved at the intercession
of Pallas.

Bacchanals, the feast of
Bacchus.

Baccharach, or Bachrag wines are
those, which we call Rhenish wines, from
Baccharag, a
Citie situate upon the Rhine

The Errata correct the running-on of this and the following entries. 



Bacchus, the
inventour of wine, he was the son of Jupiter and
Semele, who desiring to lye with Jupiter
in all his glory was burnt up with Thunder, and
Bacchus being cut out of her Womb, was inserted
into Jupiter's Thigh, untill the birth were
mature, he is also called Dionysius, Liber Pater,
and Osiris.

Bacciferous, (Lat.) bearing Berries.

Bacheler, (French) an unmarried man, also a
Bacheler of a Company, a Bacheler of Arts, is he, who
takes the first degree in the profession of any Art, or
Science, the second being licenciate, and the last Doctor,
A Bacheler Knight, vide Knight.

Backberond, (Saxon) a Term in
Common-law, signifying
a Thief that is taken with the manner, (being followed
with huy and cry) with those things he hath stollen,
whether it be money, or any thing else, it is by some
taken for an offender against Vert, or Venison in the
Forrest.

Bactriana, a Province of Scythia,
beyond Assyria.

Badbury, a Town in Dorsetshire,
where King Edward the Elder put to flight his
Cozin Aethelwald, who had conspired with the
Danes against him.

Badge, the same as Armes, or
Cognisance.

Badger, a Carrier of Corn, or like
provision from one
place, to transport it to another.

Badinage, (French) foolery,
buffonry.

Badonicus, the ancient name of a Hill in
Sommersetshire, now called
Bannesdown-hill, where King Arthur
defeated the English Saxons in a great
battail.

Boetica, a part of Spain, formerly
so called from the River
Boetis, now called Gnadalquivir.

Bagatel, (French) a toy, a trifle.

Baggeth, (old word) disdaineth.

Baile, (French) a Term in Common-law,
signifying the taking charge of one arrested upon action,
either Civil, or Criminal, under
surety taken for his appearance at a day, and place
certainly assigned. see Main-prize.

Baily, or Bailiffe, (French) a
Magistrate appointed, within a Province, or præcinct, to
execute Justice, to maintain the peace, and to preserve
the people from wrongs and vexations, and is principal
Deputy to the King, or Supream Lord, also the
Officers of each hundred,
and of Towns Corporate
are called Bayliffs, there are also Bayliffs of husbandry
belonging to private men, who are Lords of
Mannours.

Bailywick, the Jurisdiction of a
Baily.

Bain, (French) a bath, or hot house.

Bainards Castle, a house in
London, belonging
at this day to the Earles of Pembrock,
it was so called from William
Bainard, Lord of
Dunmow, whose possession formerly it was.

Baisemaines, (Fr.) kissing of the hands,
Complementing.

Baiton Kaiton, the belly of the Whale, an
Arabick word.

Baize, a fine sort of Freeze, from
Baii, a Citie of Naples, where it was
first made.



Balade, (French) a Ballet, or roundelay, also a
Dance.


Balasse, a Saxon word, signifying
Gravel, laid in the bottom of a ship, to keep it
upright.

Balatron, (Ital.) a babler, a prating
knave.

Balcone, (Ital.) a bay-window.

Baldwin, (Germ.) a proper name,
signifying bold victor,
and answering to the Greek Thrasymachus.

Bale, (French) a pack of Merchants
wares.

Balefull, sorrowfull, woefull.

Balk, (Dutch) a ridge between two
furrows.

Ball, (French) a dancing meeting.

Balladin, (French) a dancer of
Galliards.

A Ballance, (French) a pair of
Scales.

Ballast, see Balasse.

Balliol Colledge, a Colledge in the
University of
Oxford, built by John Balliol of
Bernards Castle, in the Bishoprick of
Durham, and father
of Balliol, King of Scots.

Ballist, (Lat.) an Engin to cast, or shoot
stones.

Ballon, (French) a Term in
Architecture, signifying the round Globe of a
Pillar, also a great Ball.

Ballotation, a kind of casting lots, or
making election by
Balls.

Ballustrad, a Term in Architecture,
signifying a jutting
out of a window, or portal.

Balm, the juyce, or Oyl of a certain plant
growing in Judæa, otherwise called
Balsamum, or
Opobalsamum.

Balmerinoch, an Abby in Fife, a
County of Scotland, built by Queen
Ermengard wife to King William.

Balneary, (Lat.) a bathing place.

Balthasar, an Hebr. word, signifying
without treasure, it was
the name of one of the wise-men, who came out of the East
to worship our Saviour. See Sands his
Travels 181.

Baltia, an Island in the German Ocean, by
Xenophon called Lampsacenus, now
Scandia, or Scandinavia, from this Island the
Baltick Sea derives its name, which
Philemon calls Marimorusa, Hecatæus Amalchium.

Bambalio, a faint-hearted fellow.

A Band, (French) a Company of foot
Souldiers.

Bandie, (French) to follow a
faction.

Banditi, (Ital.) out-laws from
Bando, a Proclamation, because they are condemned
by Proclamation, the Dutch call them
Nightinghals, and Free-booters.

Bandle, an Irish measure of two
foot in length.

A Bandog, a Mastive.

Bandon, (French) free Licence, or
liberty, also a company,
or Sect.

Bandore, (Ital.) a kinde of Musical
instrument.

Bane, poyson, destruction.

Banes, (French) in Canon-law are
Proclamations, but
more especially taken for the publick proclaiming of
Marriage in Churches.

Bangle-ear'd, having hanging ears like a
Spaniel.

Bangue, a pleasant drink used in the
Eastern Countreys.

A Banker, one who in forreign Countreys
delivers forreign money for his own
Countreys Coyn.

Bankrout, or Bankrupt, a decoctor,
one that hath consumed his estate.

Bannavenna, or Bennaventa, a Town
in Northhamptonshire, anciently so called, now
Wedon in the street, once the Royal seat of
Wolpher, King of the Mercians, and by his
daughter Werbury, a holy Virgin
converted into a Monastery.

Banner, (French) a Standard, or
Ensign.

Banneret, or Knight Banneret, vide
Knight.

Banneroll, (French) a little Flagge, or
Streamer.

Baptisme, (Greek) a Sacrament used in the
Church, for the initation of children into the Christian
Religion, it signifies a washing, or dipping in
water.

Baptist, (Greek) a proper name, first
given to St. John,
who was the first that baptized.

Baptistery, (Greek) a Vessel to wash in, a
Font to baptize in.

Barbara, the name of a holy woman,
martyred under the
Emperour Maximian, the word signifieth in Latin,
strange, or unknown.

Barbaria, the chief part of
Africk, which is divided into four Kingdomes,
Morocco, Fesse, Telessina, and
Tunis.

Barbarisme, (Greek) a rudenesse of
behaviour, a clownish
pronunciation of words.

Barbe, a mask, or visard.

Barbel, a kinde of fish, a little
Sammon.

Barbican, (French) a Term in
architecture, and
fortification, an out-work in a building, a bulwark, a
watch Towr.



Barbitist, a Lutinist.


Barce, the chief Citie of
Lybia.

Bards, the ancient Poets among the
Brittains, and
the Gaules, Bardes also, or barbes, signifie the
trappings, or caparisons of horses.

Bardulph, (Germ.) from
Bertulph.

Bargaret, (old word) a Sonnet, or
Ballet.

Barkary, a tan house, or house where they
put barks of Trees.

Bark, the Forresters say a Fox
barketh.

Bark-fat, a Tanners tub.

Bark-man, a Boat-man, from Bark, a
little ship, or
boat.

Barm, yest, the flowring, or
over-decking of Beer,
also a lap.

Barm-cloath, an Apron,
Chaucer.

Barn, or Bern, a Northern word,
signifying a childe.

Barnabas, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Hebrew a son of comfort.

Baroco, a Term in Logick, being one of the
moods of the second figure of a
Syllogisme, wherein
the first proposition is a universal affirmative, the two
second particular
Negatives.

Baron, (French) a title of Honour, as much
as Lord, Barons are of three sorts. First, by Dominion and
Jurisdiction, Barons of the King, whose Baronies were
Capitales. Secondly, Barons of the subjects holding not of
the King, but by mesnalty.
Thirdly, Lords of
Mannours.

Baronage, a tax, or
subsidy of aide, to be levied for the King
out of the
Precincts of Baronies.

Barre, a Term in Common-law, is, when the
Defendant in any action pleadeth a Plea, which is a
sufficient answer; also place where causes are pleaded,
also a Term in Blazon,
being composed of two equidistant lines drawn overthwart
the Escutcheon, and differeth from the Fesse, in that it
is not confined to the Fesse-point.

Barfee, a fee of twenty pence, which
every Prisoner acquitted of
Felony payeth to the Goaler.

Barratour, (French) a Term in Common-law,
signifying a common wrangler, one that setteth men at
variance, causing them to implead one another at the Barre
of Justice.

Barren signes are Libra, Leo,
Virgo.

Barricado, (Spanish) a defence against an
enemies assault, made of empty barrels fill'd with
earth.

Barriers, (French) a certain martial
exercise (in
Latin called palæstra) of armed men
fighting with short swords, within
certain limits, or lists
which sever them from the spectators.

Barrister, a pleader at the
Barre, those who
after seven years study of the Law are admitted to plead;
and stand without the Barre, are called utter Barristers,
but a Serjeant, or
Princes Attorny, or any of the Kings
Councel, are admitted to plead within
the Bar, and are called inner-Barristers.

Barsalona, or Barcellona, 
anciently called Barcino, or Colonia
Faventia, the chief Citie of Catalonia in
Spain.

Barter, from the Latin word
vertere, to truck, or change.

Bartholomew, (Hebr.) a proper name,
signifying the son of
him that maketh the waters
to mount.

Barton, a place to keep Poultry in, from the Dutch word
bært to bring forth, and
Hoen a Hen.

Barulet, a Term in Heraldry, the fourth part of a Bar.

Bascuence, (Spanish) the language of a Countrey of Spain, called
Biscay.

Base, the bottom, or foundation of any
thing, also the foot of a pillar, also the deepest part in
Musick, being the foundation
of the rest, also a kinde of fish, called a
Sea-wolf.

Base-Court, a Term in Law, any Court that
is not of Record, as Court-Baron.

Base estate, or base fee, is a holding at
the will of the Lord.

Baselards, (old word) Daggers,
Wood-knives.

Basil, an Herb so called,
of a very
fragrant smell, also a
proper name signifying Royal, or Kingly.

Basilical, (Greek) Royal,
Magnificent.

Basilick vain, see vein.

Basilisk, (Greek) a kinde of a Serpent,
called a Cockatrice, also a long piece of Ordnance, called
in Italian Basilisco, also a star, called the
Lions heart.

Basinet, a little basin.

Basis, see Base.

Baskervil, the name of a very eminent
family, descended from a
Niece of Gunora, that famous Norman Lady, they
had their ancient seat at Erdsley, a Town in
Herefordshire.

Bassa, a Commander over Souldiers
among the
Turks.

Bastard, signifies in the Common-law, one
begotten out of Wedlock.

Bastardise, to corrupt, to adulterate, to
change out of its own kinde into a worse.

Bastile, or Bastillion, (French) a
fortresse,



or fortification, the chief fortresse of Paris,
is called la Bastile, being also the chief
prison of the Kingdom of
France.


Bastinado, (Spanish) a banging with a
Cudgel.

Bastion, (French) a Skonce, or Block-house,
called also a Cullion head.

Baston, (French) a Bat, or Cudgel, it
signifieth also in the Statute Law, one of the servants,
or Officers, to the Warden of the Fleet, that attendeth
the Kings Court, for the taking of such men to Ward, as
are committed by the Court.

Bastonado, see Bastinado.

Batavia, a part of lower Germany,
scituate upon the River
Rhene, called Holland.

Bath, a famous Citie in
Sommersetshire, so called from the hot Baths of
Medicinal waters, which are there by Antoninus
called Aquæ
solis, by Ptolomy Ὑδατα θέρμα, some
report them to have been found out by Bleyden a
Magician, others by Julius Cæsar, others by an
ancient Brittish King.

Battail-field, a place near
Shrewsbury, so called from the great battail
fought there between King Henry the fourth, and
Edmund Mortimer,
Earle of March, where Sir Henry Piercy,
called Hotsspur was slain.

Battalion, (French) the main battle of an
Army.

Battle-bridge, a place in
York-shire, otherwise
called Stanford-bridge, where Harald
King of England slew Harald Hardreak
King of Norwey.

Battlements, the Turrets of houses built
flat.

Battology, (Greek) a vain repetition of words.

Battus, a certain keeper of Mares, to whom
Mercury delivered several Oxen, which he had stollen from
Apollo, keeping Admetus his heards, and
coming to him afterwards
in another shape,
he corrupted him with gifts to deliver the Oxen, but
seeing his perfidiousnesse,
he turned him into a stone, called Index.

Batune, a Term in Heraldry, and seemeth to
be the fourth part of a bend Sinister onely, it toucheth
not the chief, nor the base point.

Bavaria, a great Dukedom in
Germany.

Baubels, (old word) Jewels.

Baucis, the wife of Philemon, who
intertained
Jupiter and Mercury. see Philemon.

Baud, a brave, a Ruffian, from the
French word Ribaud.

Baudkin, a kinde of tinsel, or stuff that
glisters like sparkles.

Baudon, custody, a word used by
Chaucer.

Baudrick, furniture, also a sword-girdle,
also an old fashion'd Jewel.

Baulk, (old word) to crosse.

Baulm, a certain Herb called
Beewort.

Bawsin, (old word) bigge, grosse.

Bay, a stop for water, a road for ships,
also a brown red colour, being the colour of the
Palm-tree, Chaucer also useth it for a
stake.

Bay-window, a window that boundeth out in a
round form.


B E

Beacon, from the Dutch word Bekennen to
give notice, a light fastened upon a high pole to give
warning of an enemies approach.

Beaconage, money paid for the
maintaining of
Beacons.

Beads, from the Dutch word beden to pray, a
certain number of prayers, at the end of which it is the
custome to drop a bead.

Beadle, (from the Dutch word Bedel, a
Cryer) one that waites upon a Magistrate with a white wand
to make any Summons, an Officer, especially belonging to a
University, also an
Officer of the Forrest, that makes all manner of
garnishments for the Court of the Forrest, and makes all
manner of Proclamations, as
well within the Court of the Forrest as without.

A Beadroll, (Saxon) a list of such as
Priests use to pray for in the Church.

Beakehead, in Navigation, is that which is
fastened to the stem of the ship, and is supported with a
knee which is fastened into the stem.

Beam, in hunting, is that whereon the
starts of a Stags head grow.

Bearesfoot, an Herb otherwise called Brank
Ursin, or Beares claw.

Bearers, a term in Law signifying
maintainers or
abettors; also a term in Heraldry,
signifying those that have coat-armours,
distinguisht from others by tincture
and differences.

Bear in, is when a ship sailes before, or
with a large wind into a harbour, or
channel, she is said to
bear in with the harbour or channel.



Bear off, when a ship goes more room than her
course doth lie, she is said to bear off from the land.


Beasel or collet of a ring, that wherein
the stone is inchac't.

Beastail, (French) all manner of
cattel or beasts, as oxen,
sheep, &c.

Beate, a term in hunting, a hare or cony
when they make a noise, are said to beat or tapp.

Beatitude, (Lat.) blessednesse,
happinesse.

Beatrix, (Lat.) a womans name, she that
makes happy.

Beavis, the proper name of a man,
contracted from
Bellovesus.

Beauchamp, a name of great honour and
eminency from the time of King Henry the second,
especially since Cicily de Fortibus
descended from the Earles de
Ferrariis matcht
into their Family of this name were anciently the Earles
of Warwick, the Barons of Kidderminster, and of Powick. Of
late ages, the Title of Vicount
Beauchamp, hath been
conferred upon the Family
of Seimours. In old Records it is written de Bello
Campo.

Beaumont, the name of one of the
greatest Families of the
Nation, descended from John County of Brene in
France, who for his valour was preferred to the
kingdom of Jerusalem.

Beaupleading, a term in Law, fair
pleading.

Beau Sir, fair sir, a word used by
Chaucer.

Bec, a Phrygian word, signifying bread,
which was the first word pronounced by certain children,
whom Psammeticus the Egyptian King caused to be
brought up in a forrest, by which he concluded the
Phrygians to be the most ancient people.

Becchick, medicaments, such as are
composed for the
asswaging of a cough, as Lozenges, Licorice, Pills,
&c.

Becomingnesse, neatnesse, handsomenesse,
Artamenes.

Bede, the name of a learned English Monk,
who lived near Newcastle upon Tine; he had the title given
him of venerable
Bede, as well in his life time, as since his
death.

Beddeth, (a term in hunting) applied to a
Roe when it lies down in any place.

Bedellium, a kind of gum.

Bedlem, or Bethlem, (an Hebr.
word, signifying a house of bread) a place where mad
people are kept.

Bedpheer, (Sax.) a bedfellow.

Beemot, the flat key in musick.

Beesom, a broom.

Beestings, quasi breasting, the first milk
after birth.

Beet, a certain Garden herb.

Beglerbeg, a Supream Commander
under the Great Turk: there
are but two who have this command, the one is called
Beglerbeg of Greece, the other of
Natolia.

Beguines, an order of Religious women who
are all old.

Behight, (old word) promised.

Beknew, (old word) learnt out.

Behiram, a Feast among the Turks, where
they use to pardon all injuries.

Belamy, (French) fair friend.

Belchier, (French) good
countenance.

Belchose, (French) fair thing.

Beleagre, to besiege, from the Dutch
Belegren, to sit near.

Belgia, the Country of the Belgæ,
or Low-countrymen, lying between the
River Sequana, and
the Rhene. It is divided into 17 Provinces, also
the people anciently
inhabiting that part of England now called
Sommersetshire, Hantshire, and
Wiltshire, were
called Belgæ, in regard they came thither
originally out of Gallia Belgica.

Belides, the fifty daughters of
Danaus, who married the fifty sons of
Aegyptus, who all killed their husbands except
one.

Belizarius, Captain of the Emperour
Justinians armies, who overthrew the
Persians in the East, the
Vandals in Africa, the Goths in Italy,
and at last had his eyes put out by Justinian, and was
forc't to beg his bread in a poor cottage.

Bell, in the Chaldæan language
signifies the Sun who
was worshipped under that name by the Caldæans and
Assyrians.

Bellatrice, (Lat.) a woman warriour.

Bellatrix, the left shoulder of
Orion.

Bellerophon, the son of Glaucus
King of Epire, against whom Sthenobæa
the wife of Prætus King of Argos
conspired, because he refused her inticements; but he
having overcome all
difficulties, was commanded
at last to kill the Chimæra, which he did with the help
of Neptune, who sent him a flying horse called
pegasus, which was afterwards plac't among the celestial
Signs.



Belleth, a term in hunting, as when the
Forresters say, a Roe Belleth.


Bellipotent, (Lat.) strong in armes,
powerful in war.

Belligeration, (Lat.) a waging war.

Bellona, who is also called Enyo,
the Goddesse of War, and sister of Mars, some
think her to be the same with Minerva.

Bellow, the Foresters apply this word to
the Hart, and say, the Hart belloweth.

Belluine, (Lat.) pertaining to beasts, of a
cruel bestial disposition.

Bel-vedere, (Ital.) pleasant to
behold, the name of the
Popes Palace in Rome.

Belus, the second, or, as some say, the
first King of Assyria, who when he died, was
worshipped as a god. Also the son of Epaphus and
Lybia, was called Belus Priscus, who
married Isis, and had two sons,
Aegyptus and
Danaus, Belus hath also been taken for
Jupiter, as Nimrod for
Saturn.

Belzebub, an Hebrew word, signifying the
god of flyes, and is used in Scripture for the prince of
the Devils.

Bement, (old word) lamented.

Bemes, (old word) trumpets.

Benacus, a lake in Lombardy, which
is said to have golden sands.

Benan, a Star in the taile of
Helme.

Bend, used by Chaucer for a
muffler, a caul, a kercher. Also a term in
Heraldry, being an
ordinary extended between two opposite points of the
Escutcheon: viz. the dexter chief, and the
sinister base.

Bendlet, is also a term in Heraldry,
being a subdivision of the
bend.

Benedictines, certain religious Monks
instituted by St. Benedict.

Benefice, (Lat.) a spiritual
promotion.

Benes, (old word) bones.

Benefactour, (Lat.) a doer of good
turnes.

Benet, the proper name of a man,
contracted from
Benedictus.

Beneplacitie, (Lat.) a well
pleasing.

Benevolence, (Lat.) good will.

Benevolent Planets, are Jupiter
and Venus.

Benjamin, an Hebr. name, the son of the
right hand, as also a gum.

Benigne, (Lat.) favourable.

Benimmeth, (old word) bereaveth.

Benisons, (French) blessings.

Bennavenna, see Bannavenna.

Benoni, an Hebr. name, signifying the son
of sorrow.

Bereft, (old word) deprived of.

Berenice, the daughter of Ptolemæus
Philadelphus and
Arsinoe, whom Ptolemæus
Lagus her brother
married. She when her husband made an Expedition, vowed to
dedicate her hair to
Venus if he returned safe, which afterwards not
being to be found, Conon the Mathematician
feigned to have been translated to heaven and plac't
among the Stars.

Beris, a high hill in America, on
the top of which some hold that many people were saved in
the great Deluge.

Berkhamsted, a Town in
Hertfortshire, where Frederick Abbot of
St. Albans, ministered
an oath to William the
Conquerour, in
presence of Arch-Bishop Lanfranc, to observe
inviolably the ancient laws of this Nation.

Bern, the chief City of Helvetia,
or Swizzerland.

Bernacles, a sort of birds which breed out
of the rotten wood of trees growing by the sea side,
especially in the North parts of Scotland, and the Islands
thereabouts; They are
also called Claik-geese, and Soland-geese.

Bernard, from the Dutch word
Beornhart, i.
e. beares heart, the proper name of a learned Monk of
Burgundy, who entred
into the Monastery of Cisteaux.

Bernard Colledge, a Colledge in
Oxford, re-edified by Sir Thomas White,
Citizen of London, and called by a new name,
Trinity Colledge, as Durham Colledge was
repaired by Sir Thomas Pope, and dedicated to St.
John Baptist.

Bernardines, an Order of Monks,
instituted by
Robert, Abbot of the above-named Monastery,
whereof St. Bernard was the chief: they were also
called Cistertian Monks.

Bernet, a Town in Hertfordshire,
famous for the great battle
fought between the two Houses of York and
Lancaster, where Rich. Nevil Earle of
Warick was slain.

Berry, a Saxon word, signifying a
dwelling house, a Lord of
a Mannours seat.

Berth, convenient room at sea to moor a
ship in.

Bertha, a womans name, signifying in the
German tongue, bright or famous.

Berthinsec, or Birdinsec, a law in
Scotland,
whereby a man cannot be hanged for stealing a sheep, or
so much meat as



he can carry upon his back in a sack, but onely
scourged.


Bertram, an herb called pellitory of
Spain, also a proper name. see Ferdinando.

Berubium, a Town in Strathnahern
in Scotland, now called Vrehead.

Besant, an ancient coin of Gold,
otherwise called
Bisantine, from Byzantium: i. e.
Constantinople, where it used to be coined. It is
uncertain what value it is of; some attribute to it the
value of a Ducket. It is also a term in Heraldry, by which
they understand plates of Gold,
containing 104 pound
and two ounces of Troy weight, in value 3750 pound ster.
They were round and smooth, without any representation on
them.

Besieging, is when a Planet is placed
between the bodies of the
two malevolents.

Besestein, or Bisestano, the name
of the chief Exchange or Market-place in
Constantinople.

Besyen, trouble.

Bet, (old word) better, also
quickly.

Bete, (old word) help, boot.

Beten, (old word) to kindle.

Bethlem, see Bedlem.

Betle, or Betre, a kind of Indian
plant, called Bastard-pepper.

Betonie, a medicinal plant, so called,
having many soveraign
vertues.

Betrassed, (old word) deceaved.

Betreint, (old word) sprinkled.

Betroth, from the Dutch word
Betrouwen, to make
sure, to promise one in marriage.

Beverage, (French) a mingled drink.

Bevy, a troop, a company. The
Forresters say, a Bevy of Roes.

Bewreck, (old word) revenged.

Bewryen, (old word) bewray'd.

Bezill, see Beasel.

Bezoar, a pretious stone, bred in the maw
of a Goat.


B I

Bialacoyl, (old word) fair
welcoming.

Biace, or Bias, (French) that
which makes the boule to run obliquely.

Bibacity, (Lat.) the immoderate love of
drink.

Bibliopolist, (Greek) a Book-seller.

Bibliotheque, (Greek) a study of books, a
library.

Bice, a certain blue colour used by
Painters.

Bid, a boon, (old word) to desire a
request.

Bid-ale, the setting up of one decayed in
his estate, by the liberality of friends invited or bid to
a Feast.

Bicipital, (Lat.) having two heads.

Bicorporeal, signes, are those signes which represent two bodies, or
double bodied, as Gemini and
Pisces.

Biennial, (Lat.) of two years
continuance.

Bifarious, (Lat.) twofold, or that may be
taken two wayes.

Biformed, (Lat.) having two shapes.

Bifront, (Lat.) having two
foreheads.

Bifurcous, (Lat.) twoforked.

Bigamy, (Greek) the marriage of two wives
at the same time, which according to Common law, hinders a
man from taking holy
Orders, or one that is a prisoner from having the benefit
of his Clergy.

Bigat, a certain silver coin among the
Romans, from Bigia, a chariot drawn with two
horses, which was stamped upon it.

Bigot, (French) a scrupulous
superstitious
fellow,

Bilanciis deferendis, a writ directed to a
Corporation for the carrying of weights to a Haven to
weigh the wools that are licenc't to be
transported.

By-laws, Orders made in Court leets, or
Court barons, by common assent, farther than the publick
law binds. In Scotland they are called Birlaw, or
Burlaw.

Bilbilis, an ancient City of Hispania
Tarraconensis famous for the birth of
Martial the Latin Poet, now called by some
Calatayn'd.

Bilboa or Bilbo,  a City of
Biscay in Spain, where the best blades
are made.

The Bildge, or Buldge of a ship, 
is the breadth of the flooce whereon the ship doth rest
when she is a ground.

Bilinguis, (Lat.) double-tongued; also a
Common law term, signifying the jury that passeth between
an Englishman and Alien, whereof part are English, and
part Strangers.

Binarie, (Lat.) the number of two.

Binarchy, (Greek) a government, where two
onely bear sway.

Bindeweed, a certain herb, otherwise called
With-wind.

Binne, (old word) a manger, also a place to
put bread in.



Bint, (old word) bound.


Bipartite, (Lat.) divided into two
parts.

Bipatent, (Lat.) open on both sides.

Bipedal, (Lat.) two-foot long.

Biquintile, is an Aspect consisting of 141
degrees, thus Charactered
Bq.

Brigandes, a kinde of wilde Goose.

Birlet, (old word) a Coife, or Hood.

Bisexous, (Lat.) of both Sexes.

Bismare, (old word) curiosity.

Bison, (French) a wilde one, great-eyed,
and broad-fac't.

Bisque, a fault at Tennis, also a
compound dish.

Bissextile, Leap-year, which is every
fourth year, wherein one day more then ordinary is added
to February, having commonly but 28 dayes, and
that odd day they call dies Intercalaris.

Bisumbres, see Amphiscii.

Biton, and Cleobis, the two sons
of Argia the
Priestesse, who for want of horses drew their Mothers
Chariot to the Temple
themselves, whereupon their Mother requesting of the Gods
a reward agreeable to
their piety, they were both found dead the next
morning.

Bitressed, see Betrassed.

Bittazle, a close Cubbard, placed on the
steerage before the tiller, whereon the Compasse doth
stand.

Bits, two square pieces of Timber,
commonly placed abast the
manger, in the loof of the ship.

Bittour, a bird so called, a kinde of
Heron, which they
say hath three stones.

Bitume, a kinde of slimy clay, almost of
the nature of brimstone, or pitch, also a kinde of liquor
flowing out of mare mortuum
that burns like Oyl.

Bituriges, a certain people of Gallia
aquitanica, whose Countrey is now called

Berry, and their chief Citie
Bourges.

Bizantin, see Besant.


B L

Black book of the Exchequer, a book which
treateth of all the ancient Ordnances,
and Orders of the Exchequer.

Blacklow, a Hill in Warwick-shire,
upon which Pierce Gaveston, whom King
Edward the second raised from a base Estate to be
Earle of Cornwall was beheaded by the Nobles for
his insolencie.

Blackmore Forrest, a Forrest in
Dorcetshire,
called also the Forrest of Whitehart from a very
beautifull Whitehart, which King Henry
the third, going thither a hunting, and taking great care
to spare, was killed by T. de la Linde, which so
incensed the King, that
he set a perpetual Fine upon the Land, which at this day
is called Whitehart silver.

Black-rod, the Usher belonging to the Order
of the Garter, so called from the Black-rod he carrieth in
his hand, he is also of the Kings Chamber, and of the
Lords House in Parliament.

Black buried, gone to Hell.

A Blain, a blister.

Blanch, (French) white, also the proper
name of a woman, frequent in England.

Blandiloquence, (Lat.) a flattring, or
speaking fair.

Blandishment, (French) a flattring, or
soothing with fair speeches.

Blankers, white furniture.

Blankmanger, (French) a kinde of
delicious meat made of
Rice, Almond milk, Capons brains, and other things.

Blasco, an Island in the mouth of the River
Rhene, now called Languillade.

Blase, (Greek Blasios) a proper
name, signifying sprouting forth.

Blatant, barking, bawling.

Blateration, (Lat.) vain-babling.

Blaze, (Dutch) to spread abroad.

Blazon, (French) the description of a Coat
of Arms.

Blay, or bleak, a kinde of fish of a
whitish colour.

Ble, (old word) sight, view.

Bleach, to whiten, to dry in the
sun.

Blemishes, marks made by hunters, where the
Deer hath gone.

Blend, to mix, to mingle together.

Blent, (old word) stayed, ceased, turn'd
back.

Blepharon, (Greek) he that hath great
eye-brows.

Blesiloquent, (Lat.) faltering in speech,
stammering.

Blue-bottle, a kinde of blue flowr, so
called.

Blue-mantle, the name of an Office
belonging to one of the
Pursevants of Arms.

Blight, an Herb, called burnt-corn, or the
black Chameleon Thistle.

Blinkard, one that looks
askew, or with
distorted eyes.

Blinks, (a Term in hunting) boughs rent from
Trees, and cast overtwhart the way, where a Deer is
likely to passe, thereby



to hinder his running, they are called in French
Brisees.


Blissome, to tup as the Ram doth the
Ewe.

Blite, an Herb, so called.

Blith, an old British word, that signifies
yielding milk, profitable, also Blith, or Blithsome is
used for pleasant, or jovial.

Blive, (old word) readily, fast.

Blo, (old word) blue.

Blocks, in Navigation are those small
woodden things, wherein the running ropes do run.

Blomary, the first forge in an Iron-Mill,
through which the Iron doth passe after: It is melted out
of the Mine.

Bloom, to blossome.

Blote, to smoke, from the Dutch word,
bloet, i. e. bloud.

Bloudy-hand, see Dogdraw.

Bloud-wit, an old Saxon word used
in Charters of liberties anciently granted, signifying an
Amerciament for shedding of bloud.

Blunder, to keep a pudder, bestir ones
self.

Blyn, (old word) to cease.


B O

Boa, a kind of diseases incident to
children, which fills
them full of red pimples, which is called by Physicians
Rubella, or the Measels.

Boanerges, (Hebr.) sons of Thunder.

Boas, a kinde of Serpent, which being
nourish't with Cows milk, grow's to a monstrous
greatnesse, in so much as one of them having been killed,
there was found an Infant whole in its belly,
Plin.

Boatswain, a Term of Navigation, the
Subpilot, he that swayeth, or governeth a boat, or ship,
under the chief Pilot.

Boccone, (Ital.) a morsel, or bit, also
poyson.

Bockland, a Term in Law, land held by book,
or charter.

Bodotria, or Bederia, the ancient name of a
Town in Scotland, now called
Edenburgh
Frith, or the Forth, and Frith.

Boeotia, a Countrey in Greece,
formerly called Ogygia, and separated from
Attica by the Hill Cytheron.

Bohemia, a part of Germany beyond
the Danow, whose chief Citie is
Prague.

Boistous, (old word) halting, lame,
lowly.

Bole-armoniack, a kind of earth, or soft
crumbling-stone, which is found in a part of
Armenia, used by Painters to make a kinde of
faint red colour.

Boline, a Term in Navigation, signifying
the Coard in a ship, with which Mariners use to draw the
sayl, that it may gather winde.

Bollen, (old word) swelled.

Bollingbroke, a Castle in
Lincoln-shire, famous for being the birth-place
of King Henry the fourth, who was called
Henry of Bolling-broke.

Bolmong, a medley of several Granes
together, it is also
called Masselin, or Mongcorn.

Boltsprit, a Term in Navigation, a mast at
the head of a ship.

Bombasine, a stuffe made of Bombast, or
Cotton.

Bombard, a kinde of Gunne, or piece of
Ordnance.

Bombilation, (Lat.) a humming of
Bees.

Bombycinous, made of silk, from the
Latin word
Bombyx, i.
e. silk.

Bona Patria, a Term of the practick, or law
in Scotland, & signifies the choosing of
twelve men out of any part of the
Countrey to passe upon
Assise, who are called Jurators.

Bonaght, a certain tax formerly exacted in
Ireland, for the maintenance of the Knights,
called Bonaghty.

Bonair, see debonair.

Bona, a womans name, signifying in
Latin, good.

Bonasus, a wilde beast, having the head of
a bull, and the body of a horse.

Bonaventure, (Lat.) good luck, the
proper name of a famous
holy Fryer of St. Francis Order, and of divers
other Eminent men.

Bonet, a kinde of a Cap.

Bonewell, the name of a pretty Well, near
Richards Castle in Hereford-shire, so
called, because it is alwayes full of
little fish bones, or as
some think of small Frog bones, although they be from time
to time quite drawn out of it.

Bongrace, (French) good grace,
handsome behaviour, also
a kinde of covering for Childrens foreheads, to keep them
from the heat of the Sun.

Bonhommes, (French) an order of
Fryers, instituted by St.
Francis de Paula, they were also called Fryer
Minims, or Minorites.

Boniface, (Lat.) quasi well-doer,
the proper name of several Popes, and divers other eminent
men.



Bonjour, a salutation used in French,
being as much as good morrow with us.


Bonito, a kinde of fish, so called from the
French word, Bondir, to leap up.

Bonium, the ancient name of the
Monasterie of
Bangor in Cheshire, where
Pelagius the Heretick was brought up.

Boodeth, (old word) sheweth.

Boolie, (old word) beloved.

Boon, (old word) a request.

Boot of Bale, (old word) ease of
sorrow's.

Bootes, a North-star, near Charles
wain, called also Bubulcus, or
Arctophylax, which the Poets fain'd to have been
Arcas the son of Calisto, who was
changed into a Bear, and plac't also among the
signs.

Boracho, a Spanish word,
signifying a bottle made of a Pigg's skin, with the hair
inward dress't with rozen and Pitch.

Borage, a kinde of Herb good for the heart,
and to expel melancholy.

Borax, or Borace, a hard, and
shining mineral like green earth, wherewith
Goldsmiths use to soder
Gold or Silver. It is also called Chrysocolla.

Borbonia, a Dukedome in France,
which began from the line of Philip de
Valois.

Bordel, (Ital.) a Brothel-house.

Bordlanders, the demesns that Lords keep in
their hands for the maintenance of their bord or
table.

Borduce in Heraldry, is a circumference or
tract of one mettal, colour or fur, drawn about the armes,
and it contains the first part of the field,

Boreas, the son of Astræus, or as
some say, of Strymon, he married Orithya
the daughter of Erichthonius, King of
Athens, and begate Zetes and
Calais. It is also the name of the North
wind.

Borith, an herb which Fullers use for the
taking of spots out of cloth.

Born, (old word) to burnish.

Borough, see Bourrough.

Borrell, (old word) attire on the
head.

Borrow, (old word) a pledge, a
surety.

Borysthenes, the greatest River in
Scythia, next to
Ister.

Boscage, a place set thick with trees,
also a term in painting, a
picture that represents
much wood or trees.

Bosenham or Boseham, a pleasant
Town in Sussex, where K. Harald liv'd
retired for his recreation, and lanching forth into the
sea in a little Bark, he was carried by contrary winds
into Normandy, where being
detained, he assured the Kingdom of England to
Duke William.

Boss, (French) a stud or knob.

Bosphorus, the name of two seas, so
called from the passage of
Jupiter over them in the shape of a Bull, when he
stole away Europa,
the one lieth near Constantinople,
and is called Bosphorus Thracius, the other more
northward, and is called Bosphorus
Cimmerius.

Botachidæ, a place of Tegea in
Arcadia, from Botachus the Nephew of
Lycurgus.

Botanicall, (Greek) belonging to
herbs.

Botargo, a kind of Saucedge, from the Greek
word Oa Taricha, salted egges.

Bothna, or Buthna, a term used in
the practick of Scotland, signifying a Park where
cattel are inclosed and fed.

Botin, (French) a kind of boot or
buskin.

Botolph, a proper name, signifying in the
Saxon tongue helpful.

Bottom, (old word) a blossom or bud.

Bovillæ, a Town near Rome where
Claudius was
slain by Milo.

Bovillon, (French) a kind of boiled meat,
made of several ingredients.

A Boulter, a seive to sift meal or
flower.

Boun, (old word) ready.

Bourchier, contracted into Bowcer,
the name of a very great and ancient Family of this
Nation, stiled in Latin, Records de burgo Chara,
whose chief seat in ancient times was Hausted, a
Town in Essex.

Bourd, (French) to jest.

Bourges, (French) a free Denison.

Bourn, (Dutch) a head of a Spring, or
Fountain; and those Towns that end in bourn, as
Sittinbourn, &c. are situated upon Bourns or
Springs.

Bourreau, (French) an Executioner.

Bourrough, from the Dutch word Burgh, a
Town incorporate, which is not a City, whence
Bourrough, or Bourgomaster, is the
Bailiff, Maior, or Chief Ruler of a Town or Borrow.

Bourrough English, or
Burgh-English, a term in law, being a customary
descent of land or tenements, to the youngest son or
brother.

A Bourser or Bouser, (French) a
Purse-bearer or Treasurer of a Colledge.



Boute-feu, (French) an incendiary, a sower of
strife and sedition.


A Bow, a Mathematical instrument to take
heights.

The Bow of a Ship, the fore part of it, so
called from the form.

A Bowge of Court, a livery of bread and
drink, or other things of the Princes bounty over and
above the ordinary allowance.

To bowlt a Cony, (term of hunting) to start
her out of any place where she lies.

Boxa, a kind of drink made in Turky of a
seed somewhat like mustard-seed.

Boy, or Booy of an anchor (Span.)
that which being tied to the Anchor swims
uppon the water to give
notice where the Anchor lies.


B R

Brabantia, the Dukedom of Brabant,
which is parted from Flanders by the
River Scheldt, it
containes the Marchionate of the sacred Empire, the
Dukedom of Arschot,
the Earledomes of Hochstrat and
Macklin.

Braccata Gallia, that part of
France wich is called Province.

Brace, that which fastens beams in
building, also a Cable of a ship, also a couple or pair,
from the French brace, i. e. the armes

Brachy-graphy, (Greek) the Art of writing
in Characters or short-writing.

Brackmans or Bramans, a sect of
Philosophers or
Divines in India, who live onely upon herbs and
fruits.

Braggard or Braggadocio, a
bragging vain-glorious fellow.

Bragget, a drink made of honey, used in
Wales, it is derived from two Welch words, Brag
which signifies malt, and Gots a honey-comb; it is also a
word used in Architecture, signifying a stay cut out of
stone or timber to bear up the Corbel.

Braid Albin, otherwise called
Albanie, the most Northern Country of
Scotland, commonly called the Highlands,
the highest part whereof is likewise called Drum Albin, or Brun Albin.

Brake, (Dutch) a snaffle for horses.

Brancher, a young Hawk newly come out of
the neast.

Brankursin, see Bearesfoot.

Brand-iron, a trevet, an iron to set a pot
upon.

Brandish, (French) to make to shine with a
gentle moving.

Branonium, the ancient name of
Wigornia or the
City of Worcester.

Brant, a bird called a Bargander, or
Soland-goose.

Brassets, (French) armour for the
armes.

Brast, (old word) to break.

Brat, (old word) a ragge.

Bravado, (Spanish) a daring, a
making shew of an
onset.

Bravery, a going fine in cloths, also a
compleatnesse of behaviour. Cleopatra.

Bravy, (old word) a reward.

Brawders, engraven work,

Brawl, a kind of dance, from the
French word Bransler, to move gently up and
down.

Brayd, (old word) to break out.

Brayed, awoke, arose, also took.

Breck, (old word) a bruise.

Brede, (old word) a bredth, also
abroad.

Bredgen, (old word) to abridge to
shorten.

Breez, a fresh gale or wind blowing off the
sea by day.

Breetch, (a term in Gunnery) the
aftermost part of a
gun.

Breme, (old word) furiously, also a kind of
fish so called.

Brennus, a Captain of the Gaules who
overthrew the Romans at the River
Albia, and took
Rome, but was beaten out by Camillus,
afterwards he killed himself at Delphos.

Brent, (old word) burnt.

Breve, that which we call a writ, is
called in the practick of
Scotland, a Breve, the several formes whereof
will be seen in their order.

Breviary, a compendious collection, also a
kind of Masse-book.

Breviloquence, (Lat.) a short discourse, a
speaking in brief.

Brian, (French) a shrill voice.

Briarius, one of the Centimani, and
brother to Gyes
and Cæus, they were all three the sons of
Vranus and Terra, and were said each of
them to have a hundred hands

Bricolls, certain Engins used in old time
to batter the walls of Towns or Castles.

Bridgenorth, a Town in Shropshire,
corruptedly so
called, for Burgmorf, i. e. the Town near the
Forrest of Morf; it was built by
Achelfleda, Lady of the Mercians,



and walled by Robert de Belesm, Earle of
Shrewsbury, who keeping the Town
against King
Henry the second, was there besieged and taken.


A Brie, or Brieze, a kinde of fly,
called a horse fly, or Gad-fly.

A Brief, or Breve, or
Writ, see Writ.

Brigade, (French) a Term in Military
Discipline, a body of Souldiers, consisting of three
squadrons.

Brigandine, (French) an ancient kinde of
Armour, with many plates and joynts, like a Coat of Maile
(whence Brigand a foot Souldier so arm'd, or a high-way
Robber;) it signifieth also a kind of ship, or
Pinnace.

Brigantes, the ancient name of those people
that inhabited a great part of the North of
England, as York-shire, Richmond-shire,
the Bishoprickrick of Durham,
Lancashire,
Cumberland, and Westmorland.

Brig-bote, or Brug-bote, (Dutch) a
contribution made
toward the mending of Bridges, also an exemption from that
Tribute by a Charter from
the King.

Brigidians, an order of religious
persons, instituted by a
Princesse of Suetia, whose name was
Brigidia, there was also an Irish woman
famous for sanctity, who was called St. Brigit,
or Bride.

Brimstone, a certain Mineral, being the fat
of the earth, decocted unto his
hardnesse.

Brionie, a plant, called otherwise white
Vine.

Briseis, the daughter of Brises,
she fell to Achilles his share at the taking of
Lyrnessus, and
being afterwards taken from him by Agamemnon, was
the cause of his defection from the Grecian Army for a
great while.

Britannia, the name of this whole Island,
containing England and Scotland, it is
so called from the ancient name Brith, i. painted
and Tania, which among the old Greeks signified a
Region.

Bristow, the name of a pleasant Citie,
standing partly in Sommerset-shire, partly in
Gloster-shire, it is so called as it were
Brightstow, which in the Saxon
signifieth a bright, or shining place, in British
it was called Cær Oder Nant Badon, i. e. the
Citie Oder in the
Vale of Badon, it was fortified
by Robert Bishop of Constance, against
King William Rufus, with a Wall, which this day
is in part standing.

Britomartis, a Cretan Nimph, the
daughter of
Jupiter and Charme, she was the first
Inventour of hunting
Nets, being pursued by Minos, she to avoid him,
threw her self into the Sea.

Broach, a Term in hunting, the next start
growing above the Beamantler in a Stagg's head.

Brocado, (Spanish) a kinde of Cloath,
wrought, or mixed with Gold, or
Silver.

Broccarii, a word used in the
Scots practick,
signifies in the Statutes of Gild. Mediatours in any
transaction, or contract.

Brochity, crookednesse, especially of
teeth.

Brocket, a red Deer of two years old, a
spitter, or pricket.

Brode-half-penny, a Toll, or Custome, for
setting up boards, or Tables in a Market, or Fair.

Brond, (old word) fury.

Brontes, one of the Cyclops, the son of
Coelus and Terra, and brother to
Arpe and Strerope, they had each of them
onely one eye, and that upon
their forehead.

Brooklime, an Herb so called.

Brooming, a bringing of a ship aground to
be trimmed, or made clean.

Brotel, (old word) brickle.

A Brouch, a Jewel.

Brow-antler, a Term among hunters, the
first start that grows next to the head of a stag, and
next to that is the beam-antler.

Browded, (old word) imbroidered.

Browk, (old word) to injoy.

Browse, to feed as beasts on shrubs, or
roots of trees.

Bruges, a famous Citie in
Flanders, encompass't
with a fair wall, and having above 60 Churches.

Brumal, (Lat.) winterlike, belonging to the
shortest day of winter.

Brundusium, a Town in Italy,
through which Cæsar followed Pompey
into Greece.

Brusk, a Term used in Heraldry,
signifying a kinde of
tawney colour, otherwise called Tenne.

Bryke, (old word) streight, narrow.

Brymme, when a Boar desires
copulation, he is said
to go to the brymme.


B U

Buccinate, (Lat.) to blow a Trumpet.

Bucentoro, a stately Gally, or great ship,
wherein the Duke of Venice, and the
Senate



go yearly in Triumph, on Ascention day, to
espouse the Sea.


Bucephalus, the horse of Alexander
the Great, he had the mark of a Bull's head upon his
shoulder, being killed in the battle,
which Alexander fought against Porus,
King of India, a Citie was built in the place
where he was buried, called Bucephala.

Bucheldians, a Sect of Hereticks, which are
reckoned among the several sorts of Anabaptists.

Buck, a Hare, or Cony, when they
desire copulation are said
to go to Buck.

Buck-hurst, the title of a Barony,
belonging to the
Sackviles, afterwards Earls of
Dorset.

Buckingham, the chief Towns in
Buckinghamshire,
so called from its fruitfulnesse
in Beech-trees, which the Saxons
called
Bucken.

Bucoliks, (Greek) pastoral songs.

Buda, the chief Citie of Hungary,
now called Offen, not farre from the Banks of
Danubius.

Budaris, a Citie of Germany, belonging to
the Pals-grave, now called Heidelbergh.

Budge, Lambs furre.

Buffle, a wilde Oxe.

Bulbous, (Lat.) Bulbous plants,
are those that have round roots.

Buffoon, (French) a Jester.

Bulgaria, a countrey on this side
Thrace.

† Bulimy, (Greek) insatiable
hunger.

A Bull, a round Jewel, hollow within, also
one of the Popes briefs or Mandates.

Bullion mony, Gold, or Silver, in the
Masse, or billet, also the place where such Gold, or
Silver is brought to be tried and changed for the
King.

Bumbasin, see Bombasin.

Bundles, a sort of Records of
Chancery, lying in the Office of the Roll's, as
the Files of Bills, and Answers in Chancery, the Files of
Corpus cum causa, all Writs of Certiorare with
their Certificates, and divers
others.

Buoy, see Boy.

Buquan, a County in the South-part of
Scotland, the people whereof were
anciently called
Taizoli.

Burgedala, a famous Citie of
France, now called Bourdeaux, where the
Poet Ausonius was born.

Burel, fine glasse.

Burford, a Town in Oxford-shire,
where Cuthred King of the West-Saxons
vanquish't
Aethelbald, King of the Mercians, and
won his Banner whereon was painted the Golden
Dragon.

Burgage, is a Tenure, whereby men of Cities
and Borrows hold their Lands and Tenements of the King,
and other Lords for a certain yearly Rent.

Burganet, (French) a kinde of
Helmet.

Burgeon, or Bourgeon, to grow big
about, or grosse.

A Burgh, see Bourrough.

Burgh-grave, a title of Honour in
Germany, signifying a
Count of a Castle, or Garrison.

Burglary, (French) from Bourg, a
Village and Larrecin
theft, according to the acceptance of Common-law, is
defined a felonious entring into another mans house, with
an intent to steal somewhat, or to do some fellonious
act.

Burgundia, a Countrey of France,
the people whereof were anciently called
Sequani, and Hedui: It is now divided into lower
Burgundie, which is called Burgundia
Regia, or the County of Burgundie, and into
upper Burgundy, which is called Burgundia
Imperatoria, or the Dutchy of
Burgundy.

Burled, (old word) armed.

Burlesque, (French) merry, drolish.

Burlet, (French) a coife.

Burly-brand, (old word) a great sword,
great fury.

Burnet, the name of a certain Herb, also a
word used by Chauser, signifying
woollen, also a hood, or
attire for the head.

Burnish, (Ital.) to make bright to
polish, also a word used
by hunters, when Harts spread their Horns after they are
new rubbed.

A Burnisher, a word used in graving, or
etching, and signifieth a thing which they make use to
smooth, & sweeten the work.

Burshoulder, or Burrowholder, see Headborough.

Buscum ducis, one of the chief Towns of
Brabant, now called Hertogenbush.

Bush, or holy water sprinkle, (a Term in
hunting) the tayl of a Fox.

Busiris, the son of Neptune, and
Lybia the daughter of Epaphus, who for
his Tyranny was slain by
Hercules, with his son Amphidamas, and
Chalbis his cryer.

A Buskin, a kinde of boot, alse a Pump worn
by Tragidians.

Bustard, or Bistard, a kind of
great sluggish
bird.

Butes, the son of Amycus, King of the
Bebrycians, he being deposed, fled to Tre­



panum, and falling in love with Lycaste a fair
Curtesan, he begat Eryx.


Buthus, a famous Wrestler, that used to
devour a whole oxe in a day.

Butlerage, of wines, a certain impost
uppon wines, which the Kings
Butler may exact out of every ship.

Butten, a term among hunters, the first
part in putting up a Stags head.

Buttington, a Town in
Montgomeryshire, wherein in old time the
Danes taking up their winter quarters, were
driven out by Adhered Earle of the
Mercians, in the year of our Lord, 894.

Buttresse, a word of Architecture, the prop
whereon the but-end of the building resteth.

Buttuck, a term in Navigation, the breadth
of a ship right a stern from the tuck upwards.

Buxome or Buosome,
from the Dutch word Booghsæm, pliant, flexible, also
blith or merry.

Buzzar, a Market-place among the
Persians.

Buzzard, a kind of great Hawk or
Kite.


B Y

Byblus, a Town of Phoenicia, where
Adonis had a
Temple built in honour of him.

Byg, (old word) to build.

Byker, (old word) a fray.

Byndon, a Town in Dorcetshire,
where in the year 614. Kinegilsus the Saxon King
in a doubtful and bloody battel
overcame the Brittaines.

Byram, a certain solemn Feast among the
Turkes.

Byrlaw or Burlaw, a term used in
the practick of Scotland. Laws of Burlaw are
determined by consent of neighbours elected by common
consent in the Courts called Burlaw Courts.

Byssine, (Lat.) made of silk.

Bytrent, (old word) catched about.

Bywopen, (old word) made senselesse.

Byzantium, a City of Thrace, built
by the Spartans under the command of
Pausanias. It
was afterwards called Nova Roma:
But Constantine the Great, making it the chief
Seat of his Empire, it was called
Constantinople, and is at this day the chief Seat
of the Turkish Empire.


C A

CAb, an Hebr. measure of 3 pints.

Cabades, a King of Persia, who
succeeded
Perozes after he had vanquished him, and cut off
his whole army.

Cabala, an Hebrew word, signifying
receiving, also a
science among the Jews, comprehending the secret wayes of
expounding the Law,
which were revealed by God to Moses.

Cabalin, fountain, see Hypocrene.

Cabin, a cottage, also a little room in a
ship, called also Cabern.

Cablish, (a term used by the writers of
forrest laws) signifying Brushwood.

Cabura, an odoriferous fountain of
Mesopotamia,
wherein Juno was used to wash.

Caburn, a small line made of yarn to bind
the cabel of a ship withal.

Cacams, Doctors among the Jews.

Cacafuego, a Spanish word signifying
shitefire.

Cachexy, (Greek) a physical term,
signifying an ill disposition of the body.

Cachinnations, (Lat.) a loud
laughter.

Cacique, a certain King among the
Indians.

Cackrell, a kind of fish.

Cacochimie, (Greek) a physical word,
signifying ill juice which is caused in the body through
bad nutriment, or ill digestion.

Cacodemon, (Greek) an evil spirit.

Cacosyntheton, (Greek) a vicious
composition of
words.

Cacozealous, (Greek) ill affected, or badly
imitating.

Cacuminate, (Lat.) to form into a sharpe
top like a Pyramid.

Cacumination, (Lat.) a making sharp at the
top.

Cacus, a shepherd of Aventinium in
Italy, who stealing
some of the oxen which Hercules Recaranus had
taken from Gorgon,
drew them backward by the taile to his cave, that they
might seem by their foot-steps to have gone an other way;
but the theft being discovered, Hercules slew him
with his club, and recovered his oxen.

Cadaverus, (Lat.) like a carcase, full of
dead carcases.

Cadbury, a Town in Sommersetshire,
which is thought by some to have been that
Cathbregion where K. Arthur
overcame the English
Saxons in a memorable battel.

Caddow, a chough or daw.

Cade, or Caddee,
an Arabian word, signifying
a Lord or Magistrate among the Eastern people.



Cadence, (Lat.) a just falling of the tone in a
sentence, a descending of notes in musick.


Cadent houses, are the third, sixth, eight, and twelfth, houses
of a scheme or figure.

Cadet, (French) a younger brother, among
Gentlemen.

Cadier Arthur, a high mountain in
Brecknockshire, whose two tops resembling the
form of a chair, it is thence vulgarly called K.
Arthurs Chair.

Cadmus, the King of the Phoenicians, the
son of Agenor and brother of Europa, he
brought the Greek letters out of
Phoenicia; he killed a
serpent which had slain some of his companions, sowing the
teeth of it in the Earth, out of which there sprung up
armed men. He built Thebes, in the Country of
Aonia, which was afterwards
called Boeotia; but being driven thence with his
wife Hermione, by Zethus and
Amphion, he was changed into a serpent.

Cadrou, or Cadzou, a Barony in
Scotland, out of
which was paid a yearly pension
of 26 pounds 13 shillings and 4 pence to the Kings
Exchequer.

Caduce, the snaky staffe which
Apollo gave to Mercury in recompence of
his harp. This staff had such vertue, that with it he
could kill or make alive. It was also a rod among the
Romans which was carried by their Heraulds in sign of
peace; whence an Embassadour is called Caduceator.

Cæcity, (Lat.) blindnesse.

Cælibate, (Lat.) an unmarried state, a
bachelers life.

Cænis, a Thessalian Virgin, who was
ravisht by Neptune, and being turned into a man
and called Cæneus, was made
invulnerable:
afterwards fighting against the Centaurs, was buried alive
by a great weight of trees thrown upon him.

Cærcaradoc, a hill in Shropshire,
where Caratacus an ancient King of the Brittans resolutely
defended a stone Rampire against
Ostorius Lieutenant of the Romans.

Cærdiff, a Town in
Glamorganshire, fortified
by Robert Fitz-Hamon, whose Grandchild
William Earle of Glocester, was
afterwards besieged in the Castle, and taken prisoner by
Yvor-Bach, a Brittish Mountaineir. In this
Castle, Robert Curthose,
son of William the Conqueror,
after he was bereft of his eyes, lived till he was very old.

Cærfuse or Cærsuse, 
a Town in Montgomeryshire,
anciently as they say, a very famous City.

Cærmarden, by Ptolomy called
Maridunum, the
chief Town of Cærmardenshire, the birth-place of
Merlin, the ancient Brittish
Prophet.

Cærnarvon, the chief Town of
Cærnarvonshire,
where the Princes of Wales
anciently kept their
Chancery, Exchequer, and Courts of Justice; it was built
by K. Edward the first, and the birth-place of K.
Edward the second, sirnamed thence
Edward of Cærnarvon.

Cæsar, a name attributed to the
Emperours of
Rome, from Julius Cæsar the first
Emperour.

Cæyx, see Halcyon.

Cageole, (French) to prate to little
purpose, to canvas or dispute a businesse.

Cainsham, a Town in
Sommersetshire, so called because it was built by
Keina a devout
Brittish Virgin, of whom it was
believed by the vulgar,
that she turned Serpents
into stones, because the high-way thereabout is full of
stones which wreath about resembling a Serpent.

Cairus or Alcairus, a great City
of Aegypt,
formerly called Babylon Egyptia, it was taken by
the Turk Zelmi.

Caishoberry, the name of a country
Palace, or great House
near Watford in Hertfordshire; it was
begun by Sir Richard Morisin Knight (Embassadour to
several great Princes,
under K. Henry the eighth, and K. Edward
the sixth) and finisht by Sir Charles Morisin,
his son. It is now in the possession of the Lady
Capell Dowager.

Caitive, wretched wicked from the French
Chetif, or the Italian Cattivo.

Caytifued, chained, a word used by
Chaucer.

Calabria, a fruitful Country of
Italy, which now belongs to the kingdom of
Naples.

Calamint, an herb so called.

Calamist, a Piper upon a reed, from the
Latin word Calamus.

Calamity, (Lat.) misery, but
originally it signifies
a destruction of corn, from Calamus a stalk of
corn.

Calasticks, a physical word, signifying
purging ointments.

Calatrava, a place in Spain, which
gives denomination to certain Knights, who are called
Knights of Calatrave.



Calcanth, a Chymical word, being the same as
Vitriol.


Calcation, (Lat.) a treading, or
stamping.

Calcedon, a word used by
Lapidaries, being a certain forbe vein in a Ruby,
or Saphyre, differing from the rest of the stone, also the
name of a precious stone.

Calchas, a Grecian south-sayer,
the son of Thestor, who seeing a Serpent devour
ten Sparrow chickins, prophesied that Troy should
be taken the tenth year.

Calcine, or Calcinate, (Lat.) a
Chymicall Term,
signifying to reduce any thing into cinders, especially
metals.

Calcitrate, (Lat.) to kick, or
spurn.

Calcule, (Lat.) an accounting, also a
Ches-man, or Counter.

Caleb, a proper name, signifying in Hebr.
hearty.

Calecut, a great Mart-Town in
India, situate upon the Indian
Sea.

The Caledonian wood, a great wood in
Scotland, whence Scotland it self hath
been anciently called Caledonia, or
Calydonia.

Calefaction, (Lat.) a heating, or
warming.

Calender, a Term used by Linnen-drapers,
signifying to set a glosse upon cloath.

A Calender, (Lat.) an Almanack.

Calends, (Lat.) a word used among the
Romans, for the Computation of their moneths, and
signifies the first day of every
moneth, and if any number be added, it stands for so many
as precede the Calends.

Calenture, a Spanish word,
signifying heat, also a burning feavour.

Caletum, a Port Town in France,
called by Cæsar Portus Iccius, by the Moderns
Calis.

Calidity, (Lat.) heat.

Caliduct, a kinde of Furnace used by the
ancients, to convey heat from one room to another, through
certain pipes.

Caligation, (Lat.) dimnesse of
sight.

Caligula, the fourth Emperour of
Rome, so called from certain Military
Buskins, which he used to
wear, named Caligæ.

Caliph, a Persian word, signifying
King, or Emperour, at first all the chief Princes
of the Mahumetan Religion were called
Caliphs, as the Caliph of
Aegypt, &c.

Calisto, one of Diana's Nymphs,
and daughter of Lycaon, King of Arcadia,
she was got with Child by Jupiter, and turn'd out
of Diana's train.

Calked, (old word) cast.

Callidity, (Lat.) subtilty.

Calligraphy, (Greek) fair, or handsome
writing.

Calliope, the name of one of the nine
Muses, the mother of Orpheus, she was
believed to be the
Inspiresse of Heroick verse.

Callipolis, one of the Islands in the
Aegoean Sea,
called Cyclades.

Callirrhoe, the daughter of
Phocus, King of Boeotia, she complaining
to her Countrey-men
against her thirty suiters, who had killed her father,
they fled to Hippote,
a Town of Thebes, but being pursued by the
Boeotians, the Town was taken, and the murtherers
burnt to death.

Calliver, a kinde of great Gun, or
Arquebuse.

Callot, an old Saxon word,
signifying a leud,
or wanton woman.

Calour, (Lat.) warmth, also a heat of
desire, or affection.

Calpe, a high hill in the uttermost part of
Spain, which is faign'd to be one of
Hercules his pillars.

Calsounds, a kinde of linnen drawers
usually worn among the Turks.

Caltrope, (French) certain instruments used
in War, being great pricks of iron, four-square, to cast
in an enemies way, when they would break in on the
contrary side.

Calvinist, one of the opinion of Calvin, a
famous reformer.

Calvity, (Lat.) baldnesse.

Calumniatour, (Lat.) signifies in Com-
mon law,
him, that in his accusation alleadgeth faults never
committed.

Camarina, a Lake in Sicily, which
when the people dried up contrary to the
advice of the Oracle they
were overcome by their enemies.

Cambel, a famous Castle in Argile
in Scotland, from whence the great family of the
Cambels derive their name.

Cambio, (Spanish) a Burse, or Exchange,
whence comes Cambsor, a Banker, or
Mony-changer.

Cambles, a King of the Lydians, of
so greedy an apetite, that one night he
devoured his wife.

Cambren, a British word,
signifying a crooked stick.

Cambria, the Countrey of Wales, so
called from Camber, the son of Brutus.



Cambridge, the chief Town of
Cambridge-shire,
so called from a Bridge built over the River
Cam: In this Town hath flourished for many
ages, a famous University,
consisting of sixteen Colledges, it hath been anciently
reported that this Academy was founded by
Cantabar a Spaniard, 375 years before
Christ, and repaired
by Sebert, King of the East Angles, in the year
of our Lord 630. afterwards it was defaced by the
Danes under Sueno, but being restored
again by the Normans, it hath stood unviolated
by War to this day.


Camelot, a Town in the Shriefdom of
Stirling in Scotland, which seems to be
the same with that, which was called Corta
Damniorum.

Cambyses, King of Persia, the son
of Cyrus, he added
Aegypt to his Dominions, he died of a wound,
which he gave himself as
he was getting up to horse.

Cameracum, a Citie of the
Low-countreys, now
call'd Cambray, where the
linnen cloath, we call
Cambrick is made.

Camelion, a beast like a Lizard, that
turneth himself into all colours, and lives by the
aire.

Camelopardal, a kinde of beast, half
Camel, half Pardal, or
Panther.

Camerade, (Spanish) a Cabin, or
chamber-fellow.

Camerated, Vaulted, or Arched, a Term used
in Architecture.

Camisado, (Spanish) a suddain assault, or
surprisal.

Cammock, a kinde of Herb, that hath a hard
and big root.

Camois, a British word, signifying
crooked.

Camomil, an Herb of a fragrant smell, which
grows and spreads by being trampled
on.

Campain, (French) a plain field, also a
military word, signifying an armies
expedition, or taking
the field.

Campania, a Countrey of Italy in
the Kingdom of Naples, called Terra del
Lavoro, whose chief
Citie is Capua.

Campernulphs, the ancient name of a great
family of Cornwall, Lords of the Town of
Modbury, they are commonly
called Champernouns, in Latin Records de Campo
Arnulphi.

Campus lapideus, a field of Gallia
Narbonensis,
where Hercules fought with
Alcion and
Bergion, the sons of Neptune, but his darts
failing him, Jupiter sent him down a showr of
stones, wherewith he killed
the Giants.

Campus Martius, a field near Rome,
dedicated to
Mars, where the Romaus used to exercise,
and the people assembled to give their suffrages.

Campus sceleratus, a place where the Vestal
Nuns were punish't, if they admitted
of any familiarity with men.

Camulodunum, or Camoludunum, the
chief Town of Essex in England, vulgarly
called Colchester,
or rather Maldon.

Camulus, a name anciently attributed to
Mars, the heathen God of War.

Canace, the daughter of Aeolus,
she was got with childe by her brother Macareus,
whence they use to call an Incestuous
woman Canace.

Canachus, a Fountain near Nauplia,
where Juno used to bath her self, that she might
recover her Virginity.

Canacus, a high hill in Spain, on
the top whereof is a Well, whose depth cannot be
sounded.

Canariæ, certain Islands in the
Adriatick Sea,
anciently called the fortunate Islands, from thence it is
that we have our Canary wines.

Cancel, (Lat.) to rase, to blot out from
Cancelli Lattices, or crosse-bars.

Canceline, chamlet, a word used by
Chaucer.

Cancer, one of the 12 signs of the
Zodiack, into which the
Sun enters in the Moneth of June, the word
signifies in Latin a Crab.

Candia, an Island in the
Mediterranean Sea, anciently called
Creet, where Jupiter was born, and
Minos reign'd, it is at
present in the powr of the
Venetian.

Candid, (Lat.) white, also innocent,
sincere.

Candida Casa, the ancient name of a Town in
Galloway in Scotland, vulgarly
Whithern, the Episcopal seat of Ninian,
who first converted the Scottish Picts to
Christianity, it seemeth to be the same with Ptolomies
Leucopibia.

Candidates, (Lat.) were those among the
Romans, who use to stand for any place, or Office of
Dignity, and were clad in white Robes.

Candiope, the daughter of
Oenopian, and sister to Theodotion, who
going a hunting with her brother, and being drawn into a
Cave and ravish't by him, brought forth
Hippolagus.

Cankdore, (old word) a woeful case.



Canibals, a people of India that feed
uppon mans flesh.


Canicula, a constellation in the Heavens
called the little Dog.

Canicular dayes, certain dayes in
July and August wherein Canis Major, or
the Dog-Star riseth with the Sun, and makes the weather
extraordinary hot.

Canitude, (Lat.) whiteheadedness,
hoariness.

Cannæ, a Town of Apulia, not far
from the River Anfidus where Hannibal
overthrew Paulus
Emilius, and Terentius Varro.

Cannel bone, the neckbone or
windpipe, so called from
its likeness to a gutter or cannel.

Canobus, see Canopus.

Canon, (Greek) a rule to draw a streight
line by, also a law or decree of the Church, also one that
injoyes a living in a Cathedral Church.

Canonium, the ancient name of a Town in
Essex, now called Chelmerford, or
Chensford,
standing upon the River Chelmer.

Canonize, to examine by rule, also to
register for a Saint.

Canopus, a City of Egypt, so
called from Canopus Amyctæus, the master of
Menelaus his ship, who was there buried; also the
bright star in Argo.

Canorous, (Lat.) shrill, loud
singing.

A Canow, an Indian boat.

Cantabria, a Country of Hispania
Tarracouensis,
now called Biscay, and
Guipuscoa,
bordering upon Asturia.

Cantæ, an ancient people of
Scotland, inhabiting that part which is now
called Ross.

Cantation, (lat.) a singing, also an
inchanting.

Canterbury, the chief City of
Kens, anciently
called in Latin Dorobernia, now
Cantuaria. In the time of the Saxon
Heptarchy, it was the
Royal Seat of the Kings of Kent.

Cantharides, certain venomus green flyes,
used in physick, and breeding on the tops of Ashe and
Olive-trees.

Canticle, (lat.) a song or ballad.

Cantilene, (lat.) a tale or song.

Cantium, a County in England,
vulgarly called Kent.

Cantlow, the name of an honourable and
ancient Family in Cornwall, stiled in
Latin records, de
Cantelupo.

Canto, (Ital.) part of a
Heroick
Poeme.

Canton, a corner, also one of the
divisions of the Country
of Helvetia or Switzerland,
also a term in Heraldry, signifying
a corner in an Escutcheon.

Cantreds, a Welsh word, signifying the
Hundreds into which their Countries are divided.

Cantyre, a promontory called by Ptolomy
Epidiorum, being a Province of the South part of
Scotland separated from Argile by the
lake called Logh Fin; in Irish it
signifieth the
lands-head

To Canvase, to sift a businesse, from
canvas and cloth made of hemp, which is used in
seives.

Canum or Cana, a law term of
Scotland, signifying a duty paid to a Superiour
or Lord of the land, especially to Bishops and
Church-men.

Canzonet, (Ital.) a song or sonnet.

Capable, (French) able, or in a
condition to do a
thing, or apt to receive an impression.
Artamenes.

Capacity, in Common law signifies a right
that a King or Clergy-man hath to purchase lands, and is
either natural by which he may purchase to him and his
heirs, or politick, by which he may
purchase to him and his
successours.

Capaneus, see Euadne.

Cap-a-pe armed, armed from head to
foot.

Caparasson, (French) trappings or
furniture for a
horse.

Cape, (Spanish) a neck or promontory of
land, shooting it self into the Sea.

To Caperate, (lat.) to frown.

Capers, certain berries growing in hot
Countries, commonly used for sallads.

Capias, a writ, of which there be two
sorts, the one before judgement, which is called
Capias ad respondendum, where an exigent is to be
proclaimed 5 times, and if the party appear not, he is to
be outlaw'd. The other is called a writ of execution
after judgement, which is of divers
kinds, Capias ad faciendum, Capias pro fine, Capias ut
lagatum, &
inquiras de bonis & catallis: of which see a book
called Natura
Brevium.

Capillation, (lat.) hairinesse, or
causing hair to
grow.

Capirotade, a stewed meat, compounded of
several sorts of meat minced.

Capistrate, (lat.) to muzzel with a
headstall.

Capital, (lat.) belonging to the head, also
deadly, worthy of death.



Capitation, (lat.) pole-money, or a tribute
paid by the head.


Capite, a Tenure whereby a man
holdeth lands immediately
of the King, either by Knights-service or Soccage.

Capitol, an ancient cittadel of
Rome, so called from a mans head that was found
there when they digged to lay the
foundation.

M. Manlius Capitolinus, a famous
Roman Captain, so called
because he valiantly
defended the Capitol against Brennus and the
Gaules: but afterwards being
suspected of affecting
the kingship, he was condemned to be thrown down headlong
from the Capitol which he had saved.

Capitulate, (lat.) to make Articles of
agreement, also to divide into chapters.

Capnomancy, (Greek) a divination by
smoak.

Capo, one of the three chief Officers
among the
Venetians.

Capouchins, an Order of Fryers
institu­
ted by Mathew
Basci of Ancona, they were so called from
the coat or capouch which they used to wear.

Cappadocia, a country in Asia,
which is parted from the great Armenia by the
River Euphrates.

Capriccio, (Ital.) the rough draught or
first invention of any thing.

Caprichious, fantastical, whimsical, from
the Spanish word Capricho, a humour.

Capricorn, a Goat, also the name of one of
the twelve Signs of the Zodiack, into which the Sun enters
in the midst of Winter.

Caprification, (lat.) a term in
Husbandry, the dressing
of wild vines or fig-trees.

Caprifoile, a kind of herb, otherwise
called woodbine.

Capriole, (French) a caper in dancing, also
a term in Horsemanship, called the Goatleap.

Capstand or Capstern, a term in
Navigation, being an
instrument in a ship to weigh Anchor, a win de-beam, or
draw-beam.

Capsulary, (Lat.) belonging to a little
chest or coffer.

Captation, (Lat.) an endeavouring to get
favour or applause.

Captious, (Lat.) apt to take
exceptions.

Captivate, (Lat.) to take prisoner: it is
also taken in an amorous sense.

Capuchin, vide Capouchin.

Caracol, (French) spoken chiefely for
souldiers, to cast themselves into a round ring.

Caradoc, an old Brittish name,
signifying Dearly
beloved.

Caravan, (French) a convoy of
souldiers for the safety
of Merchants that travel by
land in the Eastern Countries.

Caravell, (French) a swift ship.

Carbantorigum, the ancient name of a Town
of Nidisdale in Scotland, now called
Cærlaverock, a place so impregnable, that it was
hardly taken by King Edward the first. It is now
the Mansion of the Barons of Maxwell.

Carbine, one that serves on horseback with
a petronell.

Carbonado, (Ital.) a rasher or collop of
meat, a Gash in the flesh.

Carbuncle, (Lat.) a certain precious stone,
also a botch, or plague sore.

Carcanet, (French Carquan) a rich
chain or tablet for the neck.

Carcedony, a kind of pretious stone, so
called from a City anciently named
Carcedon, now Carthage.

Carcelage, the fees of a prison.

Carceral, (Lat.) belonging to a
prison.

Card, an instrument to dresse wool;
also a Sea-map, which
Mariners use for the better steering of their course.
There is also a sort of playing Cards which are used for
recreation.

Cardiacal, (Greek) belonging to the heart,
also Cordial.

Cardigan, the chief Town of
Cardiganshire,
called by the Bittains Abertivy, i. The mouth of
the River Tivy; it was fortified by Gilbert de Clare, and
afterwards being
treacherously yielded up, was rased to the ground by
Rhese ap Gruffin.

Cardinal, (Lat.) belonging to a Hinge, also
chief, principal, also an Ecclesiastical dignity,
instituted by Pope Paschal the First.

Cardiognostick, (Greek) a Knower of hearts,
a prerogative onely attributed to God.

Cardoon, (French) a dish of meat made of
the stalk of an Artichoke.

Carduus Benedictus, an herb called
Blessed Thistle.

Careening, a Term in Navigation, a way of
trimming of a ship underwater.

Carefox, quasi quatrefour, or a place



parted into four wayes, a market-place in Oxford so
called.


Carecks, (old word) marks.

Caresbroke, a Town in the Isle of Wight,
contracted from Whitgaraburgh, i. the Town of
Whitgar, for to him it was given by the Lord Cerdic, the
first English Saxon that subdued the Island.

Caresses, (French) cherishings, great
expression of friendship and indearment.
Cleopatra.

Cargazon, (Spanish) the Fraight of a
ship.

Caria, a Country of Asia the Lesse, between
Lycia and Ionia.

Carine, (Latine) the keel of a ship.

Carinthia, a Country joyning on the South
to the Alpes, being under the Duke of Austria.

Carity, (Lat.) dearth, scarsity.

Cark, a quantity of wool, whereof 30 make a
Sarpler.

Carle, a clown, from the Saxon word
Ceorle.

Carlile, an ancient City in
Cumberland, almost
encompast with the Rivers Eden, Peteril, and Cand, it was
called by the Romans Luguballia, by the ancient Brittains
Cærlnalid, Egfrid, King of Northumberland, made a deed of
gift of it to St. Cuthbert: this City being
depopulated by the
Danes, and lying buried in Rubbish for 2000 years, began
to flourish again in the
time of William Rufus, by whom it was first
repaired.

Carline Thistle, a certain plant, by which
Charls the great preserved his army from the
Pestilence.

Carlings, Timbers which lie along a ship,
from one beam to another.

Carmania, a Country of Asia the
Greater.

Carmasal, a Turkish ship.

Carmelites, an order of Fryars,
instituted at Carmelus
in Syria, by Almericus, Bishop of Antioch, in the year
1122.

Carmenta, an Arcadian Prophetesse, the
mother of Euander, so called, because
she was the first that gave the
Oracle in Verse, she was
also called Nicostrata.

Carminate, (Lat.) to card wool.

Carmouth, a Town in Dorsetshire, where the
Danes obtained a great victory against King Egbert, in the
year 831, and afterwards
against Ethelwolph in the same place.

Carnage, (French) the season wherein flesh
may be eaten, also a term in hunting,
signifying the flesh that is given to the dogs, after the
chace.

Carnality, (Lat.) Fleshlinesse.

Carnation, a kind of colour resembling raw
flesh.

Carnaval, (French) a time of
dissolutenesse,
also the season, called Shrovetide.

Carnificine, (Lat.) the Executioners
office, also a place of execution.

Carnivorous, (Lat.) Flesh-devouring.

Carnogan, an old Brittish word,
signifying a kind of
wodden dish, a Piggin.

Carnoose, the base ring in a great
gun.

Carnocity, (lat.) corpulency, fulnesse of
flesh.

Carodunum, the chief City of Poland, called
Cracovia.

Caroll, a Christmasse song, or hymn, sung
at Christmasse, in honour of our
Saviours birth.

Carove, a kind of fruit, also a root
called St. Johns
bread.

Carouse, a lusty drinking, a drinking all
out, from the dutch words, Gar,
altogether, and, ausz,
out.

Carpathus, an Island in the
Mediterranean sea,
between Rhodes and Crete, now called Scarpanto.

Carpocratians, a sort of Hereticks, that
held a very dangerous opinion.

The Carp stone, a triangular stone, found
in the chap of a Carp, white without, and yellow
within.

Carrack, or Carrick, a great ship,
from the Italian word, Carico, a
burthen.

Carrat, (French) a term used by
mintmen, Goldsmiths, and
Jewellers: in gold and silver it signifies the third part
of an ounce, in Jewels the 192d part.

Carricta, or Carrict, a province
of the South part of Scotland, standing upon Dunbritain
Frith.

Carriere, (French), a running of horses in
their full speed; also a circle where horses run.

Cartel, (French) a challenge, or letter of
defiance.

Carthage, the chief City of Africa,
anciently called
Carthedon: it was built by Dido, and grew at
length to that power and greatnesse, that it waged war
with the Romans, for a long while, with equal advantage.
There is also a City of Hispania
Tarraconensis, formerly called Carthago
Vetus, now Villa Franca.

Carthismandua, a famous Brittish Lady, Queen of
the Brigantes, who casting off



her husband Venusius, married Vellocatus
his Harnesse-bearer, and crowned him King, being
countenanced by the Romans, and aided by their forces;
yet Venusius making war against her, drove her to great
straights, and recovered the Kingdom.


Carthusians, an order of Monks,
instituted by St.
Bruno, a native of Cullen 1101, who first led a
Hermeticall life upon the Carthusian Mountains.

Cartilagineous, (latine) full of
gristles.

Carucata terræ, from the French word
Charrue, a Plough: it signifies in the ancient
charters, as much land as can be ploughed in a year by one
Plough. In the ancient laws it is called Hilda
terræ, which we call
a hide of land.

Cartilagineous, (lat.) of a gristly
substance.

Cartouch, (French) a word used in
Architecture,
signifying a roll, with which they adorn the Cornish of a
pillar, also a charge of powder and shot, made ready in a
paper, called also a Carthrage.

Carvage, is to be quit, if the King should
tax his land by Carves.

Carve of land, see Carrucata
terræ.

Casemate, (Ital.) a term in fortification,
a loop-hole in a wall to shoot out at.

Cashire, (French) to break up a
company of
souldiers.

Caspian sea, a sea between the Caspian and
Hircanian Mountains.

Cassandra, the daughter of Priam and
Hecuba, she being beloved of Apollo,
received the gift of
prophesie from him at the sack of Troy, she was ravisht in
the Temple by Ajax Oileus, and afterwards in the dividing
the spoil, she fell to Agamemnons
lot.

Cassation, (lat.) a nulling or making
void.

Cassia, or Cassia fistula, a kind
of Reed or shrub, growning in Egypt, it is also called
Canell, from the French word Canelle.

Cassia lignea, a sweet wood like to
Cinnamon.

Cassiope, or Cassiopea, the daughter of
Cepheus, King of Ethiopia, and mother of Andromeda, who
for her mothers pride, in boasting her self fairer than
the Nereides, was exposed to the fury of a sea-monster,
they were afterwards placed both among the stars. see Andromeda.

Cassivellaunus, or Cassibellinus, 
an ancient King of the
Brittains, under whose conduct they defended themselves
with great courage against the Romans for a long time,
when they invaded this Island, but at last he was
constrained to surrender himself to Julius Cæsar.

Castaldie, a Stewardship, from the Latin
word Gastaldius.

Castalia, a certain Nymph, as some think,
the daughter of Achelous, who flying from Apollo, was
turned into a Fountain near Parnassus, called the
Castalian Fountain, by some the Cabailine
Fountain, sacred to the Muses.

Castanetts, a certain sort of snappers,
which dancers tying about their fingers, keep time with
them as they dance; they are so called from their
resemblance of a a Chesnut, called in Latin
Castanea.

Castellain, an officer called the
Constable of a Castle,
which some think to be the same with Gnastaldus, also in
the Forrest laws, it signifies an Officer of the
Forrest.

Castigate, (lat.) to punish, to
chastize.

Castlesteed, a word anciently used for any
Fortresse or Bulwark.

Castleward, an Imposition upon such as
dwell within a certain compasse of any Castle, toward the
maintenance of such as watch and ward the Castle: it is
taken also for the circuit it self, which is
inhabited by such as are
subject to this service.

Castor and Pollux, the sons of Jupiter and Leda, whom he lay with in the
shape of a Swan, they being grown to age, freed the sea of
Pirates, and were therefore counted gods of the sea; they
went with Jason to Colchos, and coming
home, they recovered their sister from Theseus,
and won the Town Aphydna, wherein Castor
died, Pollux, who was born in the same Egge with
Helena, and so became immortal,
desired of Jupiter that his brother might partake
of immortality with him, whereupon they were both reported
to live and die by turns.

Castrated, (Lat.) gelded, cut away.

Casual, (Lat.) accidental, hapning by
chance.

Casu consimili, a Writ of Entry granted
where a Tenant in courtesie, or for Term of life doth
Alienate in Fee, or in Tail.

Casu proviso, a Writ of Entry granted by
the Statute of Glocester.

Casuist, a writer of Cases of
conscience.

Casule, a kinde of vestment, in which the
Priest sayes Masse, resembling the
purple Robe of derision,
which was put upon our Saviour.

Catabaptist, (Greek) an enemy, or
a­ 



buser of the Sacrament of baptisme.


Catachresis, (Greek) a Rhetorical
figure, the using of
another word, in stead of the proper word.

Cataclysme, (Greek) an inundation, or
deluge.

Catadrome, (Greek) an Engin like a Crane,
which builders use, also a Tiltyard,
or place where horses run for prizes.

Cataglottisme, (Greek) a thrusting out the
tongue in kissing.

Catagraph, (Greek) the first draught of a
picture.

Catalia, see Chattels.

A Catalepsie, (Greek) occupation, also a
disease in the head, which causeth a
deprehension of the
spirits.

Catalogue, (Greek) a roul of names.

Catalonia, a Province in
Spain.

Catamidiate, to put one to open shame, for
some notorious offence.

A Catamite, (Lat.) an Ingle, a boy kept for
Sodomy.

Cataphora, (Greek) a kinde of disease in
the head, which causeth heavinesse, and deep sleep.

Cataplasme, (Greek) an unctuous, and moist
composition made of Meal and Herbs like a Pultis, but of a
thicker substance.

Cataphrygians, a Sect of Hereticks, who
baptized their dead, forbid second
marriage, and had other
erroneous opinions, they were broached by
Montanus and Apelles
(who were of the Countrey of Phrygia)
in the year 181.

Catapuce, an Herb called Spurge.

Catapult, (Lat.) the same as
Balista.

Catarract, (Greek) a great fall of
waters from a high place, a
flood-gate, a post-cullis, also a disease in the eyes
caused by a coagulation of
flegme, between the Uveous
Tunicle and the Christalline humour, hindring the egresse
and ingresse of the visual spirits.

Catarractonium, or Caturactonium,
the name of a Town near Richmond,
anciently very famous,
so called from a great waterfall near unto it, in the year
769. it was burnt by the Tyrant Beanred, but
afterwards it
flourish't again in the time of King Ethelred,
who solemnised his marriage
with King Offa's daughter in this Town, it is now
called Catarrick-bridge.

Catarrh, (Greek) a Rheum, a
distillation of
humours out of the head into the mouth, or throat.

Catastasis, (Greek) the third Act of a
Comedy, or Tragedy, wherein things are brought to a full
perfection and ripenesse.

Catastrophe, the conclusion of a
businesse, also the
last Act of a Comedy, or Tragedy.

Catechize, (Greek) to instruct, or
inform.

A Catechumen, (Greek) one that is
Catechiz'd for the
receiving of the Communion.

Category, (Greek) an accusation, also a
Predicament, which is a Term in
Logick.

Catenate, (Lat.) to chain.

Caterlogh, or Carlogh, a Countrey
of Ireland, joyning on the East to the
County of
Kilkenny.

Cathanesse, or Cathnesse, a
Province of the South-part of Scotland, the
people were called by Ptolomy, Catini.

Cathæa, a Countrey in India,
where beauty is so much regarded, that they choose the
hansomest man for their King.

Catharine, (Greek) pure, chaste, a
proper name of
women.

Catharians, a Sect of Hereticks, who held
themselves pure from sin, rejected baptisme, and denied
original sin.

Catharists, another sort of Hereticks, who
were counted a branch of the Manichees.

Catharticks, (Greek) the general name in
Physick for all purging Medicines.

Cathay, a great Country Eastward
divided into 9 Realmes
under the great Cham. It was formerly called
Scythia, now Sinarum Regio; the chief
City is Issedon.

Cathedral, (Lat.) belonging to a chair,
also a Cathedral Church is the chief Church in a Bishops See.

Cathelaunum, or Catalaunum, a
Citie of Champagne in France, now called
Chaalons, near unto which are Campi
Cathelauni, those famous fields where Attila
the Hun was overthrown.

Catethus, a Mathematical Term, the Perpendicular
side of a right angled Triangle.

Catholick, (Greek) general, universal,
defending the Christian faith, a Title
attributed to the King
of Spain.

Catholicon, a physical word, signifying a
general purging Medicine.

Cathorius, a Term used in the practick of
Scotland, signifying the value of 9 kine, it
being a penalty set upon him who



breaks the Kings peace, to give to the King 22 Kine, and
3 Cathores, or for every Cathorius 9 Kine.


Catini, an ancient people of
Scotland, See Cathanesse.

Cato, the name of several famous men of
Rome, whereof the chief were Cato Porcius,
Cato Censorius, and Cato Vticensis.

Catoptrick, (Greek) belonging to a kinde of
Optick glasse, which is called Catoptron.

Catry, a place where Cates, or
victuals are set.

Cat, in Navigation is a piece of
Timber fastned aloft, right
over the Hawse, to trise up the Anchor from the Hawse to
the fore-castle.

Cattieuchlani, an ancient people of this
Island, inhabiting those parts, which are now called
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and
Hertfordshire, they were as Camden
believeth, more anciently called Cassii, and
govern'd by Cassivellaunus.

Cavalier, a brave man, a Knight, or
Gentle-man, serving on hors-back from the Italian
word Cavallo.

Cavazion, a Term in Art Architecture, being
the hollowing, or underdigging of the earth for cellerage,
allowed to be the sixth part of the highth of the whole
Fabrick.

Caucasus, a high Hill, which parteth
India from Scythia, being part of the
mountain Taurus.

Caveare, a certain kind of meat, which
comes from the River Volgha in Russia,
made of the roes of several sorts of fish.

Caveat, (Lat.) a caution, or warning, also
a Term in Civil Law, being a writing,
which is entered by an Executor to keep others from
medling in the administratorship.

Cavechin, or Cavesan, a false rein
to lead a horse in.

A Cavern, (Lat.) a Cave.

Cavillation, (Lat.) a mocking, or
jesting, also a
wrangling.

Cavity, (Lat.) hollownesse.

Caulk a ship, to fill the holes and chinks
with Ockam and Towe.

Cavon, a County of Ireland, called
anciently East
Breanny, lying to the West of
Louth.

Caupes, or Calpes, a
Scotch-Law Term, signifying any gift, which a man
gives in his own life time to his master, especially to
the head, and chief of the Clan for his maintenance and
protection.

Cauphe, a kinde of drink among the
Turks, made of a brown Berry.

Cauponate, (Lat.) to sell for gain,
especially wine, or
victuals.

Caurus, the name of the North-East winde,
blowing commonly out of the Brittish
Sea.

Causal, (Lat.) causing, or expressing, the
cause of any thing.

Causam nobis, a writ to a Mayor of a Town,
who hath denied seisin to one, to whom the King hath given
a grant of Lands, or Tenements.

Causation, (Lat.) an excusing, or
alleadging of a
cause.

Causidick, (Lat.) a Lawyer, or
Pleader.

Caustick, (Greek) searing, or burning, a
word used in physick, signifying that, which is applied to
sear any part of the body.

Cautele, (Lat.) a warinesse, or taking
heed.

Cautery, (Greek) an iron, which
physicians use to sear
withall, also a hot oyntment
which hath the same quality.

Cauterize, to sear.

Cautionary, (Lat.) given in pledge, or pawn
for the fulfilling of Articles.

Cautione admittenda, a writ against a
Bishop, for holding an excommunicate person in prison,
notwithstanding that he offereth caution to obey the
orders of the Church.

Cayer, a quantity of paper, also a part of
a written book.

Cazimi, (Arab.) or a Planet in the heart of
the Sun, is when he is not distant from the Sun 17
minutes.


C E

Cebratane, (French) a Trunk to shoot at
Birds with clay pellets.

Ceca, a certain religious house in
Corduba, whence
they say Andar de Ceca en Meca,
i. e. to turn Turk.

Cecity, (Lat) blindnesse.

Cecrops, the first (or as some say the
second) King of
Athens, he was an Aegyptian born, and
called by Eusebius Diphyes, or Biformed, because
he was the first, who civilized mens manners, and
instituted marriage in Athens.

Cedent, (Lat.) giving place.

Cedrosii, a certain wild barbarous people
that go cloathed in the skin of wild beasts.

Cefala, an Island of Africa, found out
by the Portugals, in the year 1500. being three
miles in length, and one in breadth.



It hath two Villages and one strong Castle. In the year
1505 the Ilanders rebelled, but were quickly subdued by
the Portugall's,
who killed the King; they had chosen among themselves,
and set up another King,
as Deputy to the King of Portugal.


Celænæ, a hill in Asia, where
Marsyas is said to have contended with
Apollo for the mastery upon the Fluit.

Celandine, a kind of herb called in
Latine Chelidonium.

Celature, or Cælature, (Lat.) a
carving or
engraving.

Celebration, (Lat.) a solemnizing or making
famous.

Celebrity, (Lat.) famousnesse.

Celerity, (Lat.) swiftnesse,
expedition.

Celestial, (Lat.) heavenly.

Celestines, an Order of Fryers,
instituted in the year
1215. by one Peter a Samnite,
who was afterwards chosen Pope, and called
Celestine the fifth.

Cellarist, he that keepeth the cellar, or
buttery in a Religious house.

Celsitude, (Lat.) tallnesse, heighth, also
a terme attributed to a Prince as a Title of
honour.

Celsity, the same.

Celtæ, a people anciently inhabiting
Gallia Comata,
between the Rivers Garonne, and Sein;
they were so called from Celtus,
the son of Polypheme.

Celtiberia, a part of Spain,
anciently so called; now Arragonia.

Celurca, the ancient name of a Town in the
Province of Angus in Scotland, now
called Montros.

Cemented, close joyned or united; from
Cement a strong and cleaving morter.

Cemetery, see Cæmetery.

Cenchris, a green, and venomus biting
Serpent.

Cenotaph, (Greek) a hearse or empty tombe,
erected in honour of a great person.

Cense, (Lat.) a mustering of an army, a
cessing of people.

Censer, a vessel wherein the Priest
burneth incense at any
sacrifice or religious rites.

Censor, (lat.) an Officer among the
Romans, who was to cesse
and valew mens estates,
also to judge of discipline, and reform manners; whence
cometh to censure, i. e. to judge or give
sentence.

Centaures, a people of Thessaly,
who waged war with the
Lapithæ, they descended as the Poets feign from
Ixion, who falling in love with Juno,
lay with a cloud which was formed into her shape. They
were thought to be half men and half horses; because
riding their horses to water, while their horses held down
their heads to drink, they seemed to those who beheld them
a far off, like a strange kind of monster, whose former
part resembled a man, the hinder part a horse.

Centaury, a kind of herb, which some call
Feverfew.

Centenary, (lat.) belonging to a
hundred.

Center, (lat.) that point which is in the
midst of every Circle or Globe.

Centoculated, (lat.) having a hundred eyes,
an Epithet belonging to Argos, whom Juno
set to watch Io.

Centinodie, an herb called knot-grasse, as
it were having a hundred knots.

Centon, (lat.) a garment made up of several
patches, a work composed of many pieces.

Central, situate in the center or
middle.

Centrie, a word contracted from
Sanctuary, a place of
refuge for malefactours.

Centumviri, certain men among the
Romans chosen out of the 35
Tribes to be Judges; who although they were more in number
than a hundred, yet for the easier naming of them, were
called Centumviri

Centuple, (lat.) a hundred-fold.

Centurie, (lat.) the number of a
hundred, the space of a
hundred years, a band of a hundred men, or the
like.

Centurion, a Commander of a hundred men, a
Captain.

Cephalics, (Greek) medicines
properly applyed to
fractures of the head, but generally taken for all
medicines peculiar to the head.

Cephalic vein, see vein.

Cephalus, the son of Eion, he married
Procris, the daughter of Erichtheus
King of Athens, and being loved of
Aurora, would not answer her love: one morning
after he had been a hunting with a dart which
Procris gave him, and a dog called Lelaps, he
sate down and called upon Aura to refresh him;
but his wife having followed
him out of jealousie, had hid her self in a bush.
Cephalus perceiving the



bush to move, thought it had been a wild beast, and shot
his wife, and afterwards was turned into a stone.


Cepi Corpus, a return made by the Sheriff,
that upon an exigent, he hath taken
the body of a man.

Ceramite, a kind of precious stone.

Ceratine, (lat.) made of wax,
dissolueable.

Cerberus, quasi creoborus or flesh
devouring, a
three-headed dog, said
to watch constantly at the gates of Hell, whom
Hercules overcame and carried
away in a chain.

Cerebrosity, (lat.) a being cock brain'd,
or brainsick.

Cerdonists, a sect of Hereticks, who held
that there were two contrary principles in the cause of
every thing, a good God and a bad; they were instituted by
one Cerdo in the year 150.

Ceremonies, rites of the Church, from the
ancient Latin word Cerus, which signifieth
holy, or else from the Cærites, a
people of Hetruria, who chearfully
entertained all the
sacred things of the Romans,
which were brought to them by the Vestals when
Rome was taken by the Gaules: whereupon
the Romans out of gratitude, ordered that all things
belonging to Religious
Worship, should be called
Ceremonies.

Ceres, the daughter of Saturn and
Ops, by whom Jupiter had
Proserpina, and being
snatcht away by Pluto; Ceres
wandered through the
world to seek her, and came to the Court of
Eleusius King of Attica, whose son
Triptolomus she made immortal; and seating him in
a Chariot drawn with winged Dragons through the air, she
sent him to teach mortals the use of corn, whence she was
adored as the Godesse of Agriculture.

Cerinthians, a sort of Hereticks, who held
that Christ at his second coming should give to his people
all carnal delights and
pleasures: they had their original
in the year 97 from one Cerinthus.

Cerna, an Island in the Aethiopick
Sea, where the North Pole is not seen, by some thought to
be the same with Madagascar.

Ceromatick, (Greek) anointed with
oil.

Cerones, a certain people anciently
inhabiting that part of
Scotland which is now called
Assinshire.

Cerote, (Greek) a kind of sear-cloth or
plaister.

A Certificate, a writing made in any Court
to give notice to another Court of any thing done
therein.

Certification, of Assize of
novel disseisin,
a Writ granted for the examining of a matter passed by
Assize before the Justices,
and is called a Certification of new disseisin.

Certificando de recognitione stapulæ, a
Writ directed to the Maior, of the Staple, taken before
him, in a case where the party
himself refuseth to bring it in

Certiorari, is a Writ issuing out of the
Chancery to an inferiour Court, to call up the Records of
a cause depending there, upon complaint made by the bill,
that the party seeking the said Writ hath
received hard dealing.

Cervine, (Lat.) belonging to a hart, also
of a tanny or
hart-colour.

Ceruse, (Lat.) white-lead refined out of
the Mine, used by Chyrurgians for
ointments; by painters
for the painting of a white colour.

Cesata, or Cesada, a City of
Spain between
Emerita, and Cæsar-Augusta.

To Cespitate, (Lat.) to stumble.

Cessation, (Lat.) a leaving off, a
ceasing.

Cessavit, a Writ lying upon this
general ground, where a
man hath neglected to perform such service, or to pay such
rents as he is tied to by his tenure.

To Cesse, (from the Lat. Censere)
to leave off, to be idle, also to tax.

Cession, (Lat.) a yeilding or giving
place.

Cest, (Lat.) a marriage-girdle, which the
Bride useth to wear, and which is loosed by the Bridegroom
the first night.

Cetaceous, (Lat.) belonging to a
Whale.

Ceus, an Island where all men above 60
years old, were commanded by the law to poison themselves,
that there might be no scarsity of provision for the rest.


C H

Cha, the leaf of a tree in China,
which being infused into water, serves for their ordinary
drink.

Chace, (French) a warren, also a term in
the game at tennis.

Chafewax, an officer in Chancery, that fits
the wax for the sealing of Writs, and such other
instruments as are thence to be sent out.



Chaffare, a buying and selling, from the Dutch
word Kauffer a Buyer.


Chaffinch, a kind of bird, so called
because it delighteth in
chaff.

Chagrin, (French) care, heavinesse, also a
disease caused by melancholy.

Chaine, the decimal chaine is an
instument used in
surveying, made of round wire 16 foot in length.

Chaines, is used by a figure called
metonymie of the
Adjunct, for captivity, and sometimes in an amorous sense.
Cleopat.

Chalcedon, a Citie of Asia, near
Bosphorus
Thracius, it was built by the
Megarenses,
who were called Cæci, or blinde,
because they did not
choose the other side where Constantinople
stands.

Chalcographer, (Greek) an ingraver in
brasse.

Chaldæa, a Countrey of Asia the
greater, bordering upon Arabia, their chief Citie
is Babylon, and the people have ever been famous
for Astrology and Magick.

Chaldron, a certain measure of coales,
containing 36 bushels.

Chalice, a holy vessel wherewith they had
wont to sacrifice.

Challenge, a Term in Common-law,
signifying an exception
against persons, or things, as a prisoner may except
against the partial impanelling of a Jury, or
against the insufficiency
of the Jurors.

Chalons. blankets, or
coverings.

Chalybeate, (Lat.) of the temper, or
quality of Steel.

Chalybes, a people of Asia the
lesse, dwelling upon the banks of Thermodoon;
Strabo calls them Chaldæans, they had great
store of Iron & Steel Mines, whence some think
Chalybs comes to signifie Steel.

A Chamber, in gunnery, is a charge made of
brasse, or iron, to put in at the breech of a
Murtherer.

Chamberdekins, Irish beggars.

Chamberlain of a Citie, is the chief keeper
of the publick treasury from Camera,
or Chamber, the place where the Treasury is kept, there be
also two Officers of this
name in the K. Exchequer.

Chameleon, see Cameleon.

Chamelot, or Chamblet, a kinde of
water'd stuff mixed with
Camels hair.

A Chamfer, a word in Architecture,
being an artificial gutter,
or crevice made in a pillar.

Chamois, or Chamoy, a wilde Goat,
of whose skins they make Chamois leather.

Champernouns, see Campernulphs.

Champerty, (French) signifieth in
Common-law the
maintenance of a man in his suit depending, on condition
to have part of the Land, or Goods, when they are
recovered.

Champion, (French) one that fighteth in
anothers behalf, the Kings Champion, is one who is to come
armed on hors-back upon the Kings Coronation day, and in
the presence of the Nobles to challenge any, who shall
affirm the King not lawfull
Heir to the Crown, by this Tenure the Dimmocks
hold a manner at Scrivelby,
in Lincolnshire.

Chananæa, the holy land  bounded on
the East by Euphrates, and the River
Jordan, on the
West by Aegypt, on the South by Arabia,
on the North by Libanus.

Chancellour, from the Latin word
Cancelli,
Latices, with which in former time the judgement seats
were compassed; it is a title
of honour given unto him, who is the chief man next unto
the Prince for matter of justice in civil affairs, having
power to moderate, and temper the written Law, according
to equity, also the Chancellour of the Exchequer is a
supream Officer, appointed to moderate the extreamities in
Exchequer.

Chancery, the Court of Equity &
Conscience, moderating
the severity of other Courts that are more strictly tied
to the rigour of the Law, the Officers belonging to this
Court, are the Lord Chancelour, who is chief Judge, twelve
masters of the Chancery, whereof the master of the Roll's
is chief, the Clerk of the Crown, the six Clerks, with
many others.

Chanfron, the name of an Italian
coyn valuing about twenty pence.

A Chantepleur, (French) he that singeth and
weepeth together.

A Chanter, he that singeth divine
service in a Church, or
Chappel.

Chanticleer, (French) a name often
given to a Cock for its
clear singing.

Chaonia, the hilly part of Epirus,
which Helenus the son of Priamus, so
named from his brother Chaon, whom he there slew
against his will, while he
was a hunting.

Chaos, (Greek) a confused indigested
heap.

Chapin, (Spanish) a high Cork-heel'd
shooe.

Chaplain, from Capella, a
Chappel, he that dependeth upon the King, or
other great person for the instruction of him and his
family.



Chaplet, a wreath, or Garland for the head,
from the Latin word Caput.


Chapter, in the common and Canon-law,
signifieth a company of Clergy-men met together in a
Cathedral conventual, or collegiate Church, and this
company is a kinde of head to rule, and govern the
Diocesse in the vacation of the Bishoprick, it is also a
word of Architecture, signifying
the top, or head of a pillar.

Character, (Greek) the print, or seal of
any thing, a Note in Chronology, also the name of printers
several sorts of Letters.

Characteristick, belonging to a
Character.

Chardford, a Town in Hantshire,
heretofore called
Cerdeford from Cerdick, that warlike
English Saxon, who obtained a great victory over
the Saxons.

Chare, a kinde of fish, which breeds most
peculiarly in Winandermere in
Lancashire.

A Charge in Blazon, is that thing
whatsoever, that doth
occupy the field of an Escutcheon, as the contained in the
containing

Charientisme, (Greek) gracefulnesse,
also a Rhetorical figure,
when we sweeten harsh expressions with softer
terms.

Charing-crosse, a famous monument which
stood not long since at the end of the strand towards
Westminster, it was erected
by King Edward, the first in memory of his Queen
Eleanor, who accompanying him to the holy war,
suck't the poyson out of his eye, when it had been
wounded by a More
with an envenom'd sword, this crosse was utterly
demolish't not many years
since.

Charlatenerie, (French) a cousening,
cheating, or cogging, from Carlatan, a
Mountebank.

Charles, a proper name contracted from the
Dutch words Gar, and Ethel,
signifying all
Noble.

Charles wain, certain starres near the
North-pole.

Charmes, certain verses, or expressions,
which are thought to have a bewitching power, also taken
figuratively for surprizing
attractions and allurements. Artamenes.

A Charnel-house, a place where dead bones
are laid.

Charon, the son of Erebus, and
night, whom the Poets faign to be the ferryman of Hell,
and to carry the Souls of those that die over the stygian
Lake in a Boat.

Chart, (Lat.) a paper, or parchment, or
written deed.

Charter-house, a famous Hospital in
London, founded by
Sir Waltermany of Henault,
who served under King Edward the third, in the
French wars, this place was anciently a very
noted Cæmitery, or place of burial.

Charters, (French) written Evidences of
things done between party and party, also Letters Pattents
wherein priviledges are granted by the King, to Towns and
Corporations.

Charterparty, (a Term in Merchandize) a
Covenant, or Agreement between a Merchant, and the Master
of a ship.

Chartulary, a keeper of a Register roll, or
Reckoning book.

Charvil, or Chervil, an Herb
called in Latin Cerefolium.

Charybdis, a Gulph in the Bay of
Sicily, near the Tauromitanian shore,
which is feign'd to have been a woman of
prodigious greedinesse,
who for stealing Hercules
his Oxen, was struck with Thunder by Jupiter, and
turned into this Gulf.

Chasma, (Greek) a wide gap, or
opening of the
earth.

Chasteleyn, a word used by
Chaucer, signifying
a Gentle-woman of a great house.

Chasuble, (French) a kinde of Cope, which
the Priest and his assistants wear at Masse.

Chattels, (French) a Term in
Common-law, signifying
all goods moveable, and immoveable, but such as are in the
nature of a freehold, or a parcel thereof.

Chattesworth, a stately house in
Darbyshire,
built by Sir William Cavendish, or
Candish.

Chaumond, an ancient and Noble
family of Lancels
in Cornwall, written in
Latin Records, de Calvo
Monte.

Chaud-melle, signifieth in the practick of
Scotland, a fault committed in a sudden
Tumult.

A Chauncel, the most sacred part of a
Temple, or Church, so called from
Cancelli, or Lattices, which separate that part from the rest
of the Church, the Greeks call it Adyton.

Chaunce medley, signifies in Common-law the
casual slaying of a man.

Chauncery, see Chancery.

Chaworths, the name of a very Noble



family of Ailesbury in
Buckinghamshire, they were so called as
descending from Cahors, a Town of
Querce a Province of France, in Latin
Records they are stiled de Cadurcis.


Cheap-gild, a restitution made by the
Hundred or County for any wrong done by one that was in
plegio.

Checkie, a term in Heraldry, as a
bordure checkie is when
the bordure consisteth
of three panes of checquer-work, wherein it differs from
counter-pany, which never exceeds two panes.

Chief, a term in Common law, as lands
holden in Chief; see Capite. Also a term in Heraldry,
being a line added to the upper
or chief part of an Escutcheon, and contains a third part
thereof.

Chiefpledge, the same as Headborow,
Constable, Tything-man.

Chekelaton, a stuff like motly. Chaucer.

Chelandri, a Goldfinch, a word used by
Chaucer.

Chelidon, a pretious stone, which they say
is found in the belly of a Swallow.

Chelidonie, an herb, so called from the
Greek word Chelidon, which signifies a Swallow.

Chelmerford, a Town in Essex, so
called from the River Chelmer; it is commonly
known by the name of Chensford. In the reign of
King Henry the first it belonged to
Maurice Bishop of London, who built here
two bridges. Some think it to be the same with that which
was anciently called Canonium.

Chelonophagi, a certain people bordering
upon Carmania, who feed onely upon Tortoises,
covering their houses with the shells of them, being so
large that one of them will serve to make a ship.

Chemnis, an Island which is driven to and
fro by the wind, wherein there is a Temple consecrated to
Latona.

Cherisaunce (old word) comfort.

Chersonesus, (Greek) a tract of land
almost invironed by the
Sea, and joyned to the Continent by an Istthmus or
narrow neck of land: it is
called in Latin Peninsula.

Chert, or Cheort, (old word) love,
jealousie.

Chertes, merry people,
Chaucer.

Cherubim, or Cherub, an Hebrew
word signifying fulnesse of knowledge, one of the nine
orders of Angels.

Cheslip, a kind of little vermin that lies
under tyles.

Chest, (old word) subject.

Chesten, (French) a chessnut.

Chester, see Westchester.

Chestoul, poppie.

To Cheve, (old word) to thrive.

Cheveril leather, a kind of soft tender
leather, from the French word Chevereul, a wild
goat, of whose skin some say it is made, or else from the
River Charwel in Oxfordshire, which is famous for
dressing of leather.

Cheverons (French) the strong rafters and
cheifs that met at the top of the house, to hold up the
covering of the house; also a term in Heraldry, being one
of the ordinaries of an Escutcheon made in fashion of a
triangle.

Chevesal, a Gorget.
Chaucer.

To Chevice, (old word) to redeem.

Chevin, a certain fish having a great head,
from the French word Chef a head.

Chevisaunce, a composition or
agreement between the
debtour and creditour, from the French word
Chever, to come to a head.

Chevronel, a term in Blazon, being a half
Cheveron.

Chibboll, a little onion.

Chichester, the name of a famous City of
Sussex, formerly called Cissancester, i.
the City of Cissa, because it was built by
Cissa King of the South-Saxons. It hath a very
stately Cathedral, and in the reign of William
Rufus, the Bishops See was translated from
Selsey hither.

Child-wit, a law-term, signifying a power
to take a fine of your bond-woman
begotten with child
without your consent.

Chiliade, (Greek) the number of a
thousand.

Chiliarch, (Greek) a Commander of  a
thousand men, a Colonel.

Chiliasts, (Greek) a sect of men who are
also called Millenaries who hold that Christ shall come
and reign personally upon Earth with his Saints a thousand
years.

Chilo, the Lacedemonian, one of the 7
Wisemen of Greece, whose sentences were very brief; whence
Chilonick signifieth compendious.

Chimæra, a Hill of Lycia, on the top
whereof were many Lions, in the midst fed Goates, and at
the bottom were Serpents,
which Bellerophon made habitable. Whence the
Poets feigned that Bellerophon



killed the Monster Chimæra, who had the head
of a Lion, the belly of a Goat, and the tail of a
Dragon. Whence Chimæra's
are taken for idle conceits.


Chimbe, the uttermost part of a barrel.
Chaucer.

A Chime of Bells, a pleasant tune rung upon
the Bells. Some say from the Latin
word Cymbalum.

Chimin, (French) a law-term,
signifying the Kings
highway, where there is free passage for him and his
people.

Chiminage, a toll for wayfarage or
passage thorough a
Forrest.

China, a great Country in Asia,
which is all under one King, whom they call Lord of the
World, and Son of Heaven.

Chincherie, niggardlinesse, a word used by
Chaucer.

Chione, the daughter of Deucalion
and wife of Pæonius the Epidaurian, she
being got with child by Phoebus and
Mercury, brought forth twins, Autolycus
to Mercury,
Philammon to Phoebus.

Chios, an Island in the Aegean
Sea, between
Lesbos and Samos: It is 900
furlongs in circuit.

Chiragrical, (Greek) having the gout in
ones hands.

Chirking, (old word) a chattering
noise.

Chirographer, a law-term, signifying him,
who in the Common-pleas office, ingrosseth fines
acknowledged in that Court, into a perpetual Record; also
he that giveth a bill of his hand: Chirograph
signifying in Greek ones own hand
writing.

Chirologie, (Greek) a talking by signs made
with the hand.

Chiromancy, (Greek) a divination, by
looking on the lines and marks of the hand. This art is
also called Palmestry.

Chiron, the son of Saturn and
Philyra, who by reason that Saturn lay
with Philyra in the shape of a horse, had his
upper parts like a man, his lower parts like a horse: he
grew famous for physick, brought up Achilles and
Aesculapius, and at length was placed among the
Stars, and called Sagittarius.

Chirrichote, a Spanish word used in
derision toward the
Frenchmen.

Not found in OED.



Chirurgery, (Greek) the Art of
cureing wounds, vulgarly
called Surgery.

Chivalrie, (French) horsemanship, valour;
also a law-term, signifying a tenure of land by
Knights-service.

Chivauchie, the same as
Chivalrie.

Chloris, the wife of Zephyrus, she
was called Flora, or the Goddesse of Flowers:
also the daughter of Amphion and Niobe,
who married Meleus, and brought forth
Nestor.

Chocolate, a compounded Indian
drink, whose chief ingredient is a fruit called
Cocao.

Cholmondley, a Town in Cheshire,
which gave name and habitation to the Noble Family of the
Cholmondley's or Cholmley's by
contraction.

Chorall, a law-term, one that by vertue of
the ancient orders of the Clergy was admitted to serve God
in the quire.

Chord, a term in Geometry, being a right
line subtending an arch of a Circle.

Choriambick, (Greek) a foot in Verse,
consisting of 4 syllables, two long ones at each extream,
and two short ones in the middle.

Chorion, (Greek) the outermost
tunicle that enwraps the
Birth.

Chorister, (Greek) a singing-man of a
quire.

Chorographer, (Greek) a describer or
decipherer of Countries and Kingdoms.

Chorus, a company of Singers in a quire,
also that which is sung or played in a
Tragedie or Comedy,
between every act.

Chrysmatory, (Greek) a vessel
wherein they put the holy
ointment (used by those of the Roman Church in the
Sacrament of Baptisme)
which is called Chrism.

Chrisome, (Greek) a white cloth put about a
child newly christned, in token of Baptism.

Christian, a proper name of women, first
derived from the profession it self.

Christianism, the profession of Christian
Religion.

Christopher, (Greek) a proper name of men,
signifying Christ carrier.

Chromatic, (Greek) keeping its
colour, also pleasant,
delightful, also a soft kind of musick, which by the
Ancients was taxed of effeminacy.

Chronical, (Greek) temporal.

A Chronicle, (Greek) a History of the
times.

Chronodix, (Greek) a certain kind of Dial
or Instrument, to shew how the time passeth away.

Not found in OED.





A Chronogram, (Greek) a verse
wherein the figurative
letters being joyned together, make up the year of our
Lord.


Chronography, (Greek) a writing of
Annals.

Chronology, (Greek) a computation of years,
whereby is shown the coherence of Histories.

Chrysocol, (Greek) a kind of green earth
called Borax, wherewith Goldsmiths
soder gold and other mettals together.

Chrysolite, a kind of pretious stone of a
gold-colour.

Chrysopase, another sort of precious stone
of a greenish colour.

Chrysopolis, a Promontory of Asia,
now called Scytary.

Chrysostomus, signifying in Greek
golden mouth, it was the
name of an ancient Bishop of Byzantium, famous
for his eloquence.

Chrystalline heaven, it is the ninth
heaven, mentioned
Gen. 1. which divideth the water from the
waters.

Chyle, (Greek) a white substance or milky
juice, into which the nutriment is converted by the heat
of the stomack, and which being there brought to that
pefection, passes thence away thorough Mesaraic veines into the
Liver.

Chylification, the act or faculty of
converting nutriment
into Chyle.

Chymistry, the art of dissolving mettals,
and of extracting the quintessence out of any
thing.

Chymere, a coat or jacket, also a Heralds
coat of arms.


C I

Cibarious, (Lat.) belonging to meat.

Ciboire, (French) a cup or box,
wherein the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper is kept among the Roman
Catholicks.

A Cicatrice, (Lat.) a scar or mark which is
left after a wound is healed up.

Cicely, a proper name of women, from the
Latin word Cæcilia, i. Greyeyd.

Cicero, the name of a most famous
Oratour and Philosopher
among the Romans, whence Ciceronical is used for
eloquent.

To Cicurate, (Lat.) to tame.

Cid, from the Arabick Caide, which
signifies a Lord or
great man. This word is used among the Spaniards, for a
valiant man or great Captain.

Cierges, waxcandles, lamps.
Chaucer.

Cilerie, a term in Architecture,
signifying the draperie
or leavage, which is wrought upon the heads of
pillars.

Cilicia, a Country of Asia the
Lesse, now called Caramania or
Turcomania.

Cilicious, (Lat.) belonging to a
Cilice or haircloath.

Cilinder, see Cylinder.

Cimbick, (Lat.) a niggard or
peny-father.

Not found in OED.



Cimbrians, a northern and warlick
people, anciently
inhabiting that Country which is now called
Denmark.

Cimeliark, (Lat.) a Vestry, also a place to
put Jewels in.

Cimice, a small red insect or worm.

A Cimiter, see Scymitar.

Cimmerians, a northern people whose Country
by reason of its distance from the Sun, is alwayes dark:
whence Cimmerian
darknesse is taken for a very thick obscurity. They live
near a certain narrow sea,
which from them is called Bosphorus
Cimmerius.
There is also a people of Italy, so called,
living between Baiæ and Cumæ,
incompassed about with high hills.

Cinamon, an Hebrew word, signifying a kind
of spice.

Cincantenier, (French) a Commander of 50
men; also the name of an Officer in Paris.

Not found in OED.



Cincture, (Lat.) an encompassing with a
girdle.

Ciniph, (Lat.) a gnat.

Cinkefoile, an herb called five
leaved-grasse.

Cinnaber, a red stone found in Mines, which
is used for a Vermilion colour.

Cinople, or Sinople, a kind of
red-lead, from the City Sinope, whence it is
digged.

Cinque-ports, five Havens which lie
toward France on
the East part of England: namely, Hastings,
Dover, Hith, Rumney, and Sandwich; the
inhabitants of these Ports have many priviledges and
immunities above others
of the Commons of that Country. Also they have an especial Go­
vernour, 
who is called Lord-warden of the Cinque-ports, having all
the authority that a
Lord Admiral hath in places not exempted.

A Cipher, from the Hebrew word
Saphar, to
number, signifieth any figure or



number, especially that figure in form of an o. which
onely serveth to augment the value of a number, also a
Character wherein secret
letters are written.


Cipresse, a fine curled linnen, of which
Hoodes for women are made.

Circester, or Cirencester, an
ancient City in Glocestershire, which standeth
upon the River Corinus, or Churn, it was
formerly called Corinium, and
Durocornovium, also Vrbs Passerum, in
regard it was set on fire by sparrows, by a stratageme of
one Gurmundus;
it was taken from the Britaines by
Ceaulin, King of the West Saxons, also
Cineglise was here defeated by Penda,
King of the Mercians.

Circinate, (Lat.) to make a Circle with a
pair of Compasses.

Circk, (Lat.) a place in Rome made
circularly where the people sate and
beheld those playes, which
are called circenses.

A Circuit of action, a Term in Law,
signifying a longer
course of proceeding then is needfull, to recover the
thing sued for.

Circuition, (Lat.) a fetching a
compasse, or going
about.

Circular, (Lat.) round, in fashion of a
circle.

Circulation, (Lat.) an encompassing, a
fetching a round circle, also a subliming of waters by a
Limbeck.

Circumaggeration, (Lat.) a heaping round about.

See "circum-" in OED.



Circumambient, (Lat.) incircling, or
flowing about, an Epithet proper to the aire.

Circumambulation, a walking about, also a
far-fetch't discourse.

Circumcelliones, certain abominable
Hereticks, who to get
themselves repute, laid violent hands upon
themselves.

Circumcision, (lat.) a cutting about, a
Ceremony used among the Jews, namely a cutting off the
fore-skins from their children
as soon as they were eight dayes old.

Circumduction, (lat.) a leading about, a
deceiving.

Circumference, (lat.) a line circularly
drawn about the center.

Circumferentor, a Mathematical
instrument, used by
Geometricians and Surveyors,
it is made of wood, eight inches in length, and four
broad, three quarters of an inch thick, about the middle
of the upper-side is a
round hole, three inches and a half about, and half an
inch deep, in which is placed a
Card, divided into
120 equal parts, in
which Card is drawn a Dyal, to know the hour of the
Sun.

Circumflex, (lat.) bowed about, also a mark
over a Vowel, whereby the most full Greek accent is
express't.

Circumfluous, or Circumfluent,
(latin) flowing about.

Circumforaneous, (lat.)
loitering about the
Market, or Court.

Circumfusion, (lat.) a powring
about.

Circumgyration, (lat.) a fetching a great
circuit round about.

Circumjacent, (lat.) lying about.

Circumincession, (lat.) a word used by the
Divines, to expresse the existence of the holy
Trinity.

Circumligation, (lat.) a binding
about.

Circumlition, (lat.) a dawbing, or
plaistering
about.

Circumlocution, (lat.) a circuit of
words, or going
about the bush.

Circumvection, (lat.) a carrying
about.

Circumplication, (lat,) a folding
about.

Circumrotation, (lat.) a wheeling
about.

Circumscription, (lat.) a writing
about.

Circumspection, (lat.) warinesse,
heedfulnesse.

A Circumstance, (lat.) a quality that
accompanieth any
thing, as time, place.

Circumstantibus, a Law Term, those that
stand about to make up the number of the Jurors: if any
impanell'd appear not, or appearing, be challenged by
either party.

Circumvallation, (lat.) an enclosing, or
trenching about.

Circumvent, (lat.) to over-reach, to
deceive.

Circumvolate, (lat.) to fly about.

Circumvolve, (lat.) to roll about.

Circumvolution, a rolling, wheeling, or
turning about.

Circumdate, (lat.) to encompasse
about.

Circumsonate, (lat.) to sound about, or on
every side.

Cisalpine, Countreys on this side the
Alpes.

Cisbury, a Town in Sussex, 
so called from Cissa,
the son of Aello, and second King of the South
Saxons, who with his brother Cimen,
landed with great Forces at Cimonshore.

Cistercian Monks, see Bernardine
Monks.

Cistus, a certain bramble, called the
holy rose.



Citation, (lat.) the alleadging of any Text,
also a Summons to appear before any Court.


Citherides, a name given to the
Muses.

Not found in OED.



Citriale, a Cittern, a word used by
Chaucer.

Not found in OED.



Citrine colour, the colour of a
Pomecitron, or golden
colour.

Citrull, a kinde of Cucumber.

Cittadell, a Castle, or Fortresse of a
Citie.

Civet, an Arabian word, it is a
kinde of Unctious substance, that hath a very sweet smell,
and seems to be an excrement coming
from some beast.

A Civick Crown, a reward anciently given by
the Romans, to a deserving Citizen.


C L

Clack Wool, is to cut off the sheeps mark,
which maketh it to weigh lesse, and to yield lesse
custome.

Claick-geese, see Bernacles.

Claim, a Law Term, is a challenge of
interest in any thing that is out of ones possession, as
Claim by Charter, or descent,
&c.

Clamour, (lat.) noise.

Clan, a tribe, or family in
Scotland, as Clan Mackduff, the family
of Mackduff.

Clancular, (lat.) privie, secret.

Clandestine, (lat.) the same.

Clangour, (lat.) a shrill cry, or great
sound.

Clap, a Term in Faulconry, the
neather part of a Hawks beak, is called the
Hawks clap.

Clara, a proper name of women,
signifying in Latin
clear, or bright.

Clare, a Town of Suffolk, which
gave name unto the ancient family of the Clares,
descended from Earle Gislebert the
Norman, as also the Title of Dukedom, unto
Leonel Son to King Edward the
3d. who for the more full sound was stiled Duke
of Clarence.

Clarentieux, one of the Kings at
arms.

Claricord, or Clericord, a kinde
of Musical instrument,
somewhat like a Cymbal.

Clarie, a kinde of Herb, so called.

Clarigation, a Law Term, used by the
ancient Romans, being the same as
reprizal with us, see more in reprizal.

Clarion, a kinde of Trumpet.

Clarissonant, (lat.) clear-voic't, shrill-sounding.

Clark, a Clergy-man, a Schollar, a
Secretary, also a man
imployed in some great Office, as Clark of the Crown in
Chancery, Clark of the Crown in the Kings Bench, Clark of
the Extreats, Clark
of the Pell, of the petty Bag, of the Kings Wardrop,
of the Kings silver, &c. which see in their
several places.

Clarmathan, signifies in the practick of
Scotland, the warranting of stolen Cattel, or
goods.

Not found in OED.



Classe, an order, a rank, or degree, also a
Navy.

Claudicate, to be lame.

Clavecymbal, or Claricymbal, a
kinde of instrument with wire-strings, by some
taken for a Harpsical, or
Virginal.

Claver, a kinde of Herb, called
Trefoil.

Clavicular, (lat.) belonging to a
key.

Clavis, (lat.) a key, also an exposition of
hard words.

Clause, an Article, or conclusion, from the
Latin word Claudere, because it shuts up a
sentence.

Claustral, (lat.) belonging to a close
place, retired, or recluse.

Clement, (lat.) a proper name,
signifying milde, or
gentle.

Clementines, a part of the Canon-law, or
certain decretals collected by Pope
Clement.

Cleopatra, a Queen of Aegypt,
first loved by Julius Cæsar, afterwards married
to Marck Antonie, who having killed himself she
procured her own death, by setting Asps to her
naked breasts.

Clep, a Scots Law Term, a form of
claim, petition, or libel, or certain solemn words used,
especially in Criminal causes.

Clepen, (old word) they call.

Clepsydrie, (Greek) an hour-glasse, which
measures out the time by the insensible
flowing of water.

Clergion, a Clark, Chaucer.

Clergie, the whole number of those that
take upon them the Ministery, also a Term, signifying an
appeal, a Plea to an Indictment, heretofore onely
Clergy-men, but now all men have the benefit of their
Ordinaries.

Clerk, see Clark.

Cleromancy, (Greek) a divination by
lots.

The Clew of a sayl, the lower corner of a
sayl, which reaches down to the place where the sheates
are made fast to the sayl.

Clicket, a clapper of a door,
Chaucer also useth
it for a key.



Clicketting, a Term in hunting, a Fox when he
desires copulation, is said to go to his clicketting.


Clientele, (lat.) a taking into ones
protection, a train of
clients and followers.

Cliff, a cleft Mountain, or broken
Rock.

Climacterical, from the Greek word
Climax, a scale,
or ladder, every seventh, and ninth year is counted a
climacterical year: wherein, if any misfortune, or
sicknesse happen, it is accounted most dangerous, as
likewise those years, which are compounded of
7ths. & 9ths. up to the
63d. which is held most dangerous of
all.

Climate, (Greek) a portion of the earth
contained between two parallel lines, in which space there
is half an hours difference
in the length of the day.

Clinick, (Greek) bedred.

Clio, one of the nine Muses, who is said to
be the first inventour of History.

Cloacal, full of filth and nastinesse, from
Cloaca a sink, or house of office.

Cloelia, a Noble Virgin among the
Romans, who being left as
a hostage with Porsenna,
King of the Hetrurians made an escape, and swom
over the River Tybris to her own party.

Closet, a Term in Heraldry, being half of
the Barre, See Bar.

Closh, an unlawfull game forbidden by the
statute.

Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos,  the
three Destinies, who spin the thread of humane life,
Clotho carries the thread, Lachesis
spins, and Atropos cuts it off.

Cloudesbery, a plant which groweth
peculiarly upon
Pendlehill in Lancashire, so termed, as
if it came out of the clouds.

Clove, a Law Term, the two and
thirtieth part of a
weight.

Clun, a Castle in Shropshire,
built by the Fitz Alans, descended from
Flaold the Norman, and defended by them
as Lords Marchers (and afterwards Earls of
Arundel) against
the inroades of the Welsh.

Cluniack Monks, Monks of the
Monastery of
Cluyne in France.

Clyster, (Greek) a certain instrument
whereby to convey any purging ingredient
up into the guts through the fundament.

Clytemnestra, the daughter of
Tyndarus, and Leda, the wife of
Agamemnon, she lived
in Adultery with Aegystus, and with his help
killed her husband Agamemnon, but his son
Orestes revenged his death upon his mother and
Aegysthus.

Clytia, one of the daughters of
Oceanus, who discovering that Apollo lay
with Leucothoe,
the daughter of Orchamus was slighted by him, and
pining her self away was turned into a flower, called a
Heliotrope.

Clyto, a Title of Honour, anciently used in
this Nation, and peculiarly ascribed to the Kings sons, it
comes from the Greek word κλυτοσ, i.
e. glorious, or excellent, in the same sense was the
Saxon word Aetheling used.


C N

Cnidus, a Citie of Caria, where
Venus was worshipped in ancient times. It is now
called Cabocrio

An entry in the Errata corrects the running-on of this entry and the next.



Cnossus, or Gnossus, a
Citie of Crete, where Minas anciently
kept his Court. It was anciently called
Ceratus, from a River of that name, which ran hard by.

Cnouts delf, otherwise called Steeds
dike, a certain Ditch, which Canute the
Dane caused to be made between Ramsey
and Whitlesey, to abate the fury of the Sea
thereabout, where in a great storm his sons and servants
had like to have been cast away, it was also called
Swerdes delf, because it was marked out with
their swords.


C O

To Coacervate, (lat.) to heap
together.

Coaction, (lat.) a compelling or
constraining.

Coadjutor, (lat.) a fellow-labourer, an
assistant or helper.

Coadunation, (lat.) an assembling or
bringing together.

Coætaneous, (lat.) of the same age.

Coæternal, (lat.) equal in
eternity.

Coagulation, (lat.) a thickning or curdling
together.

Coalition, (lat.) a growing
together, an
increasing.

Coaptation, (lat.) a fitting
together.

Coarctation, (lat.) a streightning, a
pressing together.

Coassation, (lat.) a joyning together with
boards.

Coaxation, (lat.) a noise of frogs, a
croaking.

Cobus, a River of Colchis, that
hath golden sands, it
riseth out of the mountain Caucasus, and gave original to
the Fable of the golden Fleece.



Coccinean, of a Crimson, or Scarlet die.


Coccium, an ancient Town of
Lancashire,
mentioned by the Emperour Antoninus,
and thought to be the same with that, which is now called
Cockley.

Cockatrice, a kinde of Serpent, which is
also called a Basilisk, ingendred as some say from a
Cock's Egg.

Cocket, a Law Term, being a Seal
appertaining to the
Custome-house, also a scrowl delivered by the Officers of
the Custome-house to Merchants, to
Warrant that their
merchandize is Customed.

Cockle, (Lat.) a Shell-fish, also a Weed
called Corn-rose, darnel, or Field-nigella.

Cocle-stairs, a Term in Architecture,
winding stairs.

Cockney, a vulgar Term given to one born
and bred in the Citie, which comes as some think from the
River Thames, being
in ancient time called Cockney.

Cocles, (Lat.) a man born with one eye,
also the name of a valiant Roman, who alone fought against
all the forces of King Porsenna, upon a Bridge,
untill the Bridge it self was cut down, whereupon he threw
himself into the River armed, and swom over.

Coction, (lat.) a seething, also a
digestion of the meat in
the stomack.

Cocytus, a River of Hell, running out of
the Stygian Lake.

The Code, a volume of the Civil Law, which
contains divers precepts of the
Emperours. It comes
from the Latin word Codex.

Codeta, certain Orchards about
Tiber, wherein grow many shrubs like horses
tailes.

Codicil, a word used in the Civil Law,
being a just sentence of our Will,
concerning that, which
we would have done after our death, without the appointing
of an Executor, and is a kinde of supplement to a Will.

Codiniack, (French) a kinde of
Marmalade made of
Quinces.

Codrus, a King of the Athenians,
who because the Oracle had foretold that the
Peloponesians should overcome, if they did not
kill the Athenian King, he disguised himself like
a beggar, and voluntarily exposed
himself to death for the safety of his Countrey.

Coeliacal Vein, see Vein.

Cœmeterie, (Greek) a Church-yard.

Coemption, (Lat.) a certain Ceremony used
among the Romans, whereby the husband and wife seemed to
buy one another.

Coequal, (lat.) equal one to
another.

Coertion, (lat.) a withholding, or
restraing.

Coessential, (lat.) of the same
essence.

Coexistent, (lat.) having a being
together, or at the same
time.

Coffa, see Cauphe.

Cofferer of the Kings houshold, a
principal Officer in the
Kings Court under the Controller, who hath a special
charge over the other Officers of the houshold, and payeth
them their wages.

Cogitation, (lat.) a thinking, or
meditating.

Cognation, (lat.) kindred, or
alliance.

Cognisance, (French) a badge in armes, also
an acknowledging of a Fine, also a hearing a thing
judicially; moreover, a Cognisance of a Plea is a
priviledge that a Citie, or Town hath of the Kings Grant,
to hold a Plea of all Contracts, and of Lands, within the
Precincts of the Franchise,
and that when any man is impleaded for any such thing at
the Kings Court, the Mayor, or Bayliffs of such Franchises
may ask Cognisance of the Plea, that is, that the matter
be determined before them.

Cognisee, is he, to whom a Fine is
acknowledged.

Cognisour, is he, who acknowledgeth a
Fine.

Cognition, (lat.) a knowing, or judging of
a thing.

Cognitionibus admittendis, a Writ
directed to a Justice, or
any that hath power to take a Fine, commanding him to
certifie it in the Court of Common-Pleas.

Cognominate, (lat.) to give a sirname to
any one.

Coherence, (lat.) a sticking unto, an
agreeing, or hanging together.

Cohibition, (lat.) a keeping back, or
restraining.

Cohobation, (lat.) a Term in
Chymistry, which
signifies a powring of the distill'd
liquor on its fæces, and distilling it
again.

A Cohort, among the Romans, was the tenth
part of a legion, and contained five hundred
Souldiers.

Cohortation, (lat.) an exhorting, or
perswading.



Coincident, (lat.) falling out together,
hapning at the same time.


Coines, corners of a wall, also pieces of
wood wherewith Gunners mount Ordnance.

Coint, (old word) strange.

Coition, (lat.) an assembling together,
also carnal copulation. Coition of the Moon is also when
the Moon is in the same sign and degree with the
Sun.

To Colaphize, (lat.) to cuff or buffet with
the fist.

Colbrand, the Danish Giant who was overcome
by Guy Earle of Warick.

Colchis, a country of Asia, near
Pontus, where Aeætes raigned, with whom
the Argonauts made war about the Golden
Fleece.

Collactaneous, (lat.) nursed together,
sucking at the same time.

Collapsed, (lat.) fallen to decay,
ruined.

Collateral, (lat.) equal with either side,
Collateral relations or kindred, are brothers or sisters
children, or those that descend from them. Collateral
security is that security which is given over and above
the deed it self.

Collation, (lat.) a joyning or
comparing together, also
a Banquet; also Collation
of a benefice is the bestowing of a benefice by the Bishop
who hath it in his own gift or patronage; whereas the
institution into a
benefice is performed by the Bishop at the presentation of
another who is Patron of the place, or hath a
Patrons right. It is
moreover a term used by Booksellers, and signifies a
looking upon the letters at the bottom of every page to
see that the book be perfect.

Collative, a unanimous contribution of the
people toward any publick work.

To Collaud, (lat.) to joyn with others in
the praise of any one.

A Colleague, (lat.) a fellow or
copartner in any
office.

A Collection, (lat.) a gathering or levie.
Collection is when two principal significates do
not behold one another, but both of them cast several
aspects to a more weighty Planet than themselves, and they
both receive him in some of their essential dignities,
then shall the Planet which thus collects both their
lights, bring the thing demanded to
perfection.

Collects things gathered out of other mens
Works, also certain select prayers in the Common-prayer
book, with the Epistles
and Gospels for such and such dayes.

Colledge, (lat.) a place set apart for the
society and cohabitation of Students.

Collerage, a pecuniary mulct in
France exacted for the collars worn by
wine-drawing horses or men.

Not found in OED.



Collet, the same as Beazel of a
ring.

Collieth, a term in Faulconrie, when they
say, the Hawk collieth, and not beaketh.

Colligate, (lat.) to fasten, or tye
together.

Collimation, (lat.) an aiming at a
mark.

Colliquation, (lat.) a dissolving or
melting,

Collision, (lat.) a crushing, or bruising
together.

Collistrigium, or Collistridium, a
word used in the practick of Scotland, and
signifies a pillory or stocks.

Collocation, (lat.) a placing in order, a
letting out to hire.

Collock, an old Saxon word, signifying a
paile with one handle.

To Collogue, to flatter, from the Latin
word Colloquium, a talking together.

A Colonel, a Commander in chief of a
Regiment or Brigade, from the Latin word Columna
a pillar, because he is one of the chief props and pillars
of an Army.

Colloquy, (lat.) a talking of two men
together.

Colluctation, (lat.) a strugling
together.

Collusion, (lat.) a dealing 
deceitfully; in Common-law it signifieth an action
commenc't against another on purpose to defraud
him.

Collybist, (Greek) a money-changer.

Collyrie, (Greek) a term in Physick,
signifying a medicinable water for the eyes.

Colobe, an ancient kind of short coat,
reaching to the knees.

Coloieros, a certain religious Order
among the Greeks.

Colon, (Greek) a mark or pause of a
sentence not fully ended, also one of the three great
guts.

Colony, (lat.) a company of men sent out of
one country to inhabite another.

Coloquintida, a kind of wild gourd, used by
Physitians in purging medicines.

Coloss, a statue of a vast bignesse: the
most famous Coloss in the World was that of the Sun in the
Port of Rhodes.

Colostration, a term in physick, being



a disease in children, caused by sucking bad milk.


Colpindach, or Cowdach, a word
used in the practick of Scotland, signifying a
young cow or heifer.

Colran, a Country of Ireland,
anciently called Krine, bordering south upon
Tir Oen.

Colubraria, an Island of the
Iberian sea, abounding with snakes, from the
Latin word Coluber, a snake.

Coludum, the ancient name of a Town of the
Province of Merch in Scotland,
called also Coldana by Ptolomy Colania, now
Coldingham, where there was a famous Monastery,
the Nuns whereof with their Prioresse Ebba, cut
off their lips and noses to avoid the lustful violence of
the Danes.

A Columbarie, (lat.) a Dove-house.

Columbine, a kind of Flower so
called.

Column, (lat.) a pillar.

Columnæ Herculis, or Hercules 
pillars, two mountains in the West, the one in
Europe called Calpe, the other in
Africa called Abyla, which
Hercules separated the one from the other. Others
say they were two pillars of Brasse in the Isles of
Cades.

Colures, two great circles in the Globe of
the World, which passing through the Poles and the 4
principal points of the Zodiack, cut themselves
equally, and divide the
Glob into equal parts.

Colus a beast of whitish colour that hath a
head like a hog, and that drinks in water thorough the
nostrils.

Not found in OED.



Coma Berenices, a figure like a triangle in
the tail of Leo.

Comald, a strict Order of Fryers
instituted in
Italy, in the year 1012. by one Romoald
of Ravenna.

Combat, in the Common law signifies a
formal trial of a doubtful cause by the sword or bastons
of two Champions, wherein if the defendant can defend
himself till the stars be
seen in the firmament, and demand judgement if he ought to
fight any longer, then judgement is to be given on the
defendants side.

Combination, (lat.) a joyning together,
also a term in law, signifying the entring of two or more
into a conspiracy to perform
any unlawful or mischeivous design.

Combustible, (lat.) apt to take fire,
easily inflamed.

Combustion, is when any Planet is not
distant from the Sun eight degrees and three minutes,
either before or after his body, and a Planet still
remains under the Sun, until he is fully elongated 17
degrees.

Comedie, see Comædie.

Comessation, (lat.) revelling,
inordinate eating and
drinking.

Comestion, (lat.) a devouring or
eating up.

Comet, (Greek) a certain Meteor
called a blazing Star,
being a hot and dry exhalation set on fire in the upper
Region and portending many strange events: of their
several Sects, Vide Plin. l. 2. c. 25. de
Nat.

Comical, (Greek.) merry, facetious,
pertaining to Comedies.

Comitatu Commisso, is a Writ, or
Commission, whereby
the Shriffe is authoriz'd
to take upon him the sway of the County.

Comitie, (lat.) courtesie, gentlenesse,
civility of behaviour.

Comitial, (lat.) belonging to a
Convention, or
Assembly of people, which is called
Comitium, also in Physick the
Comitial disease,
signifying the falling sicknesse.

Comma, (Greek) a point in a part of a
sentence, without any perfect sense.

Commaculate, (lat.) to defile, or
pollute.

Commandment, in Common Law, is
taken either for the
Commandment of the King, when upon his meer motion he
commandeth any thing to be done, or else for the offence
of him that willeth another to transgresse the Law.

Commaterial, (lat.) made of the same
matter, or substance with another.

Commaundry, was in ancient time a Mannour
or chief Messuage by which lands belonging to the Priory
of St. Johns in Jerusalem were holden in
England.

A Commeatur, (lat.) one that passeth as a
messenger from one place to another.

Commemoration, (lat.) a mentioning or
rehearsing the deeds of any one
worthy of praise.

To Commence, (French) to begin, also a term
in Common law, signifying to proceed
in any action or suite against any one, also to take a
degree in the Universities.

Commendaces, (French) prayers for the dead,
also verses or orations made in praise of the dead.

Commendam, a word used by
Ecclesia­



stical Writers, whereby is signified the
intrusting of a
Benefice which is void to the charge and care of a
sufficient Clergyman,
until it can be conveniently supplied.


Commendation, (lat.) a praising or
extolling.

Commensal, (lat.) a companion at the Table,
a fellow Commoner.

Commensuration, (Lat.) a measuring one
thing with another.

A Commentary, (French) an explaining or
exposition of a thing; it signifieth also metaphorically,
a comprehending the depth of any misery.

Commerce, (French) a traffiquing or
exchanging of wares.

Commigration, (Lat.) a removing from
one place to another.

Commination, (Lat.) a fierce and
vehement
threatning.

Comminution, (Lat.) bruising or
breaking to
pieces.

Commiseration, (Lat.)
tender-heartednesse
or compassion.

Commissary, according to the acception of
the Cananists, is
he who exerciseth Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction in places of the Diocesse so far distant from
the chief City, that the
Chancelour cannot call the subjects to the Bishops
principal Consistory
without their great molestation; also an Officer in war,
is he who is to look to the distribution of victuals,
provided for the Army and Garrisons.

Commission, (Lat.) a delegation or mandate
given for the warrant for the exercising of a jurisdiction
given by Letters pattents,
or the publick Seal.

Commissure, (Lat.) a word used in
Architecture, being a close joyning of planks or stone, or
any other material together.

Committee, is he or they to whom the
consideration or ordering of any matter is referred,
either by some Court, or consent
of parties to whom it belongeth.

Commixtion, (Lat.) a mingling
together.

Commodious, (Lat.) profitable,
gainful.

Common, signifieth in the Common law, that
soile or water whereof the use is common in a Town or
Lordship.

Commonality, (French) the common
people.

Common-pleas, is one of the Courts in
Westminster, but in ancient time moveable. It was
erected in Henry the thirds time, for the trying
of all civil causes, both reall and personal. The cheif
Judge whereof is called Lord cheif Justice of the
Common-pleas: the rest of the Officers are Custos
brevium; four Exigenters, fourteen
Filazers, a Clark of the warrants, a Clark of the jurata
writs, Clark of the Treasury, Clark of the Kings Silver,
Clark of the Essoynes, and Clark of the Outlawries.

Commoration, (Lat.) a tarrying in a
place.

Commotion, (Lat.) a tumult or uproar.

Commotes, or Commoithes, a word
used by the Welch, for a part of a shire, or a hundred,
also a gathering made upon the people of a hundred.

Communication, (Lat.) an imparting one to
another.

Community, or Communion, (Lat.)
injoying in common, or
mutual participation.

Communition, (Lat.) a fortifying.

Commutation, (Lat.) a changing one thing
for another.

Commutative justice, is the justice of a
contractor, or his performing a covenant, in buying and
selling, lending and borrowing,
&c.

Comædie, or Comedie, a Stage-play
wherein are represented the actions of human life.

Compact, (Lat.) an agreement.

Compaction, or Compage, (lat.) a
fastning or joyning close
together. In Philosophy
the contracting of a substance by having lesse parts, or
by the more close sticking together of the parts, and it
is opposed to diffusion.

Companage, (Ital.) the same as cates, all
kind of victuals eaten with bread.

A Comparition, (lat.) an appearing to open
view.

A Compasse, a Mathematical Instrument
wherewith to make a round Circle; also a Mariners
Compasse, is a certain Instrument
used by Seamen, for the better guiding
and directing them in their Navigation.

Compassionate, (French) full of
tendernesse and
compassion.

Compatible, (French) which can agree
together.

Compatient, (lat.) suffering
together.

Compatriote, (lat.) one of the same
Country, a fellow-Citizen.

Compeer, (lat.) Compar or
Compater)



a consort, or fellow, also a Gossip, also in the Isle of
Zant, those young men invited together to
Weddings, are called Compeers.


Compel, (lat.) to force, to
constrain.

Compellation, (lat.) a calling any one by
their name, also a mentioning with
disgrace.

Compendiousnesse, (lat.) shortnesse,
brevity.

A Compendium, (lat.) an abridgement, also a
gaining by thriftinesse.

Compensation, (lat.) a making
recompence, a repaying
a good, or bad turn.

Comperennitation, (lat.) a deferring, or
putting off.

Competency, (lat.) sufficiency, or having
enough.

Competitour, (lat.) a rival, one that seeks
after the same thing another sues for.

Compile, (French) to heap together.

Compital, (lat.) belonging to the
Compita, or
crosse wayes.

Compitals, certain feasts solemnized in
those crosse wayes.

Complacential, (lat.) milde in
behaviour, of a
curteous or affable nature. Artamenes.

Complainant to a Magistrate, making ones
case known, suing for relief.

Complaisance, (French) the same as
Complacence, an obliging carriage, an
aptnesse to comply.
Cleopatra.

Complement, (lat.) a filling up, also
Ceremony in speech and behaviour, also a Geometrical Term,
signifying those parts of a Quadrangle, which being added
to the Gnomon, and the Diagonal make up the whole.
Complement of an Angle, is so much as the Angle wanteth of
ninty degrees.

The Completes, (Spanish) a piece of
service said in the
evening.

Complex, (Lat.) compound, containing
several things together.

Complexion, (lat.) the state and
constitution of the
body.

Complicate, (Lat.) to wrap, or fold
up.

A Complice, differs from a partner in this,
that a partner may be said to be a companion in good, or
evil, a complice in evil onely.

Comportment, (French) carriage, or
behaviour.

Composition, (Lat.) a setting together,
also a work set forth in any piece of
learning, or art.

Compotation, (Lat.) a drinking bout, or
merry meeting.

Comprehension, (Lat.) a laying on, also
understanding, or finding out the depth of any
mystery.

Compressure, or Compression,
(Lat.) a pressing
together.

Comprise, (French) to contain, the same as
comprehend.

Comprobation, (Lat.) a mutual
allowing, or
approving.

Compromise, a Term in Law, being a mutual
promise of two, or more parties at difference to referre
the ending of their controversie to the judgement of
Arbitrators.

Compton, in the hole, a Town in
Warwick-shire,
which gave name and habitation
to the ancient family of the Comptons, advanced
by Queen Elizabeth, to the
Title of Barons.

Compulsion, (Lat.) a constraining, or
forcing.

Compunction, (Lat.) remorce, or trouble of
minde for any crime committed.

Compurgation, (Lat.) a Term in Law, a
justifying by Oath the report, or Oath of another.

Computation, (lat.) a reckoning, or
casting of account.

De Computo reddendo, a Writ
compelling a Bayliff,
Chamberlain, or receiver to give up their accounts.

Comrade, the same as Camerade.

Comus, a certain God among the
Heathen, that was the
chief patron of revellings
and debauches.

Conaught, or Connacht, a Province
of Ireland, the people whereof were
anciently called
Concani, or Gangani.

Concamerate, (lat.) a word of
Architecture, to
make a vaulted roof to Arch.

Concatenate, (lat.) to chain
together.

Concavity, (lat.) hollownesse.

Concealers, a Term in Common-law,
signifying by Antiphrasis, or contrary speaking, such men
as finde out concealed Lands, which are privily kept from
the King, or the State by common persons, who have nothing
to shew for them.

Concede, (lat.) to yield, or grant.

Consent, (lat.) a Harmony, or agreement in
Musick.

Concentricks, (lat.) Sphears, or Circles,
having the one common Center.

Conceptacle, (lat.) a capacious
hollownesse, that
which is apt to contain, or receive
any thing.



Conception, (latin) a conceiving with Childe,
also a bringing forth any fancy, or conceit.


Concern, (lat.) to regard, to belong
unto.

Concertation, (lat.) a striving
together.

Concession, (lat.) a granting, or
yielding.

Concidence, (lat.) a falling together, a a
making a Cadence at the same time.

Conciliate, (lat.) to make to agree, to
bring together.

Concinnate, (lat.) apt, fit, proper.

Concional, (lat.) belonging to a speech
made in publick.

Concise, (lat.) short consisting of few
words.

Concitation, (lat.) a stirring up, or
provoking.

Conclamation, (lat.) a great noise, or
shouting of much people.

Conclave, (lat.) a Closet, or inner Chamber,
also an Assembly of the Cardinals, met to consult about
any affaire of the Church.

A Conclusion, (lat.) a shutting up, or
ending of a businesse.

Concoction, (lat.) a seething, or boyling,
a digestion of the meat in the stomack.

Concomitant, (lat.) bearing any one
company.

Concord, (lat.) agreement, in Common-law,
it is defined to be an agreement,
between parties that
intend the levying of a Fine of Lands one to another, in
what manner the Land shall passe, also a perfect Tone in
Musick, as an eighth, or a third, &c.

Concorporation, (lat.) a mixing of
bodies together into
one.

Concourse, (lat.) a meeting together of
people.

Concrete, (lat.) joyned, or grown
together, also a Logical
Term, signifying an accident joyned with any subject,
whereas abstract is the accident alone.

Concretion, (lat.) a growing
together.

Concubinage, (French) fornication, also a
Term in Common-law, signifying an exception against her
that sueth for her Dowry, alleadging that she is not wife,
but Concubine to the party, in whose Lands she seeks to be
indowed.

Conculcate, (lat.) to stamp upon, or tread
under foot.

Concupiscence, (lat.) a vehement desire of
any thing, but more particularly a lustfull, or venereal
appetite.

The Concupiscible faculty, the sensual part
of the Soul, which onely seeks after pleasures and
lusts.

Concurrence, (lat.) a meeting together,
also an agreeing.

Concussion, (lat.) a jumbling together,
also extorsion by terrifying.

Concussionary, an Officer, or Magistrate
that by false shew of Authority extorts gifts, and bribes
from men.

Cond, (a Term in Navigation) to lead, or
direct a ship, which way she shall go.

Condensation, (lat.) a making thick.

Condereum, the ancient name of a Town, in
the Bishoprick of Durham, where in old time the
left wing of the Astures kept their station, it is now
called Chester upon the Street.

Conders, are those men that stand upon the
high places, near the Sea-Coast, at the time of
Herring-fishing, to make signes with bough's in
their hands unto the fishers, which way the Herrings
passe, which they easily discern by the blue
colour, which they make in
the water.

Condescention, (lat.) a yielding unto, or
complying with.

Condict, (lat.) an appointment, or
composition.

Condigne, (lat.) worthy, according to
merit.

Condement, (lat.) seasoning.

A Condisciple, (lat.) a School-fellow, or
fellow Student.

Condited, (lat.) seasoned.

Condition, (lat.) nature, disposition,
also estate, or fortune. In
Common-law it signifies a rate, manner, or Law, annexed to
mens Acts, staying, or suspending the same, and making
them uncertain, whether
they shall take effect, or no.

Condolence, (lat.) a grieving with
another.

Condonation, (lat.) a pardoning, or
forgiving.

Conducible, (lat.) profitable, also to be
hired.

Conduct, (French) a guiding, also a
management of any affair. Artamenes.

Conductour, (lat.) a leader, or
guider.

Condylome, (Greek) an excrescence of
flesh.

Cone, a Geometrical figure, circularly flat
at the bottome, and sharpning by
degrees, till it end in a
point at the top, also a Pine Apple.

Confabulation, (lat.) a discoursing, or
talking together.



Confarreation, (lat.) a certain Ceremony
with a Cake, anciently used at marriages.


Confection, (lat.) a finishing, a mingling of divers things together,
a making of Conserves.

A Confident, (lat.) one that is imploy'd in
matters of secresie and trust.

Configulation, (lat.) a making of earthen
ware.

Configuration, (lat.) a likenesse, or
resemblance of
figures.

Confines, (French) Marches, or Borders of a
Countrey.

Confirmation, (lat.) a making sure, also a
Law Term, signifying a strengthning of an estate formerly
had, and yet voidable, though not presently void.

Confiscation, (lat.) a Law Term, a
bring-away a mans goods, as forfeited to the
publick Treasury, from
Fiscus a Pannyer, or Hamper, a place where the
Kings Treasure useth to
be kept.

Conflagration, (lat.) a great consuming, or
destroying with fire.

Confluence, (lat.) a meeting of divers
waters in one, also a great concourse of people.

Confluxibility, (lat.) an aptnesse to flow
together, or to be mingled one with
another.

Confoederate, (lat.) joyn'd together in a
league by Oath.

Conformable, (lat.) agreeable,
suitable.

Confront, (French) to bring face to face,
also to compare together.

Conge, (French) leave, Conge
d'Estire, signifies in the Common-law, the Kings
permission to a Dean, or Chapter to chuse a Bishop, or to
an Abbey, to chuse their Abbot.

Congenerous, (lat.) of the same sort, of
the same stock.

Congeniality, (lat.) a resemblance of
Genius and fancie.

Congelation, (lat.) a freesing, or
congealing.

Congersbury, a Town in
Somerset-shire, so named from one Congar, who liv'd there an Eremite, whom
Capgrave an old Writer affirms to have been the Emperours son of
Constantinople.

Congiary, a gift of a Prince, or great man
to the people.

Conglobation, (lat.) a gathering round into
a Globe.

Conglomeration, (lat.) a rolling up into a
heap, a winding into a bottome.

Conglutination, (lat.) a fastning
together with
Glue.

Congratulation, (Lat.) a rejoycing with any
one for his good fortune.

Congregation, (lat.) an assembling, or
gathering of people together.

Congresse, (lat.) a coming together, also
an incountring.

Congruence, or Congruity, (lat.)
agreeablenesse.

Conical, having the figure of a
Cone.

Conjectural, (lat.) that may be
conjectured, or
guess't at.

Conjugal, (latin) pertaining to
marriage, belonging to
man and wife.

Conjugates, a Term in Logick,
signifying things of
the same rank, order, or original.

Conjugation, (lat.) a deriving of things
under the same order, a coupling of verbs with their
moods, and tenses under the same theme.

Conjunction, (lat.) a joyning together,
also a Grammatical word, one of the eight parts of
speech.

Conjuration, (lat.) a conspiracy, or plot,
also a compact, or bargaining with the Devil, or evil
Spirits, to know any secret,
or effect any purpose.

Conizee, and Conizour, see Cognisee, and Cognisour.

Connacht, see Conaught.

Connascency, (lat.) a being born
together, a springing
together.

Conne, to learn without book, from the
Dutch word Kennen, to know, or learn.

Connen, (old word) can.

Connexion, (lat) a knitting, or joyning
together.

Coninesborough, a Castle in
York-shire, where Hengist, after he had
been vanquish't by
Aurelius Ambrose, rallied his forces, but being
again utterly defeated, he was beheaded.

Connivence, (lat.) a faigning not to see, a
winking at a fault.

Connubial, (lat.) belonging to wedlock, or
marriage.

Conovium, the ancient name of a Citie,
which flourish't in old time in
Cærnarvon-shire,
and took its name from the River
Conovius, now called Conwey.

Conquassation, (Lat.) a shaking together,
a dashing in pieces.

Conquest, a Term used in the practick of
Scotland, and differs from heritage in this,
that heritage
signifies Lands & Goods pertaining to any person, as
general Suc­



cessour to his father, or any other predecessour.
Conquest signifies those which any one possesseth by his
own private Title, or by gift, or by any other single
contract.


Conquestion, (lat.) a complaining
together.

Conradus, (Germ.) Able counsel; the name of
several German Emperours.

Consanguinity, (lat.) nearnesse in blood,
kindred.

Consarcination, (lat.) a patching or sowing
of several pieces together.

Conscention, (lat.) a climbing or
mounting.

Conscious, (lat.) inwardly guilty,
privy to ones self of any
fault or errour.

Conscription, (lat.) a registering, or
inrolling.

Consecration, (lat.) a setting apart to the
service of any one.

Consectary, (lat.) that which follows from
the demonstration of an argument.

Consecution, (lat.) an immediate
following. Month of
consecution is a term in Astrology, signifying the space
between each conjunction of the Moon with the Sun.

Consequence, (lat.) that which
followeth of necessity,
also a businesse of consequence
is a businesse of weight and moment.

Consequent, (lat.) following, also
being taken substantively it
signifies the last proposition of an enthymeme, the first
being called an antecedent.

Conservation, (lat.) a keeping or
preserving.

Conservator of the peace, signifieth in
Common law, him that hath a special charge by vertue of
his office, to see the Kings peace kept.

Conservator of the truce and safe
conducts, was an officer
appointed in every Port of the Sea, to inquire of all
offences done against the Kings truce and safe conducts
upon the main-sea, out of the Countries and out of the
Franchises of the Cinque Ports.

Conserves, (French) fruits conserved or
condited.

Considerable, of no mean degree, of more
than ordinary quality. Cleopatra.

Consideration, (lat.) an advising or
taking heed; also a term in
Common law, signifying the material part of a contract,
without which no contract standeth or bindeth.
Consideration is either expressed,
as when a man bargaineth to give a certain sum for any
thing, or else imply'd as when the law inforceth a
consideration.

Consignation, (lat.) a signing of a bill
with ones own hand.

Consimilarity, (lat.) a likenesse or
agreeing together.

Consistence, (lat.) a being or
setling.

Consistent, an epithite belonging to dry
bodies, and opposed to Fluid.

Consistory, (lat.) an assembly of
Prelates, a
Council-house of Ecclesiastical persons.

Consition, (lat.) a planting
together.

Consolation, (lat.) a comforting, or
putting in good heart.

Consolidation, (lat.) a sodering,
strengthning, or
making solid; also a term in Common law, signifying a
joyning of two benefices into one, and in the Civil law, a
uniting of possession, occupation, or
profit, with the
property.

Consomniation, (lat.) a sleeping or
dreaming together.

Consonant, (lat.) sounding together, or
agreeing; also substantively taken, it
signifieth a letter
which hath no sound of it self, but as it is joyned with a
vowel.

Consort, (lat.) a fellow, companion, or
mate, also a set or company of Musitians.

Consound, (lat. Consolidum) an
herb otherwise called
Backwort or Cumfry.

See OED "Saracen."



Conspersion, (lat.) a bedewing or
sprinkling.

Conspicuous, (lat.) cleer, manifest.

Conspiracy, (lat.) a plotting or secret
consultation; but in Common law it is alwayes taken in the
evil part, and signifieth
an agreement of such as bind themselves
by covenant or other allyance, that each of them shall
assist the other malitiously
to indite, or falsely to move and maintain pleas; also
such as cause children
within age to appeal men of felony, and such as receive
men in the Countries, with liveries and fees to maintain
their malitious enterprises.

Conspiratione, a Writ that lies against
Conspiratours.

Meaning not in OED "conspiration."



Conspurcation, (Lat.) a defiling,
fouling, or
polluting.

Consputation, (Lat.) a spitting
upon.

Constable, quasi comes stabuli, or Master of
the Kings horse, or as others say,
derived from the Dutch
word Konnin-Stable, i. e. prop and stay of the
King. This




word is diversly taken in Common law, either for the
Constable of England, a place formerly of great
Dignity, or for an office belonging heretofore to the
Lords of certain Mannours, and at length there came to
be ordained others of an inferiour rank, as Constables
of Hundreds, or Franchises
who were appointed for the conservation
of the peace, and called high Constables; and under
these the Constables
of every Town or Parish, who are called pety-constables.


Constant, (Lat.) standing firm to ones duty
or principles.

Constantinople, see Byzantium.

Constantinus, the son of
Constantius and Helena, he was the first
Roman Emperour that profess't Christianity, and for his
great deeds, was called Constantine the
Great.

Constellation, (Lat.) a company of Stars
embody'd together and representing
some figure.

Consternation, (Lat.) amazement, or
astonishment.

Constipation, (Lat.) a close
embodying
together.

Constitution, (Lat.) an appointing or
ordaining; also constitution of the body, the state and
complexion of the body.

Constraint, (French) a forcing or
compelling.

Constriction, (Lat.) the same, also a
binding together.

Construction, (Lat.) a placing or
setting together; also a
term in Grammar, signifying the right placing of words or
sentences.

Constupration, (Lat.) a ravishing or
deflowring a Virgin.

Consubstantial, (Lat.) of the same
Essence with
another.

Consuete, or Consuetudinal, (Lat.)
usual or accustomed.

Consuetudinibus & servitiis, a Writ
that lieth against a Tenant who deforceth his Lord of the
rent or service due unto him.

Consul, from the Latin word
Consulere, to give counsel; it was a place of
highest dignity among the Romans, brought in
after the expulsion of their
Kings, and at this present day the chief Governours of
divers Cities, are called Consuls.

Consultation, (Lat.) a taking counsel, also
the name of a Writ, whereby a cause being formerly removed
by prohibition from the Ecclesiastical Court to the Kings
Court, is returned thither again.

Consummation, (lat.) a fulfilling or
finishing, also a making up an account.

Consumption, (lat.) a falling away, or
consuming, also a disease which dries and wastes the
body.

Contabulation, (lat.) a fastning of planks
or boards together.

Contaction, (lat.) a touching of two things
together.

Contagion, (lat.) infection, the
spreading of a
disease.

Contamination, (lat.) a polluting or
defiling by touch.

Conteke, (old word) strife or
contention.

Contemeration, (lat.) a deflowring.

Contemplatives, certain Fryers of St.
Mary Magdalens Order, who wear black upper
garments, and white underneath.

Contemplation, (lat.) a deep
considering.

Contemporal, or Contemporary,
(Lat.) of the same time with another.

Contemptible, or Contemptuous,
(lat.) worthy of disesteem and scorn.

Contenement, a term in law, being the
freehold land which lieth to a mans house or
tenement.

Contention, (lat.) a striving.

Contermination, (lat.) a bordering upon, or
lying near.

Conterpleted, (old word) controlled.

Contesseration, (lat.) a entering into
league or amity with strangers.

Contestation, (lat.) a calling to
witnesse.

Context, or Contexture, (lat.) a
weaving together, also the
stile or form of a processe or discourse.

Contignation, in Architecture signifies the
floor-work.

Contiguity, (lat.) a nearnesse or close
touching.

Continent, (lat.) temperate,
containing ones self
from any thing; also substantively
taken it signifies the firm or main land.

Contingency, (lat.) a hapning by
chance.

Continual claim, a term in Common law,
signifying a claim made from time to time within every
year and day, to land or any other thing, which at present
we cannot attain without danger.

Continuance, seemeth to signifie in
Common law, the same as
prorogation in the Civil law, as continuance until the
next Assises when it chanceth that a Record cannot be
found.



Continuation, or Continuity, (lat.) a
lengthning, or going on with any thing, a holding out
intire.


Contorsion, (lat.) a pulling awry, a
wresting.

Contrabanded, prohibited, from the
Italian word
Bando, a Proclamation, as
contrabanded goods,
are goods forbidden by Proclaimation to be
imported.

Contract, (lat.) a bargaining or
making a match, as contract
of marriage; in Common law it is a covenant or
agreement with lawfull
consideration or clause.

Contractation, or Contratation,
(lat. and Span.) a contract or bargaining.

Contraction, (lat.) a drawing
together.

Contradiction, (lat.) a gainsaying.

Contra formam collationis, a Writ
against an Abbot for him
that hath given lands to an Abby, and findeth that the
Abbot hath made a feoffment thereof.

Contra formam feoffamenti, a Writ for the
Heir of a Tenant infeoffed in certain lands by Charter of
feoffment, by a Lord to do certain services to his Court,
and afterwards is distrained for more than is contained in
the Charter.

Contramure, a term in Architecture or fortification, signifying an
out-wall built about the wall of a City, a
counter-scarfe.

Contrasto, (Spanish) contention or
strife.

Contrectation, (lat.) a wanton handling
of a woman.

Contribution, (lat.) a joynt giving of
money or supplies towards any businesse of
importance.

Contributione facienda, a Writ that lieth
in case more are bound to one thing, yet the whole burthen
is put upon one.

Contristation, (lat.) a making sad.

Contrition, (lat.) remorce or
penitence.

Controller, an officer who keepeth a Roll
of other officers accounts. Controller
of the Hamper, an officer in Chancery, who takes all
things sealed from the Clark of the Hamper inclosed in
leather bags, and takes a special charge of them.
Controller of the pipe, an officer in the Exchequer, who
writes summons to the Sheriffs to levie the debts of the
pipe. Controller of the Pell, an officer of the Exchequer
who keeps a controlment of the Pell of receipts and goings
out.

To Controve, (old word) to
devise.

Controversie, (lat.) contention in
dispute.

Contumacy, (lat.) stubbornnesse,
rebellion.

Contumely, (lat.) injury, reviling.

Contumulation, (lat.) an intombing
together.

Contusion, (lat.) a bruising, or beating in
pieces.

Convalescency, (lat.) an increasing in
health or strength.

To Convene, (lat.) to warn into any
Assembly.

Conveniency, (lat.) fitnesse, or
meetnesse.

Convent, or Covent, a great
Assembly of people, also a Society of Religious men
dwelling together in a house.

Conventicle, (lat.) a private
Assembly.

Conventual, (lat.) belonging to a
company of religious
persons. Conventual Church a Parish Church.

Conversation, (lat.) a keeping company, or
being familiar with any.

Conversion, (lat.) a changing from one
state to another, especially from bad to good.

Convexity, (lat.) the outside of a globous
body which is hollow.

Conviction, (lat.) in Common law, is the
proving a man guilty by the verdict of a jury, or when a
man that is outlaw'd appeareth and confesseth.

Convivial, (lat.) belonging to a
feast.

Convocation, (lat.) a calling, or
assembling together,
convocation house, the house where the Clergy assemble, to
consult about
Ecclesiastical affairs.

Convoy, (French) a guide, or
conduct.

Convulsion, (lat.) a violent pulling
together, also a disease
wherein the sinews are shrunk up, and drawn
together.

Cooperate, (lat.) to bear another
company in the same
work.

Coote, a kinde of bird, otherwise called a
Moorhen.

Copal, a kinde of white Rosin brought from
the Indies, which they use for a perfume.

Cope, a Cloak, also a vestment, that
Bishops were wont to
wear.



Coparceners, or parceners, signifie in
Common-law, such as have equal share in the inheritance
of their ancestours.


Copia libelli deliberanda, a Writ that
lyeth in a case where a man
cannot get the Copy of a Libel, at the hands of a Judge
Ecclesiastical.

Copyhold, signifieth in Common-law, a
Tenure for which the Tenant hath
nothing, but the Copy of
the Rolles made by the Steward of his Lords Court, this is
also called a base Tenure, or Tenure in Villenage.

Copious, (lat.) plentifull.

Copise, from the French Couper, to
cut down, a little Wood, which consists of underwoods that
are to be cut down before
they grow to be great Trees.

Not in OED.



Copperas, a kinde of mineral, otherwise
called vitriol, being mixed of humours, strained by drops
into small holes.

Copthall, the name of a stately house,
belonging in ancient times to the
Fitzauchers,
and afterwards very much beautified
by Sir Thomas Heneage.

Copulation, (lat.) a joyning, or coupling
together.

Coquettery, (French) a pratling like a a
Gossip.

Coquination, (lat.) a dressing, or
Cooking of meat.

Cor Scorpii, the heart of the
Scorpion.

Cornage, in Common-law, is a certain
extraordinary imposition upon certain measures of Corn,
which is upon some unusual
occasion.

Coral, a certain Maritime plant
growing under water, which
when it is taken out, petrifies, and becomes
red.

Coralline, a kinde of plant, called
Sea-mosse, or Coral-mosse.

Coralyse, chaffe, or drosse of Corn.

Not in OED.



Corban, an Hebrew word, signifying a a gift
dedicated to God.

Corbel, or Corbet, a Term in
Architecture,
signifying a shouldering piece in Timberwork, a jutting
out like a bragget.

Corbets, the name of a very ancient
family in
Shropshire, who about the coming in of the
Normans, held divers Lordships by the service of
Roger Mountgomery.

Corciousnesse, (old word)
corpulency.

Not in OED.



Corck, or Orchall, a kinde of blue
colour, used in
painting.

Cordage, the tackle of a ship, a word used
in Navigation, also stuffe to make ropes on.

Cordelier, a Gray Fryer of the Order of St.
Francis, so called because he wears a cord full
of knots about his middle.

Cordial, (latin) comfortable to the
heart.

Cordon, an old English word,
signifying reward, in like manner also the French
word Guerdon is used by us.

Cordovan leather, leather made of
Goat-skins, so called from Corduba, a Citie of
Andaluzia in Spain, where the best sort
of that kinde of leather is made.

Cordwainer, or Cordiner, (French)
a shooe-maker.

Corinæus, one of the companions of
Brutus, whence
Cornwall is said to have
taken its denomination,
being in old time called Corinæa, it is
fabulously reported of him that he fought with a Gyant,
called Gogmagog,
and threw him down a steep Rock.

Corinth, a Citie of Achaia in
Greece, in ancient time called Ephyre,
which after it had been destroyed, was restored by
Corinthus, the
son of Marathon, or as some say of
Pelops, and by him called
Corinth.

Corinthian order, a Term in
Architecture,
signifying an adornment of Pillars, after the
Corinthian manner, there being five orders of
pillars in Architecture, Dorick,
Ionick, Tuscan, Corinthian, and
Composite.

Coritani, a people anciently inhabiting
that part of this Island, which containeth
Northamptonshire, Leicestershire,
Rutlandshire,
Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, and
Derbyshire.

Cork, a County of Ireland, in old
time reputed a Kingdom, the people whereof were anciently
called Vodiæ & Coriondi.

Cormorant, a Sea Raven,
Metaphorically
taken for a glutton.

Cornage, is in Common-law a certain Tenure,
whereby in the North, men used to hold their Lands, which
was to blow a horn when any invasion of a Northern enemy
was perceived.

Cornalin, a kinde of precious stone, which
some think to be the same with Corneol.

OED "cornelian"?



Cornavii, the name of a certain people, who
in ancient times possessed that part of this Island,
containing those Counties which are at present called
Warwick-shire, Worcestershire, Stafford-shire,
Shrop-shire, Cheshire.

Corn-flowr, a kinde of flowr, called
blue-bottle.

Cornelian, the same as Corneol,



a kinde of precious stone, also Cornelian Law, was a Law
made by Cornelius Sylla, that any who would
follow him in, should be capable of Office before they
had attained their full years.


Cornelius, (lat.) a proper name of men,
from Cornu, a horn.

Cornel, an old word, signifying a
corner, also the fore-part
of a house.

Corneol, a kinde of precious stone, apt to
be ingraven, and therefore much used for the making of
seals: It is also called a Sardy, or Onyx.

Corneous, (lat.) of a horny
substance.

Cornet, (French) a kinde of black
Taffata, which Doctors of
Physick, or Law used to wear on the collar of their robes
as an Ensign, or badge of their degree,
also the Ensign of a Troup of
horse, so called because it was used to be made of that
kinde of Taffata.

Cornice, a Term in Architecture,
signifying the crests,
or flourishing work at the upper end of a pillar, it is
also called a frize.

Cornigerous, (lat.) wearing horns, an
Epithet of Bacchus.

Cornil-tree, a Tree called a Horn-tree,
because its branches are hard like a horn.

Cornimuse, (lat.) a kinde of musical
in­
strument, which
some take for a kind of Bag-pipe.

Cornix, see Cornalin, and
Corneol.

Cornucopy, a horn which Jupiter
gave to Amalthea, whereby she injoyed plenty of
all things, it is Metaphorically taken for plenty.

Not in OED except as "cornucopia."



Cornuted, (lat.) horned.

Corody, from the Latin word
Corrodo, it signifieth in Common-law, a summe of
money, or allowance of meat and drink, toward the
maintenance of any of the Kings servants out of an Abby,
or religious house,
whereof the King is the founder.

Corodio habendo, a Writ for the
exacting a
Corody out of an Abby, or religious house.

Corollary, an advantage above the
ordinary measure, also a
gift bestowed on the people at publick feasts.

Corona, by the Greeks called Halo,
that is to say a clear Circle appearing in a Cloud about
the Sun, or any other bright Star, but especially about
the Moon, also a coelestial constellation upon the
shoulder of Bootes.

Coronal Suture, this is by Chirurgons
called the formost seam of the skull,
passing from one bone of
the Temples to the other.

Coronation, (lat.) a Crowning.

Coroner, an ancient Officer belonging to
the Crown, and Common-wealth of
England, his
Office, is to enquire of every man that is slain, or
cometh to an untimely end, and what Corn, Cattel, or
freehold, the Felon had
at the time of the fact committed, and to seize them to
the use of the King, or State, there are four of these
Officers in every County.

Coronet, a little Crown, or Chaplet.

Corporal, (lat.) belonging to the body,
also of a Commander, or band of ten
Souldiers, also the
fine linnen wherein the Sacrament
is put.

Corporation, (lat.) in the Civil Law,
signifieth a body politick, authorised by the Kings
Charter, to have a Common Seal, one, or more head
Officers, and Members able by their common consent to
grant, or receive in Law any thing within the compasse of
their Charter.

Corporature, (lat.) the form, or
constitution of the
body.

Corporeal, (lat.) of a bodily
substance.

Corporeity, (lat.) 
Philosophick Term,
Corporeature, bodily substance.

Corps, (Fr.) a carcasse, or dead
body.

Corps du guard, (French) a Term in Military
Discipline, signifying a Company
of Souldiers set to watch.

Corpulency, (lat.) fulnesse of body.

Corpus Christi, a Colledge in
Oxford, built by Richard Fox, Bishop of
Winchester.

Corpus cum causa, a Writ issuing out of
Chancery to remove, both the body and the record touching
the cause of any man lying in execution upon a judgement
for debt into the Kings Bench.

Corr, a certain measure containing two
quarts.

Corrade, (lat.) to scrape together, to
extort.

Correction, (lat.) an amending, also a
chastising.

Correctour of the Staple, a Clerk
belonging to the Staple,
that recordeth the bargains of Merchants there
made.

Correlatives, (lat.) a Term in Logick,
signifying things that have mutual
relation one to another,
as Master and servant, father and son,
&c.



Correption, (lat.) a snatching suddenly away.


Correspondency, (lat.) a holding mutual
Commerce and familiarity, an answerablenesse,
or proportion of one thing to another.

Corridor, a Term in fortification,
otherwise called
Cortina, or Curtain.

Corrigible, (lat.) easie to be corrected,
or made better by correction.

Corrival, a competitour, one that makes
suit in the same businesse.

Corroboration, (lat.) a strengthning or
making firm.

To Corrode, (lat.) to gnaw, to fret.

Corrosive, (lat.) having a gnawing or
fretting quality; it is spoken of those things which are
used in physick, to gnaw or eat into any part of the
body.

Corrugation, (lat.) a contracting
together, a drawing into
wrinkles.

Corruption, (lat.) a tainting or
depraving. Corruption
of the blood, signifyeth
in law an infection of the blood,
growing to the estate and
issue of a man tainted
with treason, whereby he looseth all to the Prince, and
both he and his heirs are made ignoble.

Corsary, (French) a Courrier.

Corse præsent, law-term, the body of a
beast or some such like offering, given to the Priest out
of a dead mans goods. It is also called a Mortuary.

Corslet, (Ital.) the same as
Cuirasse in French, armour for the back and
brest.

Corsure, or Courser,  (old word) a
Broaker.

Corstopitum, the ancient name of a Town in
Northumberland, mentioned by
Antonine. Some
think it to be the same with Ptolemies Curiæ
Ottadinorum, now called Corbridge.

Corticated, (lat.) covered with a bark or
rind.

Corven, (old word) carved.

Corvine, (lat.) belonging to a Crow or
Raven.

Corviser, see Cordwainer.

Coruscation, (lat.) lightning, a
flashing or glimmering of
light.

Corybantes, the Priests of Cybele,
who used to celebrate the Feasts of Cybele with
dancing and ringing of Cymbals; they were thought to be
the same with the Curetes and Idæi
Dactyli.

Coscinomancy, (Greek) a divination by a
seive.

Cosenage, a Writ that lieth where the
father of the Great grandfather is seized in his demesn as
of fee at the day of his death, of certain lands and
tenements, and he dying, a stranger entereth and
intrudeth. Then shall
his heir have this Writ of Cosenage.

Cosh, or Cotterel, (old word) a
Cottage.

Cosham, a Town in Wiltshire, in
ancient times the Mansion house of King
Ethelred.

Cosier, (old word) a Botcher, called also a
Sowter.

Cosmical, (Greek) belonging to the World.
Cosmical rising of a Star, is a term used in Astronomy,
signifying a Star rising at the same time with the
Sun.

Cosmography, (Greek) a description of the
World, with the Climates and Circles marked upon the Globe
and in Maps.

Cosmometry, (Greek) a measuring of the
World by degrees and minutes, being
a part of Geography or Cosmography.

Cost, a term in Blazon, being the
fourth part of the Bend or half the Gartier.

Costive, (from the Latin word
Constipatus,)
having the belly bound.

Costmary, an herb called Balsamine, or
Alecoast.

Costrel, (old word) a wine-pot.

Cote, a kind of refuse or clotted wool,
also a cottage or sheepfold.

Coteswold, (old word) a company of
sheepcotes, and sheep feeding on hills.

A Cottager, signifieth in Law he that
dwelleth in a Cottage or house without land, or at most
having but 4 acers belonging
to it.

Cotterel, see Cosh.

Cotton, a kind of stuff, otherwise called
Frize or Bombasin.

Couchant, (French) lying or
squatting close to the
ground, a word often used in Heraldry to expresse that
posture.

Covenable, or Convenable, (old
word) suitable or convenient.

Covenant, (French) a bargain, pact, or
agreement, also Covenant in Law is that which the Law
intendeth to be made though in words it be not exprest,
also the name of a Writ that lyeth for the breach of
any.

Covent, see Convent.

Coventry, a famous City in
Warwickshire,
so called from a Covent of Monks



that was anciently there. The first Lord of this City is
said to be one Leofric, who imposing heavy
taxes upon the Citizens, remitted them at last at the
earnest intercession
of his wife Godiva, upon condition she would
ride naked thorough the chief street of the City, which
she performed, but so covered with her long hair, that
no body could discern her.


Covercle, or Coverkill, (old word)
a lid or cover.

Covert, (French) an ombrage or
shady place for Deer or
other beasts.

Coverture, in Common law is the
condition of a married
woman, who by the Laws of England, is under
Covertbaron, and so disabled to make any bargain
without her husbands
consent.

Coughton, a place in Warwickshire,
the principle Mansion of the Throgmortons, a very
ancient Family.

Covie, (French) a term in fouling,
signifying a nest or brood of Partridges.

Covin, fraud, from the Latin word
Convenire, it
signifieth in Common law, a deceitful agreement between
two or more, to the prejudice of another.

Coulant, (French) flowing or gliding
along.

Couldray, (French) a hazel grove.

Not in OED.



Coule, a vessel to carry water in, also a
roab which Fryers use to wear, called in Latin
Cucullus.

Coulter, (Lat.) a plough-sheare.

Councel with a c. (lat.
Concilium) an assembly
of Counsellours.

Count, (French) an Earle, also a Law Term
coming from the Latin word Computatio,
and signifies the Original declaration
in a processe chiefly in real actions.

Countercomponed, a Term in Armory, as a
bordure countercomponed is a bordure
compounded of two colours counterly
placed.

Cf. "counterpone, v." OED.



Counteurs, or Conteurs, are those
which a man setteth to speak for him in Court as
Advocates, whereas Plaideurs speak as Counsellours at law
for one, who is present
himself.

Countenance, (French) the face, or
visage, also estimation,
or credit, also a Term in Law, signifying the favour that
is shew'd to poor men that will swear, they have nothing
whereof they may make fine.

Counter, a Trades-mans chest, where he puts
his cash, or money, also a prison in London,
where men are put for debt, from the French word Compter,
or from the Dutch word Cantor, a secluded place,
also Counters are certain
little things to cast account with.

Counterfeit, (French) to feign.

Countermaund, (French) a revocation of a
former command.

Countermure, a word in fortification, a
Wall, or Bank opposite to the Town Wall.

Counterpain, one of the Copies of a pair of
deeds, or indentures, so that one party may keep one part,
and the other the other.

Counterplea, signifieth in Common-law,
that, which the demandant alleadgeth against a Tenant in
courtesie, or in dowr, who prayeth in aid of the King, or
him, who hath the reversion for his better
defence.

Counterpoint, opposition, also a Term in
Musick, being a composing of parts
together by setting
points one against another, also a Term in Needle-work,
called backstitch, or
quilt-stitch.

Counter-round, a Term in Military
Discipline, signifying
a certain number of Officers
going to visit the Rounds, or the Sentinels.

Counter-scarf, (a Term in fortification)
that side of the moat, which is opposite to the
Fortresse.

Counter-tail, or Counter-tally,
one of the two tallies, or pieces of wood, whereon any
thing is scored, whereof one party keeps one piece, and
the other the other piece.

Countervail, (French) to be of equal
price.

County, or Shire, a certain
portion, or circuit of the Realm, into which the whole
land is divided.

County-court, a Court held every moneth by
the Sheriffe, or his Deputy the under Sheriffe.

Coup, (old word) a piece cut off, or cut
out.

Not in OED in this sense.



Coupant, (French) cutting, or
lopping.

Couple-close, a Term in Blazon,
being the fourth part of a Cheveron.

Courfine, (old word) fine heart.

Not in OED.



Courser, (French) a horse of
service.

Court, the house (where) a King hath his
present residence, also a place where justice is
judicially ministred, from the Latin curia, or
from the Greek κυριοσ, i. e. a
Lord.

Courtbaron, a Court that every Lord of



a Mannour hath within his own precincts.


Court of requests, a Court of Equiry of the
same nature with the Chancery, onely this Court instead of
a Subpoena useth a privy seal.

Courtesie of England, is a certain
Tenure, whereby a man
marrying a woman seized of Land in Fee-simple, or Fee-tail
general, if he have a childe by her, which cometh alive
into the world, though she and the childe die immediately,
yet if she were in possession he shall hold the land
during his life, and is called Tenant per legem
Angliæ, or the courtesie of
England.

Courtilage in Common-law, is a Garden, or
piece of void ground lying near a
messuage from
Curtis, a mansion house, and
legere to gather.

Courtisan, (French) a Court-lady, it is
also commonly taken for a strumpet.

Courtlasse, or Coutelasse, a short
sword.

Couth, quasi Kennouth,
knew, from the Saxon word Ken, to know.

Coutheutlaugh, (Saxon) he that
receiveth, cherisheth,
or hideth an out-law.

Cowde, (old word) a gobbet.

Cowre, to kneel, to fall down for fear from
the Italian word Covare.

Cowneer, the hollow arching part in the
ship stern.

Not in OED.



Coy, or Coyen, (old word) nice
dainty, also to quiet, to flatter.


C R

Crabbat, (French) handsome, comely, also
substantively taken, it signifieth a  Gorget for women,
or a kinde of riding band for men.

Crach, a crib, or rack for beasts.

Crabs eye, a stone found in a Crab, which
resembleth an eye.

Cranage, money paid for the use of a Crane
to draw up wares.

Crank, (old word) lusty, blith,
jovial.

Crank-sided, when a ship will bear but
small sayl, a Term in Navigation.

Crany, (lat.) the skull.

Crapulent, (lat.) glutted with meat, having
taken a surfet.

Crasie, sick, distemper'd, from the Greek
word, crasis, temperature.

Crask, (old word) fat.

Crasse, (lat.) thick, heavy, dull,
lumpish.

Crassitude, (lat.) thicknesse,
grossenesse.

Crater, is a sign in Heaven, called the
bottom of the pitcher in Virgo, it riseth about
the sixteenth of the Calends of March.

Creance, (French) trust, confidence,
credit.

Creansour, Law Term, a creditour.

Creast-tile, a roof tile, which is made to
lay upon the ridge of a house.

Crebrous, (lat.) often, usual.

Credible, (lat.) that may be
believed.

Credit, trust, belief, also esteem.

Creditour, (lat.) he that lendeth, or
trusteth out money.

Credulity, (lat.) aptnesse to
believe.

Creed, a set form containing the
artiticles of Christian
religion.

Creek, from the Dutch word Kreaken, to make
a noise, a part of a Haven where any thing is landed, or
disburthened from the Sea.

Crenelle, a Term in Heraldry, being a line
dented like the notch in the horn of a bow.

Not in OED in this sense.



Creon, the son of Menatius King of
Thebes, he was
brother to Jocasta, the wife of Laius,
and mother of Oedipus, who
unfolded the riddle of
Sphinx, and married Jocasta,
not knowing her to be his mother, and by her had
Eteocles and Polynices, who succeeded in
the Kingdom, and were to reign by turns every other year,
but they having killed one another in civil Wars,
Creon regained the Kingdom, but
behaving himself with
much cruelty, he was overcome by Theseus, and
slain.

Crepitation, (lat.) a creaking
noise.

Crepuscul, (lat.) the dawning of the
day.

Cressant, (French) the figure of a half
Moon, a term in Heraldry.

Cresses, a kind of plant called in Latin
Nasturtium.

Cresset, (old word) a Lantern, a
Beacon.

Crest, (French) a part of a helmet, also
the upper part of a Scutchion in
armory.

Crestmarine, an herb called
Rock-samphire.

Crete, an Island of the Mediterranean Sea,
heretofore called Hecatompolis by the Greeks,
because it had a hundred Cities. it is now called
Candie, and is a great part of it in the
possession of the Turks.

Cretism, or Creticism, (Greek) a
for­



ging of lyes, falshood or perfidiousnesse.


Crevequeurs, the name of an ancient
Family in Kent,
who built Leeds Castle in that County: they are
stiled in ancient Records de crepito
corde.

Crevet, or Cruset, from the French
word Creux, hollow, a Goldsmiths
melting pot.

Creusa, the daughter of Priamus
and Hecuba, and wife of Aeneas, by whom
he had Ascanius; she following her husband out of
Troy when it was set on fire, was not minded by
him till he came out of the City, by reason that he led
his son in his hand, and carried his father on his
shoulders through the
flames, but going back to seek her, he could never hear
what was become of her.

Criminal, (lat.) guilty, blameworthy.
Cleop.

Crined, having hairs, from the Latin word
Crinis; it is a word used in
Heraldry.

Crinisus, a River of Sicily, near
to the City Segesta, of which it is related, that
when the Trojan Virgins were to be
exposed to the fury of a
Monster, whom Neptune sent to destroy the Country
because of Laomedons perfidiousnesse,
Hippotes a noble
Trojan committed his daughter
Hegesta to the wide Sea, and she
being by fortune carried
into Sicily, Crinisus
fell in love with her, and turning
himself into a Bear,
ravisht her, whereupon she became with child and brought
forth Acestes,
who was afterwards King of Sicily.

Criplings, (a term in building) short spars
on the side of a house.

Not in OED.



Crisis, (Greek) a judgement or
discerning into any
thing; also a term in Physick denoting the sudden change
in a disease, tending either to recovery or death.

St. Crispins Launce, an awle, from
Crispin who was
the Patron of the Shoomakers.

Crisped, (lat.) frisled, curled.

Crithology, (Greek) a gathering in of the
first fruits of corn.

Critical, (Greek) of a nice judgement, apt
to censure. Also Critical dayes in a disease, are those
dayes wherein a disease comes to its Crisis, and they are
the odde dayes as the third, fifth, seventh, and so on;
but the most critical are counted
the fourteenth. The Crisis in acute diseases is judged by
the Moon, but in Chronick diseases, the Crisis is judged
by the Sun

Criticisme, (Greek) a playing the Critick,
a learning which consists in the curious and nice
examining of Authors.

Cro, or Croy, signifieth in the
Scotch Acts of Parliament, a satisfaction which the Judge
is to pay unto the nearest of kin to a man that is slain,
in case he minister not
justice as he should do.

Croce, (old word) a Shepherds staff, or
crook.

Crocolana, the ancient name of a Town in
Lincolnshire, now called
Ancaster.

Crocute, a certain beast imitating the
voice of a man, and ingendred of a Hyæna and a
Lionesse, it cometh from the Aethiopian word
Crocottas.

Not in OED.



Croesus, a King of the Lydians,
who abounded in riches; he was overcome in war by
Cyrus, and put upon a pile to be burnt, and
calling out Solon, Solon, Cyrus demanding the
reason, he acquainted him how that Solon having
formerly been asked of him who was the happiest man, told
him none could be happy till his death, and that the
greatest riches could not keep a man from misery;
whereupon he was freed and made one of Cyrus his
Counsellers.

Croft, from the old word Creaft,
i. e. handy-craft, a little Close joyning to a
house, it being lookt to with more than ordinary
care.

Croisada, a Bull of the Pope, granting the
sign, the badge of the Crosse, in an expedition of
Christians against Infidels.

Croises, Pilgrims, also Knights of the
Order of St. John in Jerusalem, created
for the defence of Pilgrims; they were both so called from
the sign of the Crosse which they used to wear on their
garments.

Crome, or Corm, (old word) a crow
of iron, from the Dutch word Kromb,
crooked.

Crool, (old word) to mutter.

Crosier, a Bishops staff, from the old word
Croce, a Shepherds crook, or for that it bears the figure
of a Crosse.

Crosstaff, a Mathematical Instrument,
wherewith the Altitude of any thing is taken.

Crostrees, those crosse pieces of timber
which are set on the head of the mast of a Ship.

Crotchet, a measure in musick being half



a Minim, and a Minim is once down or up, it signifieth
also a humour or whimsy.


Crotells, or Croteying (term in
hunting) the ordure of a Hare.

Not in OED.



Crouch, (old word) Crosse, whence to
Crouch, i. e. to blesse.

Crow, is a celestial constellation, and
sits upon Hydra's taile, she hath her
Mansion in the austeral
parts.

Crowland, a Town in Lincolnshire,
which is reported to have been heretofore mightily haunted
with spirits, until such time as devout Guthlac
lived there a Hermites
life, to whose memory Aethelbald King of the
Mercians built a famous
Monastery.

Crown, of the several sorts of Crowns, as
Triumphal, Civic, Gramineal, Mural, and the like. see Aulus Gellius cap. 8. Crown is also
metaphorically taken for glory, honour, dignity.

Clark of the Crown in Chancery, an Officer
that attends the Lord Chancellour for special matters of
State, as Commissions
of Lieutenancies, Justices, or such like, with their writs
of association and dedimus
potestatem for taking of oaths; also all general
pardons, writs of Parliament, writs of special executions,
&c.

Clark of the Crown-office in the Kings
Bench, is he who frames, reads, and
records, all Indictments
against Traitours, Felons, and all other offenders there
arraigned.

Collens earth, a kind of colour used n painting.

Not found in OED.



Cruciate, (lat.) to afflict, to
torment.

Crucifie, (lat.) to fasten or naile to a
Crosse.

A Crucifix, an Image which represents the
crucifying of Christ.

Cruditie, (lat.) rawnesse, ill digestion of
the stomack.

Cruet, or Crewet, a viol or
narrow-mouth'd glasse to keep oil or the like in.

Cruife, a word used in the practick of
Scotland for a hogs-stye, it is also called
Creffera.

Not in OED.



Crurall, (lat.) belonging to the
thighs.

Crusible, a pot wherein Chymists melt their
mettals.

Crussell, (old word) grisle.

Crustaceous, (lat.) crusted or covered with
a hard shell.

Crutchet Fryars, the same as crouched or
crossed Fryars.

Cruzada, see Croisada.

Cruzado, a Portugal Crown of Gold.

Cryptology, (Greek) a speaking in
secret, a
whispering.

Crystall, a very bright and transparent
kind of Mineral, which lookes like Ice, or the clearest
sort of glasse.

Crystalline Humour, a white splendid and
shining humour, nor flat nor round, seated in the center
of the eye, and is the first instrument of sight.


C U

Cubbridge head, a division made across the
forecastle and half-deck with boords, which in other
places is called the Bulk-head.

Cube, a Geometrical figure, being a
solid body every way,
comprehending six equal sides.

Cubebes, a certain kind of Indian
fruit.

Cubicular, (lat.) belonging to a
Bed-chamber.

Cubite, a kinde of measure, reaching from
the elbow to the end of the little finger.

Cuchaneale, a little worm bred in the fruit
of the Holy-oke, of which is made a certain costly grain
wherewith they dye Skarlet or Crimson colour. Some say it
comes from the Latin word coccinus,
Skarlet.

Cucullated, (lat.) having on a Monks coule.

Cucurbite, (lat.) a Gourd, also a
Cuping-glasse,
being a deep hollow glasse which Physitians apply to the
body to draw out blood.

Cucuye, a strange kind of bird in
Hispaniola,
having eyes under the wings, which in the night time shine
very bright.

Cudweed, a certain herb whose leaves are so
soft, that they are used for cotton; it is also called
Cotton-weed.

Cue, an item given to Stage-players when
any of them are to begin to speak.

Cuerpo, (Spanish) a body, also a
corporation; to walk
in cuerpo, is to go without
a cloak.

Cui ante devortium, a writ, that a
woman divorced from her
husband hath power to recover her lands from him to whom
her husband did alienate them during
the marriage.

Cui in vita, a writ of entry that a widow hath
against him, to whom her



husband did alienate her lands in his life time.


Cuinage, the making up of Tin into such a
fashion as makes it fit for carriage.

Not in OED but cf. "coinage."



Cuirassier, (French) he that is armed with
a Cuirase or Corslet, which is a kind of armour for the
brest and back.

Culdeis, quasi cultores
Dei, a sort of religious
people that were anciently in Scotland
and Ireland.

Culerage, (French) lechery, also an herb
called Water-pepper, or Arse-smart.

Culinary, (lat.) belonging to the
kitchin.

Cullers, in Latin
oves
rejiculæ, sheep that are chosen out and separated
from those that are good for meat.

Cullion-head, the same as Bastion, a Skonce
or Block-house.

Cullis, from Colare to strain, the
juice of boiled meat strained thorough a
strainer.

Cf. OED "cullis" but not in this sense or as this part of speech.



Cullot, from Cullus the taile, a
cushion to ride post with.

Not in OED.



Culm, from Culmen the top, smoak
or soot.

Culminate, (lat.) to get up to the
top.

Culrach, or Colrach, signifieth in
the practick of Scotland, a pledge or cautioner
which is left for the repledgeing of a man from one Court
to another.

Culpable, (lat.) guilty, faulty,
peccant.

Cultivation, (lat.) a manuring or
tilling.

Culture, (lat.) the same.

Culver, (old word) a pigeon or dove.

Culverine, quasi Colubrine, a piece of
Ordnance so called.

Culvertaile, a term in Architecture, a
fastning of boards with artificial joynts.

Cumble, (French) full heaped
measure.

Cumæ, a City by the Sea side in
Italy near Puzzoli.

Cumfrey, a kind of herb otherwise
called Consound.

Cumulation, (lat.) a heaping up
together.

Cunctation, (lat.) prolonging of time,
delaying.

Cuneglasus, the name of a cruel Tyrant who
succeeded Vortiporus in his
government of the
Britaines of Wales and
Cornwale.

Cunicle, (lat.) a Mine or Hole under
ground.

Cunobelinus, an ancient King of the
Trinobantes, a people of the Eastern parts of
Brittain, he succeeded Mandubratius in
the kingdom.

Cuntey, signifieth the same as the
ordinary Jury or trial by
the Country.

Not in OED.



Cupidity, (lat.) covetous or lustful
desire.

Cupping-glasse, see Cucurbite.

Cupulo, (lat.) a term in Architecture, a
high arch in a building.

Curebulli, tann'd leather, a word used by Chaucer.

Curfew, a law made by William the
Conqueror, that every
one should put out their fire and light, at the ringing of
the eight a clock-bell, which was called Couvrir le
feu, i. e. cover the fire.

Curia Ottadinorum, an ancient Town of
Northumberland. see Corstopitum.

Curialitas Scotiæ is equivalent to that
which we call Curtesie of England.

Curlew, a kind of foule so called.

Curranto, (French,) a running French Dance,
also a musical Aire of a more than ordinary swift
time.

Curricurre, a kind of East Indian
Barge.

Curriedow, a curry-favour, or
flatterer.

Current, a running stream from
Currere to run.

Cursiter, a Clerk belonging to the Chancery
who makes original writs for the Shier which is allotted
him.

Curvetta, or Corvetta, (Ital.) a
prauncing of a horse of
service, from the Latin Curvus, crook'd, because
they bend in their feet.

Curvity, (lat.) crookednesse.

Curules, (lat.) those of the Roman
Senators, which were
carried to Court in Chariots.

Curulis Sella, an ivory seat, which was
placed in the Roman Consuls Chariot.

Cusco, the chief Citie of that part of the
new world, which contains Brasilia and
Peru.

Cuspidate, (lat.) to make sharp at the end
from Cuspis a point.

Cuspe, the entrance of any house, or first
beginning, which is the line whereon the figure and degree
of the Zodiack is placed, as you finde it in the Table of
Houses.

Custode admittendo, a Writ for the
removing, or admitting
of Guardians.

Custody, (lat.) safe-hold.



Custome, both in Common and Civil Law,
signifieth a Law, or Rite not written,
which being established by long use and the consent of
our Ancestours hath been, and is dayly practised.


Custos brevium, a Clerk belonging to the
Court of Common-pleas, whose Office is to receive and keep
all the Writs, and put them upon files, every return by it
self, and at the end of every Term to
receive of the prothonotaries, all the Records
of nisi prius, called the postea.

Custos Rotulorum, is he that hath the
custody of the Rolls, or Records of the Sessions of peace,
and of the Commission it self, he is thought to be the
same with Custos placitorum Coronæ.

Custos spiritualium, or of the
spiritualities,
he that exerciseth Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of any
Diocesse, during the Vacancy
of the See, which by the Canon Law belongs to the
Dean and Chapter.

Not in OED.



Cuthbert, (Sax.) famous knowledge, a proper
name.

Cuticle, (lat.) signifieth in Anatomy, the
Membrane, or thin skin which covereth
the thicker skin all over the body, and is called in Greek
Epidermis.

Cutter of the Tallies, an Officer in the
Exchecquer, that provideth wood for the Tallies, and
cutting the summe paid upon them, casteth the same into
the Court to be written upon.

Cuttle-fish, a certain kinde of fish,
called in Latin Sepia, which throwing a black
juyce like ink into the water, becomes hid in that
obscurity, and so escapes the fisher.

Cutilia, a Lake in the Reatine
grounds in Italy, where there is a wooddy Island,
which continually moves up and down.

Cutwater, a Term in Navigation, the
sharpnesse of the ship before.


C Y

Cyamba, a Citie in Asia, where
they use Coral instead of money, and have great store of
Aloes, and all kinde of Spices.

Cybele, the daughter of Coelus and
Terra, and the wife
of Saturn, she is otherwise
called Ops, Rhea, Vesta, Magna Mater, or
Grand-mother of the Gods, also Dindymene
& Berecynthia.

Cyclades, 50 Islands in the Aegean
Sea, called by the Italians Isole dell
Archipelago.

Cycle, (Greek) a Term in Astronomy,
Cycle of the Sun is the revolution of 28 years,
Cycle of the Moon the revolution of 19 years, in
which time both of their motions
recur to the same point.

Cyclopædie, (Greek) the whole Circle of
Arts and Sciences.

Cyclops, the sons of Neptune and Amphitrite,
or as Apollodorus Atheniensis saith of
Coelus and Terra, they were the servants
of Vulcan, and made Thunder-bolts for
Jupiter, having each of them one great eye in
their forehead, their names were Bronte, Sterope
and Pyracmon, whom Apollodorus
calleth Harpe, others say they were a very
ancient people of Sicily of a very Gyantly
stature.

Cycnus, the son of Mars, who was
kill'd in a Combate with Hercules, whom
Mars to revenge his sons death resolved to fight
with, but before they came to blows,
Jupiter parted them with a clap of Thunder,
there was another Cycnus, the son of
Neptune, who being invulnerable fought with
Achilles, and could not be killed, till
Achilles throwing him upon the ground, kneel'd
upon his neck and stiffled him.

Cydippe, see Acontius.

Cygnus, vide Swan.

Cylinder, (Greek) a Geometrical
body, being long, flat at
both ends, and equally
round from one end to the other, also a rolling stone to
smooth Garden allies, being just of that figure, in the
art of Gunnery it signifies that part of the bore of a
piece, which remains empty when the piece is laden.

Cymace, from the Greek word Cyma,
a wave, it is a Term in Architecture,
signifying carved work,
which resembles waves.

Cymbal, a Musical instrument, made of
plates of brasse, resembling a kinde of boat, called
Cymba.

Cymræcan language, the Welsh, or old
Brittish language.

Cynanthrophy, (lat.) a kinde of
Phrensie, or disease,
which possesseth a man with a conceit that he is turned
into a Dogge.

Cynegeticks, (Greek) books treating of the
art of hunting.

Cynical, (Greek) crabbed, severe, from a
certain Sect of Philosophers, who were called
Cynicks.

Cynosure, (Greek) a constellation of stars
near the North-pole, called Vrsa Minor, by which
the saylers are directed in their course.

Cynthius, a name attributed to Apollo,



as Cynthia to Diana, from
Cynthus a Hill in Delos, where
Latona brought them forth, being Twins.


Cyprian, (Greek) a proper name of men, from
Cypria one of the names of Venus.

Cyprus, an Island in the
Carpathian Sea, which was anciently dedicated to
Venus, it is now under the Turks Dominion.

Cyrenaica, a Countrey of Africa,
called also Pentapolitana, because it contained
these five Cities, Beronice, Arsinoe,
Ptolemais, Apollonia and Cyrene.

Cyrus, the son of Cambyses and
Mandana, he was
King of Persia, overthrew the Assyrian
Monarchy, conquered all Asia, but was at length
overcome and slain by Thomyris, Queen of
Scythia, who causing his head to be cut off, and
cast into a tub of bloud, cried out, now satisfie thy self
with bloud, after which thou hast alwayes thirsted.

Cystick, (Greek) belonging to the bag of
Gall, which is call'd Cystis, Cystick vein
signifieth in Anatomy a branch of the Port vein, which
ascendeth up to the neck of the Gall, and there divideth
it self.

Cyzicus, an Island in the
Propontis, joyned to the continent with two
bridges, having a Citie in it of the same name.


D

DAæ, a people of that part of
Scythia, which is called Nomades,
mentioned by Virgil in his eight book of
Aeneids.

Dabuze, a kinde of weapon carried
before the Grand Signor, in
the nature of our Mace.

Not in OED.



Dacia, a Countrey of Scythia
Europæa, which at this day is divided into
Transilvania,
Zypserland, the seven Campes,
Ruscia, Servia, and
Bulgaria.

Dactyle, (Greek) the fruit of the
Palm-tree, a Date, also a foot in verse,
consisting of one long
syllable, and two short, also
a finger.

Dactylogy, (Greek) a discoursing by signs
made with the finger.

Dædalus, a famous Artist, who made the
famous Labyrinth in Crete, into which he was shut
up himself with his son Icarus, for having made a
woodden Heifer, in which Pasiphæ was injoyed by
Jupiter in the shape of a Bull, but he making
artificial wings for himself and his son, flew out of
Crete into Sardinia, but Icarus
soaring too high, melted the wax and fell into the
sea.

Dæmoniack, (Greek) possessed with a Devil,
or evil spirit.

Doemonologie, (Greek) a discourse of
Angels, Spirits, or Devils.

Daff, (old word) a Coward, or a
Dastard.

Daffadill, a kinde of flowr, otherwise
called Narcissus.

A Dagg, a Pistoll, so called from the
Dacians, who first used them.

Dagswain, a rough, or course mantle.

D' alanson, the name of an ancient and
Noble Family in Lincolnshire,
commonly called by
contraction Dallison.

Dalmatian Dap, a flour, otherwise called a
Tulip, because it was brought from
Tulippa, a
Promontory of Dalmatia, which is a part of
Illyricum, a Countrey of Greece.

Dalmatick, a kinde of vestment worn by the
Priests, so called also from Dalmatia,
where it was first made.

Dalreudini, the ancient name of a
certain people of
Scotland, so called from Reuda an Irish
Captain, who conquered those parts.

Damascus, the chief Citie of
Syria, whence we have our best sort of Pruines,
which are called Damask Pruines, or
Damasines.

Dammage, a Term in Common-law, any hurt, or
hinderance that a
man taketh in his estate, also a part of that the Jurors
are to enquire of passing for the Plaintiffe, in a civil
action.

Dammage fesant, in Common-law, is, when a
strangers beasts are in another mans ground, and there
feed without Licence of
the Tenant, spoiling the Grasse, or Corn, in which case
the Tenant may impound them.

Dammask, a kinde of fine stuffe, first made
in the Citie of Damascus.

Damnation, (lat.) a condemning, or
giving sentence.

Damocrita, a Roman Matron, whose husband
Alcippus being banish't, and she forbid to follow
him, and her daughters prohibited marriage that his race
might be extinct, she in revenge when the chief women of
the Citie were met in a house to sacrifice, set fire on
the house, and when she saw people run to their aid, she
first killed her daughters, then her self.

Danæ, the daughter of Acrisius,
King of Argos, See Acrisius.

Danaus, the son of Belus, and
brother of Aegyptus, he was King of
Argos, and from him the Greeks were
called Danai.



Dancett, is much like indented, but differs
from it, in regard the lines are deeper and wider.


Dandelion, a kind of plant, vulgarly called
Pissebeds.

Dandruff, a kind of scruff or small scales,
sticking to the skin of the head, which look like
brann.

Daneguilt, from Dane and
gelt, which signifies money; It was a tribute
anciently laid upon our
Ancestors by the Danes, of 12 pence for every hide of land
thorough the
Realm.

Dangwallet, Excessive, quasi making the
wallet to dangle down.

Not in OED.



Dania, a Country of Europe, almost
invironed with the
northern Ocean, bordering
upon Saxony, and is now called
Denmark.

Daniel, (Hebr.) judgement of God.

Danisme, (Greek) Usury.

Dank, moist, from the Dutch word
Dampight.

Danmonii, the ancient name of a people in
old time inhabiting that part of this Island now called
Cornwal and Devonshire.

Dantiscum, a famous Mart Town in
Poland called Dantzick.

Danwort, a kind of plant called
dwarf-elder, in French Hieble from Hybla
a mountain of Sicily, where it chiefely
grows.

Danubius, or Ister, the greatest
River in Europe, which rising from the mountain
Arnoba, runneth through many Countries. It is now
called the Danow.

Daphne, the daughter of Peneus,
she flying from Apollo who became in love with
her for her beauty, was turned into a Laurel-tree.

Daphnomancy, (Greek) a divination by
Laurels.

Dapper, fine, neat, spruice, from an old
Latin word Toper, i. e. swift, or the Duch word
Dapfer, stout, agil, or else from
Dapifer, which
signifies in Latin a sewer, or he that serves up the first
dish at a Feast.

Darby, the chief Town of
Darbyshire, so called by contraction form
Derwentby, because
it standeth upon the River Derwent;
the Town was won in old time by Ethelfleda that
victorious Lady of the Mercians, from the
Danes, of whom she made a very great
slaughter.

Darcy's, or de Adrecy's, the name
of an ancient Family of Barons in Lincolnshire,
descended from Norman de Adrecy, or Darcy de
Nocton, who lived in great
favour and esteem with
Henry the third.

Dardanus, the son of Jupiter, and
Electra, who
having killed his brother Jasius,
fled to Samothrace, afterwards he went into
Asia, where he built Dardanum or
Troy.

Darick, a kind of ancient coin bearing the
value of two shillings, which had
upon it the Image of
Darius.

Darius, a King of Persia; there
were several of that name, whereof the last was Darius
Codomannus, who was overcome by Alexander
the Great.

Darnel, cockle-weed, from the Dutch word
Deren, to hurt.

Darrein, from the French word Dernier,
i. e. last, as Darrein, presentment, last
presentment.

Darreighn, (old word) an attempt.

Not found in OED.



Dartos one of the membranes that
involve the stones.

Darford or Darenford, a Town in
Kent, so called from the River Daren, where K.
Edward the third built a Nunnery, which was
afterward converted into a Royal Palace.

Datary, an office in Rome, for the
collation of
Ecclesiastical Benefices.

Date, the fruit of Palm-tree, also the day
of the moneth or year, wherein any Letter is
written.

Datism, (Greek) an often rehearsal of the
same thing by a heaping of synonyma's
together, from Datis a Satrape of Greece

An entry in the Errata corrects the running-on of this entry and the next. 



the Dative Case, the third of the 6 Cases in Grammar,
used in actions of giving or attributing.

Davenport, or by contraction
Damport, a Town in Cheshire, which gave
name to an ancient Family so called.

David, (Hebr.) beloved.

Daunsette, a term in Heraldry, being
almost the same with a line
indented, but onely it is deeper and wider.

Not in OED.



Dautry, the name of a very ancient
Family
in Sussex, stiled in Latin Records de Alta
ripa.

Day, signifieth in law, a day in bank
before ordinary Judges, wherein the party should appear
and plead; as for the Astronomical
and Political distinction of dayes and the parts thereof,
see Macrobius and Censorinus.


D E

Dea bona, or Good Goddesse, a name attributed
by the old Heathen to the



Earth, whom they worshipped as a
Goddesse; she was also
called Ops Fatua, and Fauna, the Poets
feign that being drunk with a wine made of
Myrtle-berries, called
Myrtidanum, she was whipt to death by her
husband Faunus with Myrtle twiges.


Dea viri-placa, a certain Goddesse
a­
mong the ancient Romans,
in whose Chappel man and wife, after they had fallen out,
were reconciled again.

Deacon, (from the Greek Diaconus,
a minister or servant) is an officer of the Church that is
appointed to distribute alms to the poor.

Deadpledge, land or moveables pawned for
money, which is to be the Creditours for ever, if the
money be not repaid at the time agreed on; it is also
called Mortgage.

Deadwater, the eddy water at the stern of a
ship.

Dean, an Ecclesiastical Magistrate that
hath power over ten Canons, and those which have a
jurisdiction assigned them by the Bishop over other
Ministers and Parishes
near adjoyning, are called Deans rurall.

Deauration, (lat.) a gilding over.

Debaucherie, or Desboucherie,
(French) riot, disorderly revelling.

Debellation, (lat.) a overcoming in war or
duell.

De bene esse, a term used in Common law, as
when a Defendants deposition is onely allowed of for the
present, but after more full examination, is either to
stand or fall.

Debet, & solet, a Writ of right, which
hath those words in it as formal words not to be omitted
when a man sueth for a thing now first of all denied him,
and which hath been injoyed by his Ancestors, as suit to a
Mill, or common of Pasture, or the like.

Not in OED.



Debilitation, (lat.) a making weak or
feeble.

Debito, a Writ which lieth where a man
oweth money upon obligation, or
bargain for any thing
sold.

Not in OED.



Debonairity, (French) curtesie,
mildnesse, also
sprightlinesse.

Debosherie, or deboistnesse, see Debaucherie.

Decade, (Greek) the number of ten.

Decadency, (lat.) a declining or
falling down.

Decagon, (Greek) a term in
Fortification and
Geometry, signifying a figure of ten Angles.

Decalogue, (Greek) the ten
Commandments imparted
to the Jews from God by Moses.

Decameron, (Greek) a book of Fables,
written by Boccace, so called because it is
divided into ten parts or books.

Decapitation, (lat.) a beheading.

Decapolis, a Country of Syria, so
called because it contained
10 Cities.

December, one of the 12 moneths so called
as being the tenth from March.

Decempedal, (lat.) ten foot long.

Decemtales, a law-term, being a supply of
ten men empannelled upon a Jury, and not appearing, which
are to be like in reputation
to those that were empanneld.

Not in OED.



Decemvirates, (lat.) the
Decemviri which
were ten Noble men among the Romans,
chosen to govern the Common-wealth in place of the two
Consuls, until the laws were fully establisht.

Decennial, (lat.) lasting, or being of the
age of 10 years.

Deception, (lat.) deceit, fraud, or
beguiling.

Deceptione, a Writ that lieth against him,
that deceitfully doth any thing in the name of another for
him that receiveth
damage thereby.

Not in OED.



Decerption, (lat.) a cropping off, or
pulling away.

Decertation, (lat.) a striving for any
thing.

Decession, (lat.) a going away, or
departing.

Decies tantum, a Writ that lieth against a
juror that taketh money for the giving of his verdict,
wherein there is recoverable
ten times so much as he took.

The Decimal chain, a certain
Mathematical
Instrument for the measuring of land, which is to be
divided into ten equal parts, each of which containeth
about 19 in length.

Decimation, (lat.) a gathering tithes, also
a punishing every tenth man by lot.

De decimis solvendis, &c. a Writ which
formerly lay against those that had
farmed the Priors aliens
lands of the King.

Deciners, or Doziners, such as
were wont to have the check of ten Friburgs for the
maintenance of the peace, the limits
of whose jurisdiction was called
Decenna.

Decision, (lat.) a determining of any
businesse or controversie.



The Deck of a Ship, the floor of planks on
which the Ordnance is plac'd.


Declamation, (lat.) a crying out
against any thing, also an
Oration made onely for exercise.

Declaration, (lat.) a shewing forth, also
in Common law it is the shewing in writing the grief of
the Demandant or Plaintife against the Tenent or
Defendant, wherein he
supposeth to have received
wrong.

Declension, or Declination, (lat.)
a declining or bowing
down; also in Grammar, it
signifieth the varying of Cases and Tenses in Nounes and
Verbs. In Astronomy,
the declination of a Planet is his
distance from the
equator, and as he declines
from thence, either northward or southward, so is his
declination nominated
either north or south.

Declinator, a Mathematical Instrument, to
take the declinations of the Planets.

Declivity, (lat.) a bending downwards, a
steepnesse.

Decollation, (lat.) a beheading.

Decoction, (lat.) a boiling away; it is
applyed chiefely to medicinable things, as herbs, roots,
&c.

Deconate, vide Faces.

Not in OED.



Decoration, (lat.) an adorning or
decking.

Decortication, (lat.) a pulling off the
outward rind or bark.

Decorum, (lat.) good grace, order,
decency.

Decrees, or Decretals, a volume of
the Canon law, composed by Gratian a Monk of the
Order of St. Benedict.

Decrement, (lat.) a decreasing.

Decrepit, (lat.) weak and impotent with
age.

Decressant, (lat.) the waining or decreasing
Moon.

Decrustation, (lat.) a taking away the
uppermost rind or crust of any thing.

Decumbence, (lat.) a lying down.

Decumbiture, is when a man is so
violently taken with a
disease, that he is forced
to take his bed; and it is properly taken from the first
lying down of the diseased,
and from this the Crisis is to be gathered.

Decuple, (lat.) tenfold.

Decurion, (lat.) the chief of a Decuria,
which signifieth a Band of ten souldiers, or a company of
ten Senators; also an Alderman
or Burgesse of a City.

Decussation, (lat.) a cutting acrosse, or
in the form of a figure of ten.

Decussion, (lat.) a shaking off.

Not in OED.



Dedecoration, (lat.) a disgracing or
dishonouring.

Dedentition, (lat.) a shedding of
teeth.

Dedignation, (lat.) a disdaining.

Dedimus potestatem, a Writ whereby
commission is given to a private man for the speeding of
some act appertaining to a Judge, it is called by the
Civilians, delegation.

Dedition, (lat.) a rendring up,

Deeds, signifie in Common law writings that
contain the effect of a contract
between man and man, which
the Civilians call literarum
obligatio.

Deep seeline, a small line with which
Seamen sound in deep waters to finde ground.

Defaillance, (French) a failing or
defect.

Defatigation, (lat.) a making weary.

Defaulking, (French) an abating, or cutting
off: It is called in Latin defalcation.

Defeasance, or defeisance,
signifieth in Common law, a condition annexed to an act,
obligation, or recognisance, which being performed, the
act, &c. is made void.

Defecation, (lat.) a refining or
cleansing from the
dregs

Defection, (lat.) a failing, also a
revolting or falling
away.

Defeisance, see Defeasance.

Defendant, is in Common law, he that is
sued in an action personal, as Tenant is he who is sued in
an action real.

Defendimus, a word used in
Enfeofment or Donation,
binding the Donour and his heirs to defend the
Donee.

Defendour of the Faith, a Title
heretofore proper to
the King of England, as Most Christian to the
King of France, Catholick to the King of
Spain. It was first given by Pope Leo
the tenth.

Defensative, a term in Physick, a
Medicine which diverts
the humours from the place affected.

Deficiency, (lat.) a want or
failing.

Definition, (lat.) an explication or
unfolding of the essence
of a thing by its genus and difference.

Deflection, (lat.) a turning away, also a
bending down.

Defloration, (lat.) a ravishing, or
deflowring.



Defluxion, (lat.) a flowing downward, also in
physick it is taken for a falling down of humours to any
part of the body.


Deformity, (lat.) ugglinesse.

Deforsour, in Common-law, is one that
casteth another out of possession by force, whereas
Disseisour is he that doth it
without force.

Defray, to make free, also to pay
anothers charges, from
the Dutch word freshen.

Defunct, (lat.) dead.

Degenerate, (lat.) to fall from a more
noble to a baser kinde, to go aside from the vertues of
ones Ancestors.

Deglutination, (lat.) an unglueing.

Deglutition, (lat.) a greedy devouring, in
physick it is taken for a powr of the animal faculty,
which makes us swallow our meat and drink with an
appetite.

Degradation, (lat.) a casting out from any
Dignity, or Office.

Degree, (French) a step, or stair, or by
Metaphor any state, or condition, which is as it were an
ascending, or descending from one step to another, in
Astronomy it is the 30th. part of any of the
twelve signs, in physick andchymistry it is the
intensnesse, or remisnesse of the hot, or cold quality of
any thing.

Dehortation, (lat.) a disswading.

Deianira, the daughter of Oeneus,
King of Etolia, she was first espoused to
Achelous,
afterwards to Hercules, and being to passe over
the River Evenus, Nessus the Centaure offered his
service to carry her over, but as soon as he was on the
farther side, he attempted to ravish her,
whereupon Hercules shot at him with a
poysoned arrow; Nessus perceiving he had
received his deaths wound, he to be revenged
presented Deianira with a shirt dipt in his own
bloud, telling her, that if her husband wore it, it would
draw his affections from all other women, which she
believing gave it to Hercules, but the shirt
sticking to his body so burnt his flesh that to avoide the
torment, he threw himself into a flaming pyle, and
Deianira for grief slew her self.

Dejeration, (lat.) a taking a solemn
oath.

Deifie, (lat.) to make a God of one.

Deiphobus, the son of Priamus and
Hecuba, who caused
Paris to be slain by treachery and married his
wife Helena.

Deipnosophists, (Greek) a company of
wise-men discoursing at supper.

Deis, (old word) a seat.

Deity, (lat.) Divinity, or Godhead.

Delamere, a Forrest in Cheshire,
whereof the Dawns of Vskinton were, by the gift
of Ranulph the first Earle of Chester,
made Forresters by Hereditary succession; in this Forrest
Aedelfleda the Mercian Lady built a Town
called Eadelbury, i. e. the happy Town, which now
being nothing but a heap of rubbish, is called the Chamber
in the Forrest.

Delatour, (lat.) an accuser, or
informer.

A Delegate, (lat.) he that executes
judgement in the place of a Civil, or
Ecclesiastical Judge.

Deletion, (lat.) a blotting out.

Delgovitia, the name of an ancient Town in
York-shire, which stood as some think in that
place where now Wighton is.

Delibation, (lat.) a sacrificing, also a
tasting.

Deliberation, (lat.) a consulting, or
debating.

Delict, (lat.) an offence, or crime.

Delineation, (lat.) a drawing the first
draught of a Picture.

A Delinquent, (lat.) one that hath
committed an offence, or
crime.

Deliration, (lat.) a doating, or being
besides ones senses.

Delos, an Island in the Aegean
Sea, the chiefest of the Cyclades, where
Apollo and Diana were born, whence they
were called the
Delian Twins.

Delph, is an abatement placed in the middle
of an Escocheon, proper to him that revoketh his own
challenge, and eateth his
own words.

Delphos, a Town of Phocis in
Greece, famous for
the Temple and Oracle of Apollo.

Deltoton, (Greek) a constellation of stars,
resembling the figure of a Greek delta.

Not in OED except at "properness" (1635 quotation).



Delusion, (lat.) a deceiving, or
beguiling.

Deluge, (French) an inundation, or
overflowing of
waters.

Demand, in Common-law, is opposite to
plaint, for in pursuit of civil actions, if they be real
actions, the pursuer is called demandant, if personal,
plaintiffe.

Demeasne, or Demain, (French) by
the Civilians called Dominicum, is that
land, which a man holdeth originally of
himself, whereas
feodum are those, which he holdeth by the benefit
of a Superiour.



Demetrius, the name of several famous Kings in
Asia, who succeeded Alexander, the
word signifieth belonging to Ceres, who in
Greek is called Demeter.


Demi, (lat.) joyned with another word,
signifieth half as Demi-God, &c.

Demin, (old word) a Judge.

Not in OED.



Demise, (lat.) to farm, or let.

Demission, (lat.) a casting down, or
abasement.

Democracy, (Greek) a Government wherein the
Magistrates are chosen from among the people, and by the
people.

Democritus, a famous Philosopher born at
Abdera, he thought the world to be composed of
Atomes, and that he might the better contemplate upon
natural causes, and not be
taken off with any outward
objects, he put out his eyes with a burning bason, his
father was a man of so great riches, that he feasted
Xerxes and all his Army.

Demolition, (lat.) a casting down, or
ruinating.

† Demonachation, (French) an
expelling from the
Monkish order, also a forsaking
of the same.

Demoniack, see Dæmoniack.

Demonstration, (lat.) a shewing, or
making plain.

Demophon, the son of Theseus and
Phædra, he was
driven by Tempest upon the shore of Thrace, and
married Phillis, the daughter of
Lycurgus, but Theseus dying, he took the
government of Athens upon him, and forgetting
Phillis, she for grief hanged her self upon an
Almond-tree.

Demosthenes, a famous Oratour among the
Greeks, who was banish't by Philip of
Macedon, and at last poysoned himself to avoid
the fury of Antipater.

Demur, signifieth in Common-law a kinde of
pause upon any point of difficulty.

Denariata terræ, the fourth part of an
Acre of Land, it is also called farding-deal, or a
farundel of Land.

Denary, (lat.) the number of 10. also the
same as Deneer.

Denbigh, the chief Town of
Denbighshire,
called by the Britains Cled Fryn-yn Rosse, i. e.
a rough Hill in Rosse, for so that part of
Wales was anciently named.

Deneer, a kinde of Coper Coyn, which values
about the tenth part of a penny.

Denelage, the Law of the Danes, by which a
third part of England was
governed before the
Conquest.

Denis, a proper name, contracted from
Dionysius, which some fetch from Dios
nous, i. e. Divine minde, the chief of this name was
St. Denis, the great Saint of France, it
is also a womans name contracted
from Diana.

Deneck, (Arab.) the tayl of the
Swan.

Not in OED.



Deneck elected, (Arab.) the tayl of the
Lion.

Not in OED.



Deneck Alihedi, (Arab.) the bowing of the
back, or doubling of the tayl of the Goat.

Not in OED.



Denizon, quasi Danes son, or from the
French word donaison, an endowing, and signifieth
in Common-law an Alien that is Infranchised by the Princes
Charter, whereby he is made capable of any
Office, or of purchasing
Land, but it cometh short of Naturalization, because a
stranger naturalised may
inherit by descent.

Dennington, a Castle in
Bark-shire, built by Sir Richard de
Aberbury, it was once the Residence of the Poet
Chaucer, afterwards
of Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolk.

Denomination, (lat.) a giving a name, from
any occasion.

Dense, thick, opposed to rare by the
Philosopher, and that body is said to be dense, where the
substance is more, and the quantity lesse.

Density, (lat.) thicknesse.

Dent, a Term in Blazon, as a bordure dent,
or indented is, when the line of which the border is made
is indented in, and out like the teeth of a saw.

Dentifrice, (lat) a certain powder made up
into a consistence, wherewith to rub the teeth.

Dentisscalp, (lat.) a tooth-picker, or
tooth-scraper.

Dentition, (lat.) a putting forth, or
breeding of teeth.

Denudation, (lat.) a making bare, or
naked.

Denuntiation, (lat.) a proclaiming, or
denouncing.

Deodand, a thing devoted, and consecrated
to the service of God, to expiate some eminent hurt, or
mischief it hath done.

De Deoneranda pro rato portionis, a Writ
that lieth where a man is distrained for Rent that ought
to be paid by others, proportionably with himself.

Deosculation, (lat.) a kissing with
eagernesse.

Departer, a Term in Law, signifying, he



that pleading one thing at first in barre of an action,
and being replied thereunto, doth in his rejoynder, shew
another matter contrary
to his first plea; also departers
of Gold or Silver, are those that purifie, and part
those mettals from the courser sort: they are also
called parters and finers.


Departure in despite of the Court, is when
the Tenet or Defendant appeareth to the action brought
against him, and hath a day over in the same term and does
not appear but makes default; it is called a departure in
spight of the Court.

Depauperation, (lat.) a making poor.

Depeculation, (lat.) a publick theevery, or
stealing from the Common-wealth.

Depend, (lat.) to stay or rely upon.

Depford, a famous shipdock in
Kent, where the ships for the Kings Navy use to
be built. It was anciently called West-Greenwich,
and at the Conquest of England
was given to Cislebert Mammignot, one of
William the Conquerours
Souldiers.

Depilation, (lat.) a making bare of hairs,
a making bald.

Deploration, (lat.) a mourning for, or
bewailing.

Deplume, (lat.) to strip off
feathers.

Deponent, in Grammar, signifieth a Verb
which hath a passive termination, and an active
signification; also in Common law it is he who deposeth or
layeth down any matter upon oath.

Depopulation, (lat.) a spoiling or
unpeopling of any
Country.

Deportation, (lat.) a carrying away.

Deportment, (French) carriage,
comportment or
behaviour.

Depositum, (lat.) a pledge in feoffee or
trust.

Depravation, (lat.) a spoiling,
corrupting, or making
nought.

Deprædation, (lat.) a preying upon, a
taking away by force.

Deprecation, (lat.) a diverting Gods
judgements by prayer, a praying against any
calamity.

Deprehension, (lat.) a catching, or
taking unawares.

Depression, (lat.) a pressing downward,
also an humbling.

Deprivation, (lat.) a bereaving or
taking away.

Depromption, (lat.) a bringing out.

Depudication, (lat.) a vitiating or
corrupting.

Depulsion, (lat.) a driving from.

Deputy, a Lieutenant, one that governs in
the place of another.

Dequace, (old word) to dash.

Deradiation, (lat.) a casting forth of
ray's or beames.

Dere, (old word) to hurt.

Dereliction, (lat.) an utter
forsaking.

Derein, from the French word
Desranger, or
the Norman word Desrene,
signifieth the proof of
an action which a man affirmeth that he hath done, and his
adversary denies.

Not in OED.



Derham, in the Saxon tongue
Deorham, a Town in Glostershire, where
Ceaulin the Saxon King slew 3 Princes of the
Britains, Commeail, Condidan, and
Fariemeiol, and utterly subdued the
Nation.

Deric, a proper name of a man, it being a
word contracted from Theoderic.

Derision, (lat.) a scorning or laughing
at.

Derivation, (lat.) a drawing or taking, it
is used in Grammar for the deriving of any word from its
original; also in Physick
it is taken for a drawing of the
humour from one part of the
body to another.

Dertmouth, a Port Town in
Devonshire, which in former times Mounsieur
de Castel a French Pirate going about to invade,
was by the Country people intercepted and slain.

Derogation, (lat.) a lessening or
detracting from the
worth of any thing, or any person.

Deruncination, (lat.) a taking away weeds,
or any thing that molesteth.

Derbices, a people of Asia,
inhabiting near the mountain Caucasus, who
strangle their kindred as soon as they arrive at the age
of 70 years, and eat their flesh,
inviting their neighbours
to the Feast. And this they hold to be the most noble kind
of burial.

Derceto, the name of a certain Goddesse
anciently worshipped at Askalon, her
forepart representing the
shape of a woman, her hinder part the shape of a
fish.

Dercyllidas, a famous Lacedemonian
Commander, who succeeded Thymbron, he took
Larissa, Amaxitos, and Colona, and
gained divers victories over the Persians.

Dervises, an Order of religious persons
among the Turks.

Descalsas, (Spanish) a sort of Fryars in
Spain that go barelegged.



Descant, called in Latin
frequentamentum
vocis, in French fredon, is a term in
Musick, signifying the answering of quick notes in one
part, unto a slower measure in the other part.


Descent, (lat.) a coming down, also a
deriving ones pedigree.

Description, (lat.) a setting forth the
nature or property of any thing.

Descry, from the French word cry or
clamour, to discover afar off.

Desection, (lat.) a cutting or mowing
down.

Desert, a Wildernesse or solitary place,
from the Latin word deserere, to forsake, but
with the accent in the last syllable, it signifieth merit
from the French word deservir.

Desertion, (lat.) a forsaking or
abandoning.

Desiccation, (lat.) a drying up.

Desidery, from the Latin
desiderium, desire
or lust. It is a word used by Chaucer.

Designation, or Design, (Lat. and
French) a purposing or contriving.

Designers, see Deciners.

Desidious, (lat.) negligent, lazy,
sluggish.

Desipience, (lat.) foolishnesse,
indiscretion; also
in Physick it is taken for the dotage of a sick
person.

Desist, (lat.) to leave off, to
cease.

Deslavy, leacherous beastly, a word used by
Chaucer.

Desmonia, a County in Ireland,
anciently inhabited by
the Vellabri and Iberni; It is vulgarly
called Desmond.

Desolation, (lat.) a lonelinesse or lying
waste.

Despection, (lat.) a casting ones eyes
downward.

Desperation, (lat.) a despairing or
giving over.

Despicable, (lat.) lyable to contempt, or
to be despised.

Despoliation, (lat.) a robbing or
spoiling.

Despondency, (lat.) a dejection of spirit,
or despairing.

Desponsation, (lat.) a betrothing, a
giving in marriage.

Despote, (Greek) a great Title
heretofore among the
Greeks, being as much as chief Lord or Governour of a
Country.

Despotical dominion, the power of a Master
over his servant.

Despumation, (lat.) a taking off the scum
or froth.

Destination, (lat.) an appointing or
ordaining as it were by
destiny.

Destiny, Fate; the three Destinies, the
three fatal Sisters. see Atropos.

Destitution, (lat.) an utter forsaking or
deserting.

Destruction, (lat.) a destroying, or
undoing.

Desuetude, (lat.) a desisting from any
custom or use.

Desultorious, (lat.) given to
vaulting.

Detection, (lat.) a revealing, or laying
open.

Detention, (lat.) a detaining or
withholding.

† Deterioration, (lat.) a making
worse.

Determination, (lat.) a purposing or
intending.

Deterred, (lat.) frighted,
discouraged.

Detestation, (lat.) a detesting or
abhorring.

Detinue, (French) a Writ that lieth
against him who having
goods or chattels delivered him to keep, refuseth to
deliver them again.

Detorsion, (lat.) a wresting away.

Detraction, (lat.) a drawing away, also a
slandering.

Detriment, (lat.) hurt or dammage.

Detrition, (lat.) a wearing away.

Detrusion, (lat.) a thrusting a way.

Detruncation, (lat.) a cutting off a limb
or branch.

Devastation, (lat.) a laying waste.

Devastaverunt bona testatoris, a Writ lying
against Executors for paying of
Legacies without
specialties before the debt upon the said specialties be
due.

Deucaledonians, a certain people
inhabiting in old times
the Western parts of Scotland;
They were vulgarly called Picts.

Deucalion, the son of Prometheus,
he with his wife Pyrrha the daughter of
Epimetheus,
were saved in the universal Deluge, being carried in a
ship to the top of Pernassus
and consulting the Oracle of Themis what way they
should take to restore mankind, and being told they should
throw the bones of their first mother
behind them, they took
stones out of the earth, and cast them behind them. Those
which Deucalion cast became men, and those which
Pyrrha cast became women.

Devest, (lat.) signifieth in Common Law to
deprive of a possession.

Devils-bit, a kind of plant whose root looks as
if it were, and is fain'd to have been, bitten by the
Devil out of envy,



because of the many excellent virtues and properties it
hath, wherewith mankinde is benefitted.


Developed, (French) unfolded.

Deviation, (lat.) a turning aside out of
the way.

Devirgination, (lat.) a deflouring, or
depriving of
Virginity.

Devise, in Common-law, is, where a man in
his will bequeaths his goods, or his lands, to another
after his decease, and he, to whom the lands, or goods are
bequeathed, is called
the devisee, devise also
signifieth a Motto, or conceit in a Coat of Arms, or
Picture, and is also called an Imprese.

Deumo, an Idol adored by the East
Indians of
Calicut.

Devoir, (French) duty, Devoirs of
Caleis, were the
customs due to the King for Merchandize brought to, or
carried thence when our staple was there.

Devolution, (lat.) a rolling down, a
falling from one to
another.

Devote, (lat.) vowed or consecrate to
God.

Devotion, (lat.) a vowing, or
consecrating; also
piety, religiousnesse.

Deusan, any kind of hard fruit that
lasteth long, so called from durare, to
last.

Deuteronomy, (Greek) a Book written by
Moses, signifying the second Law,
being the fifth Book in the
Holy Scriptures.

Dew, is generated of a most thin cold
vapour, onely exhal'd so high by the Sun as to keep it up
in the air; but when he withdrawes himself from our
Hemisphear, it falleth down again in round drops, and is
by the coldnesse of the air congealed resolved into
water.

Dewlap, called in Latin paleare,
the skin which hangeth down under the throat of an
oxe.

Dexterity, (lat.) nimblenesse, readiness,
agility.

Dexter aspect, is contrary to the
succession of the
Signs.

Dexter point, a term in Heraldry, being
that place in an Escutcheon
that hath its beginning near the right corner, in the
chief thereof.


D I

Diabetical, (Greek) a term in Physick
signifying troubled with the Diabetes, which is a disease
wherein a mans water runneth from him without any
stay.

Diabolical, (Greek) devillish.

Diacatholicon, a certain Medicine or
physical Composition.

Diachylon, a Plaister composed of juices
whose office is to soften and concoct.

Diaconal, (Greek) belonging to a
Servant, Minister, or
Deacon.

Diademe, (Greek) a wreathed hatband, also a
Kings Crown.

Diæresis, (Greek) a figure whereby one
syllable is divided into two.

Diagnostic, (Greek) thoroughly
knowing or discerning in
Physick. Diagnostic signs of a disease, are those signs
which at present are apparent.

Diagonal, (Greek) a term in
Geometry, signifying a
line in a quadrangle which passeth from one corner to
another.

Diagram, (Greek) a Geometrical
figure, also a certain
form described in demonstrative
sciences, also a proportion of measures in Musick
distinguished by Notes.

Diagraphical, (Greek) belonging to  the
art of painting, or graving.

Dialect, (Greek) a propriety of speech, or
difference of pronunciation peculiar to each several
Countrey, as in Greece heretofore there were
the Attick, Dorick, Ionick, and Aeolick
Dialects, or Idiom's; it is also the art of
Logick.

Diallel lines, (Greek) lines running
crosse, and cutting one another.

Dialogisme, (Greek) a figure wherein a man
reasoneth, and discourseth with himself as it were with
another.

Dialogue, (Greek) a written discourse
wherein two parties are brought in
talking together.

Diameter, (Greek) a Geometrical word,
signifying a streight line drawn through the middle, or
Center of any figure.

Diamond, a sort of precious stone, called
also Adamant, so hard, that it is not to be softned by any
thing but Goats bloud, it cometh from the Greek word
Adamas, untamable.

Diana, the daughter of Jupiter and
Latona, brought
forth at one birth with Apollo,
she, that she might keep her Virginity
fled into the Woods, and addicted her self wholly to
hunting, whereupon she was called the Goddesse of the
Woods.

Diapasme, (Greek) a Pomander, or
perfume made of dry
powders, which is



used upon several occasions.


Diapason, (Greek) an eight, or the most
perfect concord in Musick.

Diaper, a kinde of linnen cloath, which is
wrought with flourishes, and divers sorts of
figures.

Diaperd, a bordure in Heraldry is properly
said to be Diapred, where it is fretted all over,
and hath something quick or dead appearing within the
frets.

Diapering, in painting, is an
overrunning your work
after it is quite finish't with branches, or other
work.

Diaphanous, (Greek) transparent, or that
may be seen through, or pierced through by the Sun
beams.

Diaphony, (Greek) a harsh sound, a sound
which maketh a discord.

Diaphoretick, (Greek) easily piercing
through, a word used in physick, and
signifies a Medicine
that discusses any humour
by concoction, or transpiration.

Diaphragme, (Greek) a fence, or hedge, in
Anatomy it signifieth a skin, or muscle which passeth
overthwart the body, seperating
the breast, or middle region from the stomack, or lower
region.

Diarrhæa, (Greek) a flux of the belly
without any inflammation of the
Entrailes.

Diastole, (Greek) a figure whereby a
syllable short by nature is made long, also in physick, it
is taken for that motion of the pulses, which dilates the
heart and the arteries, being contrary to Systole, which
contracts them.

Diarie, a Diurnal, or Day-book,
wherein the passages of
every day are written.

Diatesseron, (Greek) one of the chief
Chords in Musick, called a fourth, also a plaister that
consists but of foure ingredients.

Diatribe, (Greek) a place where
Orations,
or Disputations are held.

Not in OED in this sense.



Dibble, a two forked instrument,
wherewith they set Herbs
in a Garden.

Dicacity, (lat.) a taunting, or
mocking.

Dicearch, (Greek) a just Governour, or
Prince.

Dication, or Dedication, (lat.) a
promising, devoting, or
consecrating.

Dichotomy, (Greek) a cutting in two pieces,
a dividing a speech, or discourse into two parts.

Dicker, a quantity of leather, containing
ten Hides.

Dictate, (lat.) to tell any one what they
are to write.

Dickins, a contraction from Devilkins, or
little Devils.

Dictator, (lat.) a great Commander
among the Romans, who had
the chief authority for
the time being, both in war and peace; he was never chosen
but upon some great occasion,
and his command was to last but half a year.

Dictionary, (lat.) called in Greek a
Lexicon, a Book wherein hard words and names are mentioned
and unfolded.

Dictum, the ancient name of a City in
Cærnarvonshire, now called
Diganway.

Dictynna, a name attributed to
Diana, who flying from Minos, she cast
her self into certain nets which are called Dictya.

Didapper, a kind of bird, so called from
the Greek word Diadyptein, to duck under
water.

Dido, the daughter of Belus, King
of the Tyrians, she was married to
Sichæus Priest of Hercules, whom
Pygmalion slew that he might obtain his riches;
but she gathering all the wealth she could together, fled into
Africa, and there built a City which was first
called Byrsa, afterwards
Carthage, and refusing to marry Iarbas
King of Getulia, because he went about to force
her by war, she killed her self. Others say, it was
because falling in love with Aeneas who was
driven by tempest on her
coast, he refused to marry her.

Didram, an ancient coin valueing
fifteen pence.

Diem clausit extremum, a Writ that lieth
for the Heir of him that holdeth land of the Crown, either
by Knights service, or in Soccage and dieth. It is
directed to the Eschetour
to inquire of what estate he was seized, and who is next
Heir; and this inquisition is to be
returned into the
Chancery.

Dies datus, a respite given to the
Tenent or Defendant before
the Court.

Diennial, (lat.) of two years
continuance.

Diespiter, quasi diei pater, a name
attributed to
Jupiter; he is also called
Lucetius, from
Lux the light.

Diet, in Greek diaita, from
dais a banquet,
signifieth a general convention of the German
Peers to consult of the affairs of the Empire.

Dieta rationabilis, a reasonable dayes
journey; a word used in the Civil Law.



Dietetical, (Greek) belonging to a
limited and
proportionable diet.


Diffamation, (lat.) a disgracing, a
blemishing any ones
good name.

Diffarreation, (lat.) a solemnity
anciently used among the
Romans in the divorcement
of man and wife.

Differences, in Heraldry are
extraordinary
additions whereby bearers of the same Coat-armour, are
distinguished each from others.

Difficulty, (lat.) uneasinesse,
hardnesse.

Diffidence, (lat.) doubtfulnesse,
mistrustfulnesse.

Diffluence, (lat.) a flowing asunder, or
several wayes.

Diffusion, (lat.) a scattering or
shedding abroad.
Diffusion in Philosophy is the dilating of a substance
into more parts.

Digamma, (Greek) the Aeolic letter
among the Greeks, like unto
our letter F.

Digestion, (lat.) a disposing, also a
concocting of the meat
in the stomack.

Digests, in French Pandectes, a
volume of the Civil Law; so called because the legal
precepts therein contained are so excellently disposed and
digested.

Dight, (old word) ready, adorned.

Digit, a Character which expresseth a
figure in Arithmatick, as a V. the figure of five, also
the parts of an eclipse.

Digitation, (lat.) a pointing with the
fingers, also an expressing the form of the
fingers.

Digladiation, (lat.) a fighting, or
disputing the matter
with swords.

Digne, from the Latin word dignus,
neat, gentle, worthy. It is a word used by
Chaucer.

Dignity, (lat.) honour, reputation,
advancement.
Essential Dignities of the Planets are when Planets are in
their own houses, exaltations, tripticities, and faces,
how these are assigned to every Planet, see in Mr.
Lillies Introduc. Fo. 104.

Dignosce, (lat.) to know, or discern one
from another.

Digression, (lat.) a wandering out of the
way, a going from the matter in hand.

Dijudication, (lat.) a deciding a
difference between
two.

Dike-grave, one that oversees the dikes and
banks of the Low-Countries, that keeps the bankes from
Inundation of the Sea.

Dilaceration, (lat.) a rending or
tearing asunder.

Dilaniation, (lat.) a butchering or
tearing in pieces.

Dilapidation, (lat.) a taking away or
ridding of stones, also a wasting.

Dilatation, (lat.) a widening or laying at
full length.

Dilatatory, a Chirurgeons Instrument to
widen any part that's too much closed.

Dilection, (lat.) a tender affection or
love.

Dilemma, (Greek) is called a horned
syllogism, wherein both propositions are so framed, that
neither can well be denied.

Dilling, a child born when the Parents are
old.

Dilstone, otherwise called
Divelstone, because
it standeth upon the River Divelesburn,
a Town in Northumberland where King
Oswald slew Cedwalla the Brittish
Tyrant.

Dilucidation, (lat.) a making clear or
plain.

Dilution, (lat.) a purging or washing
away; also wine dilute
signifieth wine that is mingled with water.

Diluvial, (lat.) belonging to a Flood or
Deluge.

Dimention, (lat.) the just measure or
proportion of any figure. In Geometry length breadth, and
depth, are called the three dimensions.

Dimetæ, the ancient name of the people
inhabiting that part of Wales which
containeth those
Countries now called Cærmardenshire,
Pembrokshire, and Cardiganshire.

Dimication, (lat.) skirmishing or
fightng.

Dimidiation, (lat.) a dividing in the
midst, a cutting into two halves.

Dimocks, an ancient Family in
Cheshire. see Grand Sergeanty.

Diminutive, (lat.) little, small; in
Grammar it is taken
substantively for a word whose termination implies a
littlenesse in respect of another thing that is bigger, as
from tabula a table, comes tabella a
little table or tablet. In Heraldry it is a
blemishing or defacing
of some particular point of the Escocheon by the
imposition of some stain and colour thereon. In
Architecture it
signifies the lessening of a pillar by little and little,
from the base to the top.



Dioces, from the Greek word dioecesis
a governing, signifieth the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
of a Bishop.


Diogenes, a famous Philosopher, who lived
in a tub which he rolled up and down from place to place;
he was for his churlish disposition and clownish
conversation called
the Cynic.

Diomedes, the son of Tydeus, and
Deiphile, and
King of Aetolia, he was
accounted one of the
chiefest Hero's at the wars of Troy; he brought
away Rhesus his horses and the
Palladium, he wounded Mars and
Venus, fought with Hector and
Aeneas, whom his mother Venus protected;
at length being ashamed to return home because of the
whorish pranks of his wife Aegiale, he went into
Apulia and had that Kingdom given him by
Daunus. There was also another Diomed
King of Thrace, who used to feed his horses with
mans flesh; but at last Hercules overcoming him,
gave him to be devoured by his own horses.

Dioptic art, that part of perspective which
belongs to Astronomy, and by instruments
searcheth out the distance of the Sun and other Stars,
comprehending the Intercapedines of Sun, 
Moon, and Stars.

Dioptrical, (Greek) belonging to a
Dioptra or Geometrical
Quadrat.

Diphthong, (Greek) two vowels clapt
together into one

An entry in the Errata corrects the running-on of this entry and the next.



Diple, a mark in the margent, to shew
where a fault is to be corrected.

Dipsas, a kind of Serpent whose biting
brings a deadly thirst.

Diptote, signifieth in Grammar a Nown that
hath but two Cases.

Dirce, see Amphion.

Dire, (lat.) cruel, fell,
unmerciful.

Directory, (lat.) that which directeth, or
putteth in the right way.

Direction, a Planet is said direct, when it
moveth in its natural course according to the direction of
the Signs.

Diremption, (lat.) a setting apart.

Direption, (lat.) a snatching, or taking by
force.

Dirge, from the Latin word
dirigere, prayers, or divine-service offered to
God for the soul of the dead.

Diribitory, from the old Latin word
diribere, to
distribute or divide, a place where souldiers are mustered
and receive pay.

Diruption, (lat.) a bursting
asunder.

Disalt, to disable.

Disard, a doltish fellow from the French
word disard, loquacious, or the Dutch word
dwæsærd, i. e. a man of a stupid wit.

Disastre, (French) ill luck, derived from
the evil influence of the Stars.

Discent, in Common Law is an order whereby
Lands are derived unto any man from his Ancestors.

Disceptation, (lat.) a contentious
disputing.

Discern, (lat.) to perceive, to know one
thing from another.

Discerption, (lat.) a tearing in
pieces.

Descession, (lat.) a departing.

Hair Discheveled, (French) loosely
scattered out of
order.

Discinct, (lat.) ungirded, also
carelesse.

Discipline, (lat.) a teaching or
instructing.

Disciplinants, an Order of Religious men
that scourge themselves.

Disclamer, in Common Law is an
expresse denial or
refusal in standing out against
any action.

Discoloure, (lat.) of divers
colours.

Discomfiture, (French) a total routing or
vanquishing an enemy.

Disconsolate, (lat.) comfortlesse.

Discontinuance, or Discontinuity,
(lat.) an interruption or breaking off; also in Common Law
discontinuance of possession
is this, that a man may not enter
upon his own land being
alienated, but must bring his Writ, and seek to recover
possession by
Law.

Discordance, (lat.) a disagreement,
jarring, or being out of
tune; for in Musick those Notes are called discords which
make harsh and unpleasing sounds, as seconds, fourths,
sevenths, &c.

Discrepance, (lat.) a differing or
varying one from
another.

Discretion, (lat.) a separating or
distinguishing;
also wisdom, prudence, because
it teacheth us how to make a right distinction of
things.

Discrimination, (lat.) a putting a
difference between one
thing and another.

Discumbence, (lat.) a sitting or lying down
to eat, it being a custom among the Ancients to lie down
upon the ground and eat.

Discure, to discover, a word used by
Chaucer.



Discursion, (lat.) a running to and fro.


Discussion, (lat.) a shaking off, or into
pieces; also a searching narrowly into a businesse.

To Disembogue, (Spanish) to come out of the
mouth of a River or Haven.

Disfranchize, to exclude out of the
number of Citizens or free-Denisons.

Disgrading, a depriving a Clergy-man of his
orders, who being delivered to his ordinary, cannot purge
himself of the crime whereof he was convicted by the
Jury.

Disgregation, (lat.) a scattering, or
separating.

Disguise, (French) to put into another
guise or form.

Disgust, (lat.) to distaste.

Disherit, or Disinherit, (French)
to put out of possession.

Disjunction, (lat.) a severing or
disjoyning.

Dislocation, (lat.) a putting out of its
right place.

Dislodge, a term in hunting, applyed to a
Buck, when you first raise him

Disloyalty, (French) unfaithfulnesse,
perfidiousnesse.

Dismantle, (French) to take off a cloak or
mantle, but by metaphor, it is taken for to beat down the
walls of a Fortresse.

Dismes, (French) tithes, or the tenth part of all the fruits being
consecrate to God, and consequently to be paid unto those
who take upon them holy Orders.

Not in OED.



Dismission, (lat.) a sending away.

Dispansion, (lat.) a spreading both
wayes.

Disparagement, (Ital.) a disgracing, or
undervalueing; In Common Law it is used for the marrying
of an Heir or Heiresse under their degree, or against
decency. Some derive it from the Latin words
dispar and ago, it being as it were a
doing that which is disagreable.

Disparates, (lat.) a term in Logick,
signifying things which
are different from one another, but not contrary.

Disparity, (lat.) unevennesse, or
diversity.

Disparpled, or Disperpled, loosely
scattered, or shooting
it self into divers parts, a term used in Heraldry.

Dispaupered, signifieth in Common Law
deprived of the priviledge of forma
pauperis.

Dispend, (lat.) to spend or lay out
money.

Dispensation, (lat.) a distributing or
dealing; also a performing the office of a Dispenser or
Steward.

Dispersion, (lat.) a scattering into
several parts.

Dispert, to finde out the difference of the
diameters of mettals between the breetch and the mouth of
a piece of Ordnance.

Not in OED in this sense.



Dispicience, (lat.) a looking diligently, a
considering.

Displicence, (lat.) a displeasing.

Displosion, (lat.) a bursting in two, also
the shooting off a gun.

Dispoliation, (lat.) a spoiling, rifling,
or robbing.

Dispone, (old word) to dispose.

Disposition, (lat.) a placing or disposing
of things; also the natural inclination of the mind, also
the constitution of the body.

Dispossession, (lat.) a depriving any one
of their possession.

Disproportion, (lat.) inequality.

Dispurveyed, (French) bare, indigent,
unprovided.

Disputation, (lat.) a disputing or
contesting in words
about any doubtful subject.

Disquamation, (lat.) a taking off the
scales or bark of any thing.

Disquisition, (lat.) a narrow search after
any thing.

Disrationare, in French disrener,
to prove any thing by Battel, Writ or Assize.

Dissasina, (French) dispossession, see Sasina.

Not in OED but see "sasine."



Dissection, (lat.) a cutting asunder or in
pieces.

Disseisin, in Common law, is an
unlawful dispossessing of
a man of his lands or goods.

Dissemination, (lat.) a sowing or
scattering up and
down.

Dissentaneous, (lat.) discording,
disagreeing.

Dissentory, (old word) a kind of Still.

Disservice, a disclaiming any ones
service, a doing an ill
office.

Dissidence, (lat.) a disagreeing, or
falling out.

Dissilience, (lat.) a leaping or bounding
up and down, a falling asunder.

Dissimilar, (lat.) unlike; in Anatomy the
dissimilar parts of the body, are those



which are compounded of several similar parts, as a hand
being compounded of flesh nerves and bones, is called a
dissimilar or organic part.


Dissimulation, (lat.) a counterfeiting, or
dissembling.

Dissheveled, see Dischevelled.

Dissipation, (lat.) a scatering or
dispersing.

Dissociation, (lat.) a separating or
putting asunder.

Dissolution, (lat.) a dissolving, a
melting, or destroying;
also dissolutenesse, debauchery,
or licenciousnesse of life: also contrary to
Annexation.

Dissonance, (lat.) a difference in sound,
also a disagreement.

Dissuasion, (lat.) a perswading against any
thing.

Dissyllable, (Greek) a word consisting of
two syllables.

Distance, (lat.) a being afar off.

Painting in Distemper, or size, is a kind
of painting which hath been ancientlier in use than that
which is in oil'd colours.

Distention, (lat.) a drawing out, or
stretching to the full length.

Distick, (Greek) a couple of Verses ending
in the same rhyme or measure.

Distillation, (lat.) a dropping down, or
distilling in a Limbeck.

Distinction, (lat.) a putting a difference
between one thing & another. A Logical distinction is
when a word having several significations, may be taken
either way.

Distortion, (lat.) a pulling awry, or
wringing several wayes.

Distraction, (lat.) a drawing several
wayes, also perplexity or madnesse.

Distresse, or distraining, (in Latin,
Distriction,)
is a streightning, wringing, or affliction. In Common Law
it signifieth a compulsion to appear in Court, or to pay a
debt or duty denied.

Distribution, (lat.) a dividing amongst
many.

Distributive, is an epithite to justice,
whereby is signified the justice of an
Arbitrator, who being
trusted and performing
his trust, is said to give every man his own.

Districation, a ridding out of trouble,
from the latin words dis a preposition, and
Tricæ small threads about chickens legs, which
hinder them from going; but metaphorically
any kind of incumbrance.

Districtus, the circuit or territory
within which a man may be
compelled to appear.

Term not in OED as headword but see entry for "district."



Distringas, a Writ directed to the
Sheriff to distrain one
for a debt to the King, or for his appearance at a
day.

Disturbance, or Disturbation,
(lat.) a causing trouble, or unquietness.

Disunited, (lat.) disjoyned or
severed.

Dithyramb, (Greek) a kind of Hymne
antiently sung in honour of Bacchus, also any
kind of lusty or jovial Song.

Dition, (lat.) a Dominion, Jurisdiction, or
Territory.

Dittany, or Ditander, in Latin
Dictamnum, an
herb growing abundantly in Dicte, a Promontory of
Creet, in English it is called
Garden-pepper.

Ditty, a Song which hath the words composed
to a tune.

Divan, a great solemn Council or Court of
Justice among the Turks and Persians.

Divarication, (lat.) a striding
wide.

Diventilation, (lat.) a winnowing, or
tossing to and fro.

Diverberation, (lat.) a violent
beating.

Diversified, (lat.) varied.

Diversity, (lat.) variety.

Diverticle, (lat.) a by-way, also a
device or shift.

Divertisment, (French) recreation or
pastime.

Dividend, in Arithmetick, is the
number which is to be
divided, also the share which is equally divided among the
Fellows of a Colledge.
Also Dividends in the Exchequer seem to be one part of an
Indenture.

Dividual, (lat.) easie or apt to be
divided.

Divinaile. (old word) a riddle.

Divination, (lat.) a presageing of things
to come.

Divine, (lat.) heavenly, also it is taken
substantively for a professour of
Theology, whom
Chaucer calls a divinistre.

Divisibility, Philosophic, it signifies a
capacity in a thing to be
divided.

Division, (lat.) a dividing or cutting into
two parts.

Divitiacus, a King of the Gaules,
who as some say, was King of the
Brittains.

Divorce in Common law, is a separation
between two married together, not onely from bed and
board, but from the bond of wedlock.

Divour, see Dyvour.

Diuretical, (Greek) that which
provokes urine.

Diurnal, (lat.) belonging to the day;



It is also used substantively for a
Pamphlet, wherein the
passages of every day are recorded.


Diuturnity, (lat.) lastingnesse, or long
continuance.

Divulgation, (lat.) a making known
abroad.

Divulsion, (lat.) a pulling violently
asunder.

Dizain, (French) the number ten, also a
kinde of French Coyn of about the
value of a penny, also a
song consisting of twelve Stanza's.


D O

Dobeler, a great dish, or platter.

Dobuni, ancient people of the
Brittains, who inhabited those parts, which are
now called Oxfordshire, and
Glostershire.

Doced, or Douced, a Musical
instrument, otherwise called a Dulcimer.

Not in OED.



Docility, Docibility, (lat.) aptnesse to
learn that which is taught.

Docke, a place where ships are built, or
laid up from the Greek word Cocheion a
receptacle, also a kinde of Herb, called in Latin
Lapathum.

Docket, a Brief in writing.

Doctoral, (lat.) belonging to a Doctor,
i. e. Teacher, or one that hath taken the highest
degree in Divinity, Physick, or Civil Law.

Document, (lat.) a teaching, or
instructing.

Dodded, (old word) in Latin
Decornutus,
unhorned, also lopped as a Tree,
having the branches cut
off.

Dodder, a certain weed winding about
Herbs.	

Dodecædrie, (Greek) a Geometrical figure
of 12 sides.

Not in OED but see "dodecade."



Dodecagon, (Greek)  a Geometrical
figure of 12 Angles.

Dodecatemorie, (Greek)  an
Astronomical Term,
being one of the 12 parts, into which the Zodiack is
divided.

Dodkin, a kinde of small piece of money,
which some think to be of the same value as our
farthing.

Dodona, a Citie of Chaonia, a
Countrey of Greece, near to which there was a Temple and
Oracle of Jupiter, within a Wood, sacred to the
same Deity, of which Wood it was fain'd that the Trees
were vocal, and returned the answers of the Oracle, also
the name of a Fountain, whose water had a property, both
to quench and kindle fire.

Dotrantal, (lat.) of the weight, or
measure of nine
ounces.

Not in OED.



Dog-dayes, see Canicular
dayes.

Dogdraw, (a Term used in Forrest law,) is
when any man is found drawing after a Deer by the scent of
a hound, which he leadeth in his hand, being one of the
four circumstances, wherein a Forrester may arrest the
body of an offender against Vert, or Venison in the
Forrest, the other three being Stablestand, Back berond,
and Bloudy-hand.

Doge of Venice, is the supream
Magistrate, or Duke of
Venice.

Dogger, a kinde of ship.

Dogmatist, (Greek) one that bringeth in any
new Sect, or opinion.

Dolation, (lat.) a making smooth, or
plain.

Dole, (lat.) deceit, fraud, also grief,
also a distributing, or dealing of Almes, or gifts.

Dollar, a Dutch Coyn of the value of four
shillings.

Dolling, (old word) warming.

Dolorous, (lat.) painfull, or
sorrowfull.

Dolphin, a kinde of fish, so called as some
say from the Delphi, who were the first finders
of it, also the title of the eldest son of the King of
France, from Daulphin a Province of
France; also a constellation beautified with nine
bright stars, according
to the number of the Muses.

Dolt, a sot, or blockhead, from the Dutch
word Doll.

Dolven, buried from the old word Delve, to
dig.

Dolyman, a kinde of Turkish Garment.

Domable, (lat.) tameable.

Dome, (Ital.) a Town-house, or chief
meeting place of a Citie.

Domestick, (lat.) tame, belonging to a
family, or houshold.

Domicil, (lat.) a dwelling-house, or place
of habitation.

Domination, (lat.) a ruling, or lording
over others, dominations are also one of the nine orders
of Angels.

Dominical letter, the red Letter in the
Calender, wherewith Sunday, or the Lords day is
mark't.

Dominicans, an Order of Fryars,
instituted by St.
Dominick a Spaniard about the year 1206.

Domino, a kinde of hood worn by
Canons, also a mourning
vail for women.

Domition, or Domiture, (lat.) a
taming.

Domo reparanda, a Writ that lieth
against one whose house
going to decay may indanger his Neighbours house by
falling.



Donary, (lat) a gift, or present.


Donatists, a Sect of Hereticks, whereof the
more rigid sort are called Circumcellians,
they held the son to be lesse then the father, and the
holy Ghost lesse then the son, and affirm'd the true
Church to be onely in Africa, they were
instituted by Donatus, Bishop of
Carthage, in the year 358. the more moderate sort
were called Rogatists.

Donative, (lat.) apt to give, it is
substantively taken
for a benefice meerly given
by a Patron to any man, also a Princes gift.

A Dondon, (old word) a short fat
woman.

Not in OED but see headword "dondaine."



Donee, in Common-law, is he to whom Lands
are given as Donour, is he, who
giveth them.

Donegal, see Tyrconel.

Dooms-day-book, a book made in the time of
Edward the Confessour, some say, of
William the Conquerour, wherein all the ancient
demeans of England were
registred with the names
of all those that possessed them.

Dooms-man, a Judge from the Saxon
word Doom, a Judgement, or sentence.

Dorcas, the proper name of a woman, the
word signifieth a Deer.

Dorado, (Span.) guilded over.

Not in OED in this sense.



Dorchester, the chief Town in
Dorcetshire,
it was in old time called Durnovaria,
i. e. the River passage, it was
miserably harrass't by
Sueno the Dane, and
afterwards by
Hush the Norman, but flourish't again in
King Edwards dayes; there is
also another Town of this
name in Oxfordshire,
by Leland, called Hydropolis. Dour
signifying in the ancient Brittish tongue,
water.

Dorick, dialect, see Dialect.

Dorick, Musick, a kinde of grave and
solemne Musick, also Dorick work in
Architecture, see Corinthian.

Doris, the daughter of Oceanus and
Thetis, she being
married to Nereus, brought forth a great number
of Sea-nymphs, called
Nereides.

Dormant, in Heraldry signifieth lying in a
sleeping posture, also in Law a writing Dormant is, that,
which hath a blank to put in the name of any one, also a
Dormant-tree is a
great beam, which lieth crosse the house which some call a
Summer.

Dormers, window's made in the roof of a
house.

Dorothy, a womans name, signifying in Greek
the gift of God.

Dorp, or Thorp, a Countrey Town,
or Village.

Dorrie, a kinde of fish, so called because
the sides of it shine like Gold, it is called in Latin Faber.

Dorter, or Dormitorie, a place
where many sleep together, also a place where people are
buried.

Dose, (Greek) a Term in Physick, being the
quantity of a potion, or Medecine which is prescribed by a
Physitian to his patient.

A Dosel, or Dorsel, from the Latin
word dorsum, a rich Canopie under which
Princes sit, also the
Curtain of a Chaire of State.

Doted, (lat.) endowed, having a
joynture.

Dotkin, or Dodkin, the eighth part
of a stiver, or French shilling.

Dottrel, a kinde of bird so called.

Double plea, is that wherein the
Defendant alleadgeth two
several matters in bar of the action.

Doubles, in Greek diplomata, Letters
Patents.
Not found in OED in this sense.



Doubleth, a Term in hunting, when a Hare
keeps in plain fields, and chaseth
about to deceive the hounds,
it is said she doubleth.

Doublet, a precious stone, consisting of
two pieces joyned together.

Doublings, a Term used in Heraldry, for the
linings of Roabs, Mantles of state, or other
Garments.

Dovane, (French) Custome, or
Impost.

Dover, see Dubris.

Dovetail, a joynt used by
Carpenters,
denominated from that kinde of figure.

Dousabel, (French) sweet and fair, a womans
name answering to the Greek Glycerium.

Douset, or Doulcet, a kinde of
Custard, from the Latin word dulcis.

Dowager, a title applied to the widows of
Princes and great persons.

Downes, hilly plains, also a part of the
Sea lying near the sands, from the Saxon word
Dune, a hill, the same word signifying
in Dutch a sand-bank.

Dowry, in Common-law, signifieth that which a
wife hath with her husband in marriage, it is also taken
for that portion



which she bringeth with her, which is
called in Latin Maritagium or Dos, the
former is called
Donatio.


Dowsets, the stones of a Stag, so termed in
hunting, also the same as Dousets.

Dowtremere, fair wearing, a word used by
Chaucer.

See OED "clothe," v., 5a (Chaucer quotation ca. 1369).



Doxie, a she Beggar or Trull.

Doxology, (Greek) a Verse or Song of
praise, anciently instituted in the Church which was to be
recited in Divine-service after the Prayers and
Psalmes.


D R

Drabler, in Navigation, is a piece
added to the bonnet, when
there is need of more sail.

Draco's Laws, certain rigid and severe Laws
made anciently in Athens by one Draco;
whence all severe punishments for trivial offences are
called Draco's Laws.

Dragant, or Tragacant, 
a certain gum distilling from an herb of the same name, in
English called Goates-thorn.

Dragons Head, called in the Greek
ἀναβιβάζων}, a node or place in the
Eccliptick line, which
the Moon cutteth and ascendes from the aust'ral part of
the node into the Septentrional, it hath no aspect to any
Planet, but it may be aspected
by them; its motion is according to the motion of the
Sun.

Dragons taile, called in Greek
κακαβιβάζων, is a node opposite to the Dragons
Head in the Eccliptick line, which the
Moon cutteth and
descends from the Septentrional
part of the node, unto the Aust'ral.

Dragons-wort, a certain herb, otherwise
called Serpentary, or vipers Bugloss.

Dragonstone, a certain pretious Stone
called in Greek Draconitis.

Drags, pieces of wood so joyned
together, as floating
upon the water they may bear a burload of wood or other
wares down the River.

Draiton, a Town in Shropshire near
which, a very bloody field was fought
between the two Houses of
York and Lancaster.

Dram, or Drachme, (Greek) the
eighth part of an ounce.

Dramatic, (Greek) a sort of Poetry, wherein
are lively representations of things, acted by persons
upon a Stage, as Comedies and Tragedies.

Drap de Berry, a kind of thick cloth made
in the Country of Berry in
France.

Drapery, a term in painting, being a work
wherein cloths are represented. see Cilerie.

Draught, a first Copy, from the Latin word
tractus.

Drawelatchets, a sort of nightly theeves,
so termed in divers Statutes, they are also called
Robertsmen.

Drawing, a term used by Painters,
signifying an exact
observance of the distances
and proportions of that which you would imitate or phancy.
It comprehendeth
Pictures by the life; Stories, Opticks, Landskips,
&c. It is by some called
Designing.

Dreint, (old word) drowned.

Dretch, (old word) to dream, to
tarry.

Dry exchange, a term which is given to
Usury.

Driffeild, a Town in Yorkshire, famous for the Tomb of the
learned Alfred King of Northumberland,
and for the Mounts which he raised about it.

Drift of the Forrest, a driving of cattel,
or a view of what cattel are in the
Forrest; also a boat is
said to go adrift when it hath no body to row or steer it.
Drift is also taken for counsell or policy, from the Dutch
word driiven,
i. e. to act.

Drill, a Stone-cutters toole wherewith he
bores holes in Marble, also a Baboon.

Drogoman, or Truchman, in Greek
Dragomenos, a
word used by the Turks for an Interpreter.

Droit, signifieth in common Law a double
right, the right of possession, and the right of the
Lord.

Drolery, (French) a merry facetious way of
speaking or writing.

Dromedary, a kind of Camel with two bunches
on its back, it is called in Greek Dromas for its
swiftness.

Dronklew, (old word) given to drink.

Dropacist, a puller off of hair.

Not in OED as headword (see "dropax").



Drouy, (old word) troubled.

Dru, (Sax.) subtile, a proper name, called
in Latin Drogo, or Drugo.

Not found in OED.



Drugge, a Medicin, from the Dutch word
Droogh, i. e. dry, because all
Medicins vehemently dry
the body.

Druides, certain learned men or Priests
anciently in great esteem among the Galls; they
were so called from the Greek word Drys a wood,
because they loved to inhabite
among the woods.

Drury, (old word) sobriety,
modesty.

Not in OED in this sense.





Drusilla, the proper name of divers
famous women.


Dryads, certain Nimphs, called Nimphs of
the wood, from the Greek word Drys an Oak.


D U

Duall, (lat.) of, or belonging to
two.

To Dub a Knight, to confer the Order of
Knighthood upon any one, from the French word a
douber, to arm compleat.

Dubious, (lat.) uncertain, doubtful.

Dublin, the chief City of Ireland,
situate in the Province of
Leimster, it was antiently called Bala
cleigh, i. a Town upon
Hurdles. Some say it was built by Harold
King of Norway, (when he conquered
Ireland) from whom descended in a direct line
Griffith ap Conan, borne at Dublin, in
the reign of Tyrlough. This City was bravely
defended by the English against Asculph
Prince of the Dublinians, and Gottred
King of the Isles, and in the time of King Henry
the second, was given to a Colony of
Bristowmen.

Dubris, the ancient name of a Port-Town in
Kent, now called Dover, having a very
fair and strong Castle, built as some say by Julius
Cæsar, and afterwards fortified
by King Arviragus against the
Romans.

Ducal, (lat.) belonging to a Duke.

Duces tecum, a Writ summoning one to appear
in Chancery, and to bring with him some evidence which
that Court would view.

Ducket, a certain golden coin, valueing
about 6 shillings, first coined in Rome in the
year of the City 547. having the Image or arms of a Duke
or supream Magistrate
stampt upon it.

Ductile, (lat.) easie to be drawn out, and
beaten into a thin plate; a word most commonly applied to
mettals.

Duction, (lat.) a leading.

Duell, (lat.) a single Combat between two,
from duo,  i. two, and bellum, i.
war.

Duellona, see Bellona.

Duilius, a great Commander among the
Romans, who overcame the Carthaginians
in a great Sea-fight, and was the first that triumphed
after a naval Victory.

Dulcarnon, a proportion found out by Pythagoras, for which
happy invention, he sacrified an Oxe to the gods in
thankfulness, which
sacrifice he called Dulcarnon.

Dulcimer, a kind of Musical Instrument,
otherwise called a Sambuc.

Dulcisonant, (lat.) sweetly
sounding.

Dulcitude, (lat.) sweetness.

Dulceration, (lat.) a making sweet.

Dulocrasy, (Greek) a government where
slaves and servants domineer.

Dumosity, (lat.) fulness of bryers and
brambles.

To Dun, a word vulgarly used
signifying to come
often to importune the payment
of any debt.

Dunbar, a Town of Lothien or
Lauden in Scotland, where of late years
a total defeat was given to
the Scotch army under the command of
Lesly, by Crumwell
General of the English Forces.

Dundee, a Town of Angus, a
Province of Scotland, called in Latin Taodunum, by others Alectum.

Duni pacis. see knots of peace.

Dunstan, (Sax.) Most high.

Duodecimo, a book is said to be in
Duodecimo, when
it is of twelve leaves in a sheet.

Duplicity, (lat.) a being double or
twofold.

Duplicate, a second letter patent
granted by the Lord
Chancelour, in a case wherein he had formerly done the
same, and was therefore thought void.

Duplication, (lat.) a doubling, also a word
used in Law, signifying an allegation brought in to weaken
the reply of the pleader.

Dura mater, (lat.) a term in Anatomy,
signifying the outward skin that infolds the brain.

Duration, (lat.) a long continuing or
lasting.

Dures, in Common Law, is a plea used by way
of exception by him who being cast into prison, or hardly
used by any, is constrained to seal a bond to him during
his restraint.

Durham, the chief City of the
Bishoprick of
Durham, built by Bishop Aldwin, with the
help of Vthred Earle of
Northumberland.
Here the Monks of Lindis-farm sheltred themselves
when they fled with the body of St. Cuthbert from
the fury of the Danes. It was anciently called
Dunholm and Dunelmum.

Durham Colledge, see Bernard
Colledge.

Durity, (lat.) hardness.



Durnovaria, see Dorchester.


Durotriges, an ancient people among the
Brittains, inhabiting that part which is now called
Dorcetshire.

Duskie, obscure, dark, from the Greek word
dascios, shady.

Dutchie Court, a Court wherein all
matters belonging to the
Dutchy of Lancaster are decided by the decree of
the Chancelour of that
Court.

Duumvirate, a certain Magistracy
anciently in
Rome.

Dwale, a kind of herb called sleeping
night-shade.

Dwyned, (old word) consumed.


D Y

Dyna, a kind of East India coin,
valueing about 30
shillings.

Dynastie, (Greek) Supream
Government or
Authority.

Dyrrachium, a City of Macedon,
lying upon the Adriatick Sea, now called
Durazzo.

Dyscracy, (Greek) a distemper of the body
proceeding from an unequal mixture
of the first qualities.

Dysentery, (Greek) a disease called the
Bloody-Flux.

Dyspathy, (Greek) evil passion or
affection.

Dyspepsie, (Greek) ill digestion of the
meat in the stomack.


E

EAd, or Eadith, (Sax.) a proper
name of women, signifying happinesse. It is writen in
Latin Auda, and by some Idonea.

Eaglestone, a certain pretious Stone found
in the nests of Eagles, in Greek called Aetites.

Eadelman, or Adelman, a Saxon
word, signifying a Noble man.

Eadgar, (Sax.) happy power.

Eadulph, (Sax.) happy help.

Eadwin, (Sax.) happy Victor.

Ealderman, or Alderman, the same as
Eadelman.

Ealred, (Sax.) all counsell: a proper
name.

Ean, to bring forth young, from the Greek
word Odinein.

To Ear the ground, to till or plough the
ground, from the Latin word Arare.

Earing, a part of the bolt-rope which
at all four
quarters of the sail is left open.

Earle, (Sax.) a Noble man, from Ehre,
i. Honour, and Edel, i. Noble.

Easell, is a word used in painting, being
that frame upon which the Artist placeth his cloth either
higher or lower as he pleaseth.

Easement, in Common law, is a service which
one neighbour hath of another by charter or prescription,
as a passage thorough his
ground, or the like. The Civilians
call it servitus prædii.

Easter, the time of the celebration of
Christs Resurrection, contracted from the Dutch word
Aufferstand, i. e. Resurrection, or from
Eoster, an ancient Goddesse of the Saxons, whose
Feast they kept about the same time, namely, about
April, which was thence called
Eoster-monath. It is also
called Pasca, from the Hebrew, word
Pasach, to passe over, because about this time,
the Jews celebrated the Feast of the Passeover.

Easterlings, people inhabiting the East
part of Germany, also Easterling money, is that
which we call Sterling, or Currant money, from a certain
coin which Richard the first caused to be coined
in those parts, being held in great request for its
purity.

Eastmeath, a County of Ireland, in
the Province of Meath, it is divided into 18.
Baronies.


E B

Eben-tree, a certain tree which grows in
India, and Aethiopia, it hath neither
leaves nor fruit, and the wood of it is black and very
hard, serving for many uses.

Ebionites, a certain Sect of Hereticks who
denied the Divinity of Christ, and rejected all the
Gospels but St. Mathews; they were instituted by
one Ebion in the year 71.

Ebissa, a certain Captain of the Saxons,
who with Octha, came to aid Hengist
against the
Brittains.

Eboracum, the second City of
England, commonly called York. Ptolomy
calleth it Brigantium, from the
Brigants, an ancient people of that Country; but
it was called Eboracum, or Eburacum, from
Ebrank, a certain King of the Brittains,
or as others say, from the River Vre.

Ebrack, the Hebrew tongue; a word used by
Chaucer.

Cf. OED "Hebraic."



Ebriety, or Ebriosity, (lat.)
drunkennesse.



Ebulo, the same as Ybel.


Ebullition, (lat.) a bubling or boyling
up.

Eburnean, (lat.) made of Ivory.

Eccentrick Orb, in Astronomy, is that which
moves at unequal distance from the Center.

Ecclesiastical, (Greek) belonging to the
Church.

Echen, (old word) they increase, also they
help.

Echidne, a Queen of Scythia, who
by Hercules had three Children at a birth, whereof one of
them named Scytha, who onely was able to bend his
fathers bow, succeeded in the Kingdom, and from him it was
named Scythia.

Echo, a Nymph that lived near the
River Cephisus, she
dying for the love of Narcissus, was fain'd by the Poets
to be changed into that voice, which is
reflected back in Caves
and hollow places.

Eclipse, (Greek) a want, or defect, an
Eclipse of the Sun is a depriving us of its light, by the
interposition of the Moons body, between that and us,
whereas the Eclipse of the Moon is caused, by the
interposition of the earth.

Ecliptick line, a line running through the
midst of the Zodiack and 12 signes, it is so called
because the Eclipses happen
under that line.

Eclogue, or Eglogue, as pastoral
Poem, or speech between two Sheapherds.

Ecstasie, (Greek) a figure wherein a
syllable is made long contrary to its
proper nature, also a
trance, or sudden rapture
of spirit.

Ectype, (Greek) a thing drawn from another
Copy.


E D

Edacity, (lat.) a greedy eating, or
devouring.

Eddie, the turning round in a
stream.

Edelfleda, or Elfleda, the wife of
Ethelred, King
of the Mercians, who after her husbands death,
governed that Kingdom for eight years with great prudence
and moderation.

Edentate, (lat.) to make toothlesse.

Edgehill, a Hill in Warwick-shire,
where the first pitch't field was fought, between the
forces of King Charles the first, and the
Parliament of England.

Edict, (lat.) a Proclamation, or publick
Ordinance.

Edification, (lat.) building, also it is
Metaphorically taken for instruction.

Edifice, (lat.) a house, or
building.

Edil, or Eadile, (lat.) an Officer
in Rome, who was appointed to oversee the
building of Temples and private houses.

Edinton, (called in old time
Eathandune) a
Town in Wiltshire, where King Alfred
overthrew the Danes in a
memorable battle, here also William de Edinton, Bishop of
Winchester, erected a Colledge for an Order of
men, called bon hommes, i. e. good men.

Edition, (lat.) a setting forth of any
thing, but commonly it is taken for the impression of a
book.

Edmund, the proper name of a man
signifying in the
Saxon tongue happy peace.

St. Edmundsbury, a Town in
Suffolk, anciently called Bederick's gueord,
i. e. the Court, or Mansion-house of
Bederick, and seems to have been the same Town
with that, which Antonine calleth Villa
Faustini. It derived
its present name from King Edmund, who was
cruelly put to death by the Danes, and his body
translated hither, a
stately Church being also erected to his memory, which
being demolished by
Suenus the Dane, was built anew by his
son Canutus to expiate his
fathers sacriledge.

Education, (lat.) a bringing up, or
instructing.

Edward, a proper name, signifying in the
Saxon tongue happy keeper.


E F

Effable, (lat.) to be express't, or
uttered.

Effect, (Lat.) the doing, or finishing of a thing.

Efficacie, (lat.) vertue, ability, also
force, urgency in speech.

Efficient, (lat.) causing to come to passe,
it is a word chiefly applied to one of the four causes
treated of in Logick.

Effiction, (lat.) a forming, or expressing
a thing.

Effigies, (lat.) the form, or
representation of
any thing.

Efflagitation, (lat.) an earnest
requesting, or
importuning.

Efflorescence, (lat.) a sprouting, or budding
forth.

Effluence, Effluvium, or Efflux,
(lat.) a flowing forth.



Effœmination, (lat.) a making soft, nice, or
womanish.


Efforts, (French) violent Assays, strong
impressions.

Effroenation, (lat.) unbridlednesse, or
rashnesse.

Effronterie, see Affrontednesse.

Effusion, (lat.) a powring out, or
wasting.

Eft, (old word) again.

Eftsoones, (old word) quickly.


E G.

Egbert, a proper name, signifying in the
Saxon tongue ever bright and famous.

Egestion, (lat.) a voiding, or conveying
forth.

Eggement, (old word) procurement.

Last noted usage in OED ca. 1440.



Eglantine, a certain herb, so called from
the Dutch Eghel, i. e. a Hedge-hog, because it is
full of prickles. It is also call'd sweet Bryar.

Eglogue, see Eclogue.

Egregious, (lat.) excellent.

Egremont, a Castle in Cumberland,
which William de Meschines
held by Knights service of King Henry the
first.

Egression, or Egresse, (lat.) a
going forth.

Egrimony, see Aegrimony.


E J

Ejaculation, (lat.) a casting forth, also
by Metaphor a spiritual trance.

Ejection, (lat.) a casting out.

The Eight (anciently called Alney,
i. e. the Island) a place in Glocestershire,
where a single Combat was fought between
Edmund King of the
English, and Canutus King of the
Danes, to decide their right to the Kingdom.

Eirenarchie, (Greek) the Office of
Constable, or Justice of Peace.

Ejulation, (lat.) a yelling, or pittifull
crying out.

Ejuration, (lat.) a renouncing, a
yielding up ones place.


E L.

Ela, the highest note in the scale of
Musick, or Gam ut.

Elaborate, (lat.) done with exactnesse and
pains.

An Elaboratory, or Labratory,
(lat.) a place to work in, properly a Chymists work-house,
or shop.

Elapidation, (lat.) a taking away
stones.

Elapsion, (lat.) a slipping out.

Elated, (lat.) lifted up, exalted,
proud.

Eld, (old word) age, Eldership.

Ele, (old word) help.

Eleanor, a proper name of women
deduced from
Helena.

Elecampane, in Latin, Enula
Campana, a certain Herb called Horseheal.

Election, (lat.) a choosing, or setting
apart.

Elections, are times elected, for the doing
any manner of work by the secret
operations of the
Heavens, by the nature of the signes, planets, and aspects
of the Moon.

Electors, certain Princes belonging to the
Roman Empire.

Electrum, a kinde of precious Gum,
called Amber, distilling
from Poplar Trees, into which the Poets fain the sisters
of Phæton to have been turned.

Electuarie, a certain confection, or
Medicinable
composition made of the most select drugs.

Eleemosynary, (Greek) an Almner, or giver
of Almes.

Elegancy, (lat.) gallantnesse in speech, or
apparel.

Elegie, (Greek) a kinde of mournfull verse,
or Funeral song.

Elegit, a Writ, for the recovery of goods,
or lands, toward the payment of any debt.

Elements, those pure unmix't bodies, which
are principles of all things, an
Element is defin'd by the
Philosophers, to be a body not composed of any former
bodies, and of which all
former bodies are composed; also the rudiments of any Art,
also the single letters of the Alphabet.

Elench, (Greek) a subtile, or
argumentary
reproof.

Elenge, (old word) strange.

Elephancie, or Elephantiacy,
(Greek) a kinde of disease, called a leprosie.

The term "elephantiacy" is not in the OED, but see its "elephantiasis."



Elevation, (lat.) an exalting, or
lifting up.

Eleyson, see Kyre Eleyson.

Elf, a fairy, it seems to be corrupted from
the Greek word Ephialtes.

Elguze, the left shoulder of Orion.

Elibation, see Delibation.

Elicitation, (lat.) a drawing out, an
enticing.

Eligible, (lat.) apt to be elected, or
chosen.



Elimation, (lat.) a filing off.


Elimination, (lat.) a throwing over the
threshold, a casting out of doors.

Eliquament, (lat.) a fat juyce which is
squeezed out of any kinde of flesh.

Elizabeth, (Hebr.) quiet rest of the Lord,
a proper name of women.

Elision, (lat.) a hitting against.

Elixation, (lat.) a seething.

Elixir, in (Arab.) signifieth strength, it
is commonly taken for the quintessence of any thing, the
Philosophers stone.

Elizabeth, the proper name of a
woman, from the Hebrew
words Eli, and Shavang, i. e. the
Oath of God.

Elk, a kinde of strong swift beast,
derived from the Greek
word Alce, i. e. strength.

Ellis, a proper name, corruptly for
Elias, Hebr. Lord
God.

Elmet, a certain Territory, or little
Region about Leeds in York-shire,
anciently so called,
which Eadwin the son of Ealla King of
Northumberland Conquered
from Cereticus the Brittish King, in the
year 620.

Elocution, (lat.) proper speech,
handsome
utterance.

Elogie, (lat.) a Testimony given in
commendation of any
one.

Eloinment, (French) or Elongation, 
(lat.) a removing a great way off.

Elopement in Law, is, when a married woman
leaves her husband, and dwells with an Adulterer.

Eloquence, (lat.) neatnesse, power and
perswasivenesse in speech.

Elucidation, (lat.) a making bright, clear,
or plain.

Elvish, (old word) froward.

Elutheria, (Greek) certain feasts
celebrated by the
ancient Heathens.

Elysian fields, certain pleasant places,
into which the Heathens held that the Souls of men passed
after death.


E M

Emaceration, (lat.) a making lean.

Emaciating, the same.

Emaculation, (lat.) a taking away of
spots.

Emanation, (lat.) a flowing from.

Emancipation, (lat.) hath the same
reference to Children,
as Manumission to servants, according to the Civil Law,
namely a legal, setting them free from the power of their
fathers, before the Magistrate.

Emanuel, (Hebr.) God with us.

Emanuensis, (lat.) he that writes, or doth
businesse for another man, a Secretary.

Predates earliest OED citation (1692).



Emargination, (lat.) a term in Chirurgery,
signifying a clensing wounds, or soares of the scruf that 
lieth about the brims.

Emasculation, (lat.) a taking away the
force of manhood.

Embargo, (Span.) a stop, or arrest upon
ships.

Emberweek, in Latin Cineralia, the
week before Lent, wherein by the
ancient institution of the
Church people were to fast, and the Bishop used to
sprinkle ashes upon their heads; saying, Remember, O man,
that thou art ashes, and to ashes shalt thou return.
Imber, signifying in the Saxon tongue
ashes, whence our word embers cometh, some say ember week,
is derived from the Greek word Hemerai, i.
dayes.

Embellish, (French) to deck, or
beautifie.

Embezel, to steal, from the Italian word
Invaligiare, i. to put in a sack.

Emblem, (Greek) a curious inlaying in wood,
or other material, also an expressing
a moral sentence by way of device, or picture.

Emblements, in Common-law, signifie the
profits of Land, which hath been sowed.

Embolism, (Greek) a casting in, it is
commonly used for the casting in of the day, which is
added to Leap year.

Embolned, (old word) swelled.

Embossement, or Emboucheur,
(French) a putting into the mouth.

"Emboucheur" is not in the OED.



Embost, a Term in hunting when a Deer is so
hard chac't, that she foams at the mouth, it comes from
the Spanish word Dosembocar, and is
metaphorically taken for any kinde of wearinesse.

Embracer, in Common-law, is he that when a
matter is in trial, comes for reward to the bar, being no
Lawyer, and speaks in favour of one of the parties.

Embrocation, (Ital.) a bathing any part of
the body in a liquor, falling from aloft.

Embryon, (Greek) the imperfect
feature of a Childe,
unshap't in the mothers womb.

Embushment, see Embossement.

Embuscade, an Ambushment, or
secrete lying in wait.

Eme, (old word) an Aunt.

Defined by OED as "uncle."





Emendation, (lat.) a correcting or
mending.


Emerald, (Span.) a certain pretious stone
of a green colour, called in Latin Smaragdus.

Emergent, (lat.) rising up above water,
appearing from underneath any thing. An Emergent occasion
is taken for a business of great consequence.

Emetical, (Greek) a term in Medicine,
belonging to those things which purge the body by
vomit.

Emication, (lat.) a shining out.

Emigration, (lat.) a passing out of any
place.

Emildon, a Town in Northumberland,
where J. Duns called Scotus was born,
who for his obscure way of writing was stiled the subtile
Doctor.

Eminence, (lat.) an excelling, an
appearing above
others.

Emissary, (lat.) one sent abroad to spie or
give intelligence.

Emission, a throwing or sending out.

Emme, the proper name of a woman: some will
have it to be the same with Amie, others contract
it from Elgiva which signifieth
Helpgiver.

Emmot, a little insect called a Pismire.

Emollient, (lat.) softning, molifying, or
asswaging.

Emolument, (lat.) profit or benefit.

Emotion, (lat.) a moving out, a stirring
up, also trouble of mind. Cleop.

Empaire, (French) to diminish, to make
worse, from the præposition in, and
pire, worse.

Empannel, from the French word
panne, or panneau,
i. a skin, signifies to enter the names of the Jury
into a parchment or roll, which are summond to appear for
the publick service.

Emparlance, (French) in the Common Law, is
a petition in Court of a day of respite. It is called in
the Civil Law, petitio
induciarum.

Emphatical, (Greek) uttered with a grace or
emphasis, which is a significant or intent expression of
ones mind.

Emphyteutick, (Greek) set out to be
improved, let out to farm.

Empirick, (Greek) a Physitian which cures
by receipts taken upon trust.

Emplastration, (lat.) an applying a
plaister, a dawbing,
also a graffing.

Emporetical, (Greek) belonging to an
Emporium, i. e. a Mart Town, or place for Faires
and Markets.

Emprimed, a term in hunting,
signifying a Harts
forsaking the herd.

Emption, (lat.) a buying.

Empyræal, (Greek) fiery, Empyræal Heaven,
the highest Heaven, or Seat of the Blessed.

Emucid, (lat.) mouldy.

Emulation, (lat.) envy, or striving to
exceed.

Emulgent, (lat.) stroaking, Emulgent vein,
one of the branches of that hollow vein which goes to the
reines, and by which the reines do separate the urine from
the blood, and attract it.

Emulsion, (lat.) a stroaking, also in
physick, it is a kind of Medicine made
into a certain cream.

Emunctories, (lat.) certain kernelly places
in the body by which the principal parts void their
excrements or superfluities.


E N

Enach, in the practick of
Scotland, is a satisfaction for any crime or
fault.

Not found in OED.



Enaluron, a term in Heraldry, is when a
bordure is charged with any kinds of Birds.

Enamell, to vary with little spots, from
the French word Maille, a spot.

Enargy, (Greek) cleernesse or
evidence.

Not found in OED.



Encaustick, (Greek) varnished, or wrought
with fire.

Enchace, (French) to set in Gold.

Enchant, (French) to conjure, or
invoke the Devil with
certain strange words or verses.

Encheson, a Law French word,
signifying the cause
why any thing is done.

Encheiridion, (lat.) a small Book that one
may clasp in ones hand.

Enclitick, (Greek) enclining. An
Enclitick conjunction in
Grammar is that which casts back the accent to the
foregoing syllable.

Encombrance, (French) a hindrance.

Encomiastick, (Greek) belonging to an
Encomium or speech made in praise of another.

Encrochment, in Common Law, is a pressing
too far upon ones neighbours ground.

Encyclopædie, see Cyclopædie.

Endammage (French) to hurt, to
damnifie.

Enditement, in Common Law, is a Bill of
accusation for some offence exhibited against any one,
and by a Jury presented



unto an Officer, or Court that hath power to punish, in
the Civil Law it is called Accusation.


Endive, a kind of herb, so called.

Endorse, a term in Heraldry, being the
fourth part of a Pallet, see Pallet.

Endorsed, see Indorsed.

Endowment, in Law, signifieth the
bestowing or assuring of
a dowr, also a sending
maintenance to a Vicar when the
benefice is appropriated.

Endromick, a long Irish Robe.

Not in OED.



Endymion, a certain Shepherd whom the Poets
feign to have fallen in love with the Moon, and that being
cast into a perpetual
sleep upon the top of Latmus Hill, she every
night stoopt down to steal a kiss from him.

Eneya, in the practick of
Scotland, is the principal part of the Heritage
which goes to the eldest son, called in French
l'aisne.

Cf. OED "father, n." 1597 quotation (Skene).



Energy, (Greek) force or efficacy.

Enervation, (lat.) a weakning.

Enfeildchace, a place in
Middlesex, where yet are to be seen the ruines of
an old house, the dwelling place heretofore of the
Magnavills Earles of Essex, from whom
this Chace descended to the Bohuns Earles of
Hereford and Essex.

Enfranchisment, (French) the
incorporating of any
man into a society or body politick.

Engastrimuch, (Greek) on that speakes out
of the belly.

Not in OED.



Engelbert, (Germ.) bright Angel, a proper
name.

Englecery, is taken contradistinct to
Francigena, which word used to
comprehend every alien
that was murdered, upon which there was a mulct laid upon
the Country where it was done, unlesse
Englecery was proved;
that is to say, that it was an English man who
was slain.

Not in OED.



Engonasin, (Greek) the name of one of the
heavenly constellations, by which figur was represented
Hercules kneeling. In Latin it is called
Ingeniculum or Nixus.

Engyscope, (Greek) a certain Instrument whereby the proportion of the
smallest things may be discerned.

Antedates earliest OED example (1684-85).



Enhauncement, (French) a raising the price
of any thing.

Enigmatical, see Aenigmatical.

Eniff Alpherary, (Ar.) the yawning of
Pegasus.

Enoch's pillars, two pillars erected by
Enoch the son of Seth, the one of brick,
the other of stone, whereupon were ingraven the whole Art
of Astronomy.

Enneade, (Greek) the number nine.

Enneagon, (Greek) a Geometrical figure of
nine Angles.

Enodation, (lat.) an unknotting, a
making plain.

Enormity, from the Latin word
Norma, a rule and the præposition E. It
signifies irregularity,
unmeasurablenesse.

Enquest, in Common law, is the trial of
causes both civil and criminal by the Jury.

Ensconce, to entrench, from the Dutch word
Schantse, a military Fortresse.

Ensiferous (lat.) carrying a sword,
sword-bearing.

Ensign, (French) an Escutcheon
wherein are painted the
Trophies of Honour or Armory of a Family; also a military
Banner.

Enstall, from the Greek word
Enstellein, i. to adorn, signifies to put upon a
Throne, to endow with a Robe of honour.

Entaile, in Common law, signifieth fee
taile, fee entailed, or abridged.

Entangle, quasi inter angulos ducere, to
ensnare, to embroile.

Enteched, (old word) defiled.

Entelechie, (Greek) an inward soul, or
power to move and act.

Entendment, (French) signifieth in Law the
true meaning or sense of a word or sentence.

Enterfeire, (French) to hit one against
another, to clash, or skirmish.

Enterplead, in Common Law, is the
discurssing of a point
accidentally hapning before the principal cause have an
end. In the Civil Law it is called cognitio
præjudicialis.

Enthusiasts, see Enthysiasts.

Enthymem, (Greek) an imperfect
Syllogism
wherein the Major or Minor proposition
is to be understood.

Enthysiasts, (Greek) a certain Sect of
people which pretended to the Spirit and
Revelations.

Entire entrance, signifieth in Common law a
sole possession in one man, whereas several tenancy is a
joynt or common possession.

Not in OED, but see "entrance," n., 2b.



Entire pertransient, is in Heraldry a line
which crosseth the middle of the shield, and runs
diametrically the longest way of her position.

See OED "pertransient," A.n.



Entire pertingents, are lines that run the
longest way of the sheilds position,
with­



out touching the Center.


See OED "pertingent," A.n.



Entity, (lat.) the having a being.

Entoire, a term in Blazon, when a
bordure is charged with all
sorts of inanimate things, except leaves, fruits, and
flowers.

Entoxication, a poisoning, from the Hebrew
word Toch, i. poison.

Entrals, bowels, from the Greek word
Entera.

Entreague, (Span.) a making good
again. It is also taken for
a Story, which after many intangled passages is brought to
a calme end.

Entreate, (old word) to handle.

Entry, in Common Law, signifieth a
taking possession of Lands
or Tenements.

Entriked, (old word) deceived.

Entrusion, in Common Law, signifieth a
violent entrance into Lands or Tenements void of
possession by him that hath no right unto them.

Entrusion de gard, a Writ that lieth where
the infant within age entreth into his Lands and holdeth
his Lord out.

Entweyssel, a fair house in
Lancashire, which gave name and habitation to an
ancient family so called.

Enucleation, (lat.) a taking out the
kernel, also the expounding of any
difficult matter.

Envelope, (Span.) to infold or
inwrap.

Environ, to compasse about, from the French
word Environ, i. about.

Enumeration, (lat.) a numbering or
counting.

Enunciation, (lat.) an uttering or
pronouncing; in
Logick it is taken for a proposition
which simply affirms or denies.


E P

Epact, the number by which the year of the
Sun, or solar year, exceeds the year of the Moon, or lunar
year, being the number 11.

Epaminondas, a great Captain of the
Thebans, who much weakned the strength of the
Lacedæmonians by many great
victories which he
gained over them: he died of a wound which he received at
the battel of Mantinea.

Epanalepsis, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure,
wherein the same word is oft times repeated.

Epatrides, (Greek) certain Noble men among
the Athenians.

Eparch, (Greek) the chief Governour of a
Province.

Epenthesis, (Greek) a certain figure,
wherein a letter or syllable is put between any
word.

Epha, an Hebrew measure containing 9
Gallons.

Epheby, (Greek) a young man between the age
of 14. and 25.

Ephemerides, (Greek) Journals or Books
wherein daily actions are registered,
also Astronomical calculations.

Ephesus, the chief City of Ionia
in Asia the Lesse, famous for the Magnificent
Temple of Diana, built by one Ephesus
the son of Caister, who gave name to the
City.

Ephialtes, (Greek) a kind of disease called
the Nightmare, or Elf.

Ephippiated, (Greek) saddled.

Ephod, a kind of brest-plate or priestly
garment, worn by the ancient Priests of the
Jews.

Ephori, (Greek) certain Magistrates
among the ancient
Lacedæmonians.

Epicedie, (Greek) a certain mournful Song,
which used to be sung before the corps at a
Funeral.

Epicoene, (lat.) one of both Sexes, a word
of the Epicoene Gender in Grammar is a word
declined with both Genders, Masculine, and
Fæminine.

Epicurean, of the Sect of
Epicurus, a famous
Philosopheer, who held pleasure and absence of pain to be
the chiefest good.

Epicycle, (Greek) a term used in
Astronomy, signifying a
lesser orb, whose center is in the circumference of a
greater, whereby the irregular motion of some Planet is
solved.

Epick poesie, (Greek) is that which is
written in Heroick Verse, and is taken contradistinct to
lyric.

Epidemical, (Greek) Epidemick or
Epidemical disease, a
disease universally catching.

Epigastrick, (Greek) belonging to the
Epigastrium or outward part of the belly, which reacheth
from the stomack to the navel.

Epiglottis, (Greek) the weasel of the
throat, the little tongue which closeth the larinx.

Epigrams, (Greek) short Poems upon several
kinds of subjects.

Epigraph, (Greek) an Inscription.

Epileptic, (Greek) troubled with a
certain disease called
the Epilepsie, which is a convulsion of the whole body,
whereby



the sense and understanding is very much depraved.


Epilogue, (Greek) a conclusion, also a
speech made at the end of a Play.

Epiphany, (Greek) an appearing bright or
shining; also the Feast celebrated on the 12 day from
Christs Nativity, which was the day whereon the
Star appeared in the East, which conducted the Wise
men

Episcopal, (Greek) belonging to a
Bishop or Overseer.

Epistolary, belonging to a Letter or
Epistle, which comes from
the Greek word Epistellein, to send.

Epistyle, (Greek) a term of
Architecture,
signifying the Chapiter of a pillar or Architrave.

Epitaph, (Greek) that which is
inscribed upon a Tomb or
Sepulchre.

Epitasis, (Greek) the buisie part of a
Comedy, before things are brought to their full state and
vigour.

Epithalamy, (Greek) a Nuptial Song, or Poem
which useth to be recited at Weddings in praise of the
Bride, and Bridegroom.

Epithemetical, (Greek) belonging to an
Epithem or liquid Medicine outwardly applyed to the body
by a piece of Cotton or Scarlet.

Epithet, (Greek) a word expressing the
nature or quality of another word to which it is
joyned.

Epitoge, (Greek) a garment worn loose over
another.

Epitome, (Greek) a making short or
abridging.

Epoch, (Greek) a certain retention of time
in a Chronology, taken from the
beginning of some
Empire.

Epode, (Greek) a kind of lyric Poesie,
wherein the first Verse is longer than the second.

Epulary, (lat.) belonging to a
Banquet.


E Q

Equator, see Aequator.

Equestrian, (lat.) belonging to
Horseman, Cavalier, or
Knight, who is called in Latin Eques
Auratus.

Equilateral, (lat.) see Aequilateral.

Equinoctial line, see Aequator.

Equipage, (French) a furnishing, or setting
forth.

Equiparates, or Aequiparates,
(lat.) things compared or made equal, a term in
Logick.

Equipollence, or Aequipollence, 
(lat.) a being of equal force or value.

Equipped, (French) set forth, or
accoutred.

Equivalent, or Aequivalent, (lat.)
being of equal worth or
value.

Equivocal, or Aequivocal, (lat.)
(a Logical term) having a
double signification, or whose sense and meaning may be
taken either way.

Equorean, (lat.) belonging to the
Sea.

Not found in OED.



Equus, a Constellation in Heaven.


E R

Eradication, (lat.) a destroying or
pulling up by the
roots.

Erased, (lat.) scraped, or torn out; in
Heraldry the member of any beast which seems torn from the
body, is called Erased.

Erasmuss, (Greek) Amiable. A proper
name.

Erastians, a sort of Hereticks, founded by
one Erastus a Physitian.

Erato, the name of one of the 9
Muses.

Erchembald, (Germ.) a bold or speedy
learner. A proper name answerable to the Greek
Dasypodius.

Erebus, an infernal Deity, whom the Poets
feign to be the father of night: It is metaphorically
taken for Hell.

Erection, (lat.) a raising or making to
stand up-right.

Eremitical, (Greek) belonging to a
desart, or leading a
Hermites life.

Ereption, (lat.) a snatching, or taking
away by violence.

Erichthonius, a King of the
Athenians, and the son of Vulcan, who
desirous to lie with Minerva, and she resisting
him, he spilt his seed upon the earth in the
contest, out of which
sprung Erichthonius with Dragons feet, which
deformity to hide he invented the use of the
Chariot.

Eridanus, a River in Italy,
otherwise called Padus, vulgarly Po,
made a Constellation.

Erigone, the daughter of Icarius,
who hanging her self for grief of her fathers death, was
placed among the heavenly signs, and called
Virgo.

Erimanthian, belonging to
Erimanthus, a Mountain in
Arcadia.

Eriphile, the wife of Amphiaraus,
and sister of Adrastus, who having received a
Bracelet of Polynices, betrayed her husband to
the Theban wars, where he was
destroyed.



† Eristical, full of strife, from the
Greek word Eris contention.


Ermine, a little beast, whose fur is very
costly, Ermines is a word used in
Heraldry, signifying
white powdered with black.

Ermine-street, see Ikenild.

Erminois, a Term in Blazon, or
Armory, signifying a fur wherein black and
yellow are mixed.

Ernes, (old word) promises.

Not found in OED.



Ernest (Germ.) severe, it seems
contracted from
Ariovistus mentioned by
Cæsar.

Erogation, (lat.) a liberal
bestowing.

Eros, the servant of Mark Antony,
who killed himself, because he would not see his master
fall.

Erosion, (lat.) a gnawing, or eating
away.

Erostratus, one, who to make himself
famous, set fire on the Temple of Diana.

Errant, a Justice which rides the
Circuit, from the Latin
word Errare, or the old word Ern, i. e.
a journey.

Errata, (lat.) faults escaped in
printing.

Errhines, certain Medecines, which purge away flegm sticking about
the membranes of the
brain, through the nose.

Erroneous, (lat.) subject to
errours.

Erubescency, (lat.) a being ashamed, or blushing.

Eructation, (lat.) a belching forth.

Erudition, (lat.) an instructing, or
bringing up in learning.

Eruncation, (lat.) a taking away of
weeds.

Eruption, (lat.) a breaking forth with

violence.

Erwhile, a while ago, lately.

Eryngus, a kinde of Thistle, so
called.

Not found in OED.



Erysipely, (Greek) a disease called St.
Anthonies fire, causing blisters, being bred of
Cholerick bloud.

Erythræan Sea, the Arabian Gulf,
not the Red-Sea as some have supposed.

Eryx, the son of Buras and
Venus, he was a man of great strength, and was
killed by Hercules, at a fight called
whirlebat.


E S

Esay, the name of a Prophet among the Jews,
the word signifying in Hebrew, reward of the Lord.

Escal, (lat.) fit for food.

Escambio, a Licence granted for the making
of a Bill of exchange to a man over-sea.

Not found in OED.



Escheat, in Common-law, signifieth lands
that fall to a Lord within his Manour, by forfiture, or
the death of his Tenant without
Heirs, it cometh from the French word Escheoir,
to fall.

Escotcheon, (French) a shield, or Coat of
Arms, from Escu, a Buckler.

Escuage, (French) a Tenure of Land, whereby
a Tenant is bound to follow his Lord into the Wars at his
own charges.

Esculent, see Escal.

Escurial, a famous Monastery built by
Philip the second of Spain, and
dedicated to the Jerome Fryars, it is situate
near to a Village of the same name not farre from
Madrid.

Esnecy, the right of choosing first, in a
divided inheritance belonging to the
eldest Copartner.

Eson, or Aeson, the father of
Jason, and the brother of Pelias King of
Thessaly, he had his youth restored unto him by
Medea, at the
request of Jason.

Esples, in Latin Expleta, the full
profit, that land
yields.

Not found in OED.



Esquier, in French Escuier, in
Latin Scutifer,
was anciently he that bore the Arms of a Knight.

Espringold, a certain warlike Engin, for
the casting up of great stones.

Esquiline, one of the seven Hills, upon
which Rome was built.

Essay, (French) a tryal, also a
preamble.

The Essay of a Deer, in hunting is the
breast, or brisket of a Deer, in French la
hampe.

Essedary, (lat.) one that fights in an
Essed, or warlike Chariot.

Essenes, certain Philosophers among the
ancient Jews, who separated themselves from the rest of
the people, and led a kind of Monastical life.

Essential, (lat.) having a perfect essence,
or being.

Essential debilities, are when the
Planets are in their
detriment fall, or peregrines.
See the Table in Lillies
introduction,
f. 104.

Essoine, in Common-law, is an excuse
alleadged for one that
is summoned to appear at
any Court, it is called by the Civilians
Excusatio.

Clerk of the Essoins, an Officer of the
Common-pleas, who keepeth the Essoins Rolls, delivereth
them to every Officer,



and receiveth them again when they are written.


Establishment of Dowr, is the assurance of
Dowr, made to the wife, by the husband,
or his friends, about the time of marriage.

Estandard, the standing measure of the
King, or Common-wealth, to the scantling
whereof all measures throughout the Land are to be framed,
also an Ensign in Warre.

Estimation, or Aestimation, (lat.)
valueing, or
esteeming.

Estopel, in Common-law, is an
impediment of an
action, growing from a mans own fact, that might have had
his action tried, it cometh from the French word
Estouper, to stop.

Estovers, in Common-law, signifieth that
sustenance, which a man accused of felony is to have out
of his Lands, or Goods, during
his imprisonment, it cometh from the French word
Estover, to foster.

Estreat, in French Estraict, in
Latin Extractum,
the Copy of an Original writing.

Estreie, in Latin Extrahura,
signifieth in Common-law, a beast not wilde, found within
any Lordship, and not owned by any man.

Estrepement, from the Spanish word Estropear, to set upon the
wrack, signifieth in Common-law, spoyl made by the
Tenant for term of life,
upon any Lands, or Woods, to the prejudice of him in
Reversion, also a
drawing out the heart of the Land, by plowing it
continually.

Estuate, see to Aestuate.

Esurition, (lat.) a being a hungry.


E T

Etching, is a kinde of graving with
Aqua fortis, which
eats into the Copper.

Eternize, (French) to make eternal.

Etesian windes, (Latin Etesiæ)
certain milde Easterly winds.

Etheling, see Adeling.

Ethelbert, (Sax.) nobly bright, or
renown'd, hence the
Heirs apparent of the Crown were surnamed Etheling, i.
e. Nobly born.

Ethelstane, (Sax.) noble Jewel.

Ethelward, (Sax.) noble keeper.

Ethelwold, (Sax.) noble Governour.

Ethelwolph, (Sax.) noble helper, proper
names.

Etherial, see Aetherial.

Ethicks, Books treating of Moral
Philosophy, from the
Greek word Ethos, manners,
or morality.

Ethiopia, see Aethiopia.

Ethnick, (Greek) belonging to the Heathens,
or Gentiles.

Ethologie, (Gr.) a discourse of
manners.

Etocetum, the name of a Town, situate in
the Military High-way, commonly called
Watling-street, mentioned by the Emperour
Antoninus, as the second Roman Station from
Manvessedum, or Mancester, in
Warwick-shire.

Etymological, (Greek) belonging to
Etymology,
which is a true derivation of words from their first
Original.


E V

Evacuation, (lat.) an emptying.

Evade, (lat.) to escape.

Evagation, (lat.) a wandring abroad.

Evagination, (lat.) a drawing out of a
sheath.

Evan, the same, as Ivon, see John.

Evangelisme, (Greek) a bringing glad
tidings, a preaching the Gospel.

Evanid, (lat.) soon decaying.

Evaporation, (lat.) a sending
outvapours.

Evasion, (lat.) a making an escape.

Eucharist, (Greek) a giving thanks,
also the Sacrament of the
body, and bloud of Christ.

Eucrasie, (Greek) a good temperature of the
body.

Eve, the wife of Adam, from the
Hebrew word Chavah, to live.

Eve, and Treve, in the practick of
Scotland, are
such servants, whose Predecessours
have been servants to any man, and his
predecessours.

Eveck, a kinde of beast like a wilde
Goat.

Evection, (lat.) a lifting up, or carrying
forth.

Event, (lat.) issue, or successe.

Eventeration, (lat.) a taking out the belly
of any thing.

Eventilation, (lat.) a winnowing, or
sifting, by Metaphor a
strict examining of a businesse.

Everard, (Germ. well reported) a
proper name answering to
the Greek Eudoxus,
others write it Eberard, i. e.
excellent towardnesse.

Eversion, (lat.) an utter
overthrowing.

Evestigation, (lat.) an earnest seeking
after.

Eugeny, (Greek) Gentility, Noblenesse of
bloud.

Not found in OED.





Eviction, (lat.) a vanquishing, a
convincement by
argument, or law.


Evidence, (lat.) testimony, in Common-law,
it is used for any proof, either of men, or
instrument.

Eviration, (lat.) an unmanning, a
yielding.

Evisceration, (lat.) a taking out the
bowels, or guts.

Evitation, (lat.) a shunning.

Eulogie, (Greek) a praising, or
speaking well.

Eunuch, (Greek) a man that is utterly
disabled for the use of women, and herein differs from
Castratus, in that a Castrate is onely
gelded, but an Eunuch totally deprived
of his Genitals.

Eunomians, a sort of Hereticks, who held
that faith was onely acceptable
without works.

Evocation, (lat.) a calling out.

Eupatorie, a kind of Herb, called
Liverwort.

Euphemisme, (Greek) a setting forth any
ones good fame.

Euphonie, (Greek) a gracefull sound, a
smooth running of words.

Euphorbium, a certain Gum distilling from a
plant, call'd Gum-thistle, of which Iuba, King of
Lybia is said to have been the first
inventour.

Euphrosyna, the name of one of the three
Graces, the other two being Aglaia and
Thalia.

Euridice, the wife of Orpheus, who
flying from
Aristheus his Embraces, was stung by a Serpent,
and died, and being by the Harmony of Orpheus delivered
from the Deep, she was snatch't back again, because he
look't back upon her before she was arrived upon
earth.

Euripe, a narrow passage between
Attica, and
Euboea, now called Golpho de
Negroponte, which
Ebbes and flowes seven times a day. It is Metaphorically
taken for any narrow passage.

Europe, one of the four parts of the world
separated from Asia, by the River
Tanais, it was so called from Europa,
the daughter of Agenor, King of
Phoenicia, whom Iupiter carried away in
the shape of a Bull.

Eurythmy, (Greek) a Term in
Architecture, being
the exact proportion of the Rooms in a building.

Not found in OED.



Eutaxie, (Greek) a handsome
ordering, or disposing
of things.

Eusebius, (Greek) pious, or godly, a proper
name.

Eustace, a proper name, from the Greek
Eustathius, or Eustachius, i. e.
standing firm.

Euterpe, the name of one of the nine Muses.

Euthymie, (Greek) quietnesnesse, and
tranquillity of minde.

Eutrapely, (Greek) courtesie,
urbanity.

Eutropius, (Greek) well manner'd, a proper
name.

Eutychians, a Sect of Hereticks,
instituted by
Eutiches in the year 443. their chief Tenet was,
that there was but one nature
in Christ.

Evulsion, (lat.) a violent pulling
up.


E X

Exacination, (lat.) a taking out the stone,
or kernel out of any fruit.

Exaggeration, (lat.) an increasing, or
heaping up together, also the same as
aggravation.

Exagitation, (lat.) a stirring up.

Exalted, being joyned as an Epithete to
another word, is as much as sublime, great, excellent, as
exalted virtue. Cassandra.

Exanguious, (lat.) bloudlesse.

Exanimation, (lat.) a depriving of life,
also a dismaying.

Exanthems, (Greek) certain Wheals in a mans
body, called the small Pox, or Measles.

Exantlation, (lat.) an overcoming with much
labour and difficulty.

Exaration, (lat.) a plowing up, also a
writing, or engraving.

Exarch, (Greek) a great Officer,
heretofore under the
Constantinople Emperours,
who governed the affaires of Italy, and was
called the Exarch of Ravenna, where his
chief residence was.

Exarticulation, (lat.) a putting out of
joynt.

Exasperation, (lat.) a making sharp, a
provoking to anger.

Exaturation, (lat.) a satiating.

Exauctoration, (lat.) a depriving one of
any office, or benefit.

Excandesceny, (lat.) a being inflamed with
anger, or rage.

Excavation, (lat.) a making hollow.

Excelsity, (lat.) highnesse,
loftinesse.

Excentrik, see Eccentrick.

Excerption, (lat.) a culling, or choosing
out.



Excesse, (lat.) an exceeding or
superfluity.


Excester, (i. the City standing upon the
River Ex,) the chief City of
Devonshire, it
is called in Latin Exonia by
Antonine Isca
Danmoniorum; it was fortified by King
Athelstane who drove the Brittains quite out of
it; also it is famous for the birth of Joseph
Iscanus the most excellent Poet of his age.

Exchequer, the Court to which are brought
all the Revenues belonging to the Crown.

Excitation, (lat.) a stirring up.

Exclusion, (lat.) a barring or shutting
out.

Excogitation, (lat.) an inventing.

Excommunication, (lat.) is a punishment
inflicted by the Church upon offenders, being a secluding
them from the Sacrament,
and other spiritual priviledges.

Excoriation, (lat.) a fleaing or pulling
off the skin.

Excreation, (lat.) a spiting out.

Excrementitious, (lat.) belonging to or full
of excrements, i. dregs or ordure.

Excrescence, (lat.) an unusual growing out,
or swelling.

Excretion, (lat.) a purging of
excrementitious
humours, a sifting or casting out.

Excruciation, (lat.) a tormenting, or
putting to pain.

Excuriation, (lat.) a throwing out of the
Court.

Excursion, (lat.) a roving or running
out.

Excusation, (lat.) an excusing or
freeing from blame.

Excussion, (lat.) a shaking off.

Execration, (lat.) a cursing or
detesting.

Execution, (lat.) in Common Law,
signifieth the last
performance of an Act, as of a fine, or of a
judgement.

Executione facienda, a Writ
commanding the
execution of a judgement.

Executor, (lat.) one that performeth any
action. In Law it is taken for him that is left by will to
dispose of the deceased
parties estate.

Exemplification, (lat.) a drawing out of an
example, transcript, or draught, out of an Original
Record.

Exemption, (lat.) a taking out or
freeing.

Exenteration, (lat.) a taking out the
bowels or guts.

Exequies, (lat.) Funeral Rites, or
Solemnities.

Exercitation, (lat.) often exercising; also
a kind of critical commenting upon Authors.

Exflorous, (lat.) that hath flowers
growing out of it.

Not found in OED.



Exhalation, (lat.) a hot and dry fume drawn
up by the heat of the Sun, by which fiery Meteors are
ingendered: Also a blowing or breathing out.

Exhausted, (lat.) drawn quite out,
wasted.

Exhibition, (lat.) a shewing or
presenting, also an
allowment to any one toward
their maintenance.

Exhilaration, (lat.) a making merry or
joyful.

Exiccation, (lat.) a drying up.

Exigendary, or Exigenter, an
Officer of the Court of Common-pleas.

Exigent, (lat.) a Writ that lieth where the
defendant in an action personal
cannot be found, nor any
thing within the County to be distreined: It is directed
to the Sheriff to call five County-dayes under pain of
outlawry. It is metaphorically
taken for a streightnesse or necessity.

Exiguity, (lat.) slendernesse or
smalnesse.

Exilition, (lat.) a leaping out.

Exility, (lat.) the same as
Exiguity.

Eximious, (lat.) excellent, famous.

Exinanition, (lat.) a making void or
empty.

Existence, (lat.) a being.

Existimation, (lat.) a thinking or
judging.

Exit, is commonly taken for the going out
of any person in a Play, from the Latin Exire, to
go out.

Exitial, (lat.) bringing danger, or
destruction.

Exodos, (Greek) a going out, the Title of
the second Book in the old Testament.

Exolete, (lat.) stale, grown out of
use.

Exoneration, (lat.) an unloading.

Exoptation, (lat.) an earnest
wishing.

Exorable, (lat.) that may be
intreated.

Exorbitancy, (lat.) a thing done out of
measure, square or rule.

Exorcism, (Greek) a restraining the power
of the Devil by prayes or conjuration.

Exordium, (lat.) a beginning or
preamble to an Oration or
Discourse.

Exornation, (lat.) a dressing, or
adorning.

Exosseous, (lat.) having no bones.



Exoster, (lat.) a Petard, or Engin to blow open
a gate.


Exotick, (Greek) strange or forrain.

Expansion, (lat.) an opening or
spreading abroad.

Ex parte latis, a Writ that lieth for a
Bailiff, who having auditours assigned to hear his
accounts, cannot obtain reasonable
allowance.

Expatiation, (lat.) a walking at large, or
at full liberty.

Expectant fee, in Common Law,
signifieth land given
to a man and to the heirs of his hody, it being the same
with fee-taile, and contrary to
fee-simple.

Expectation, (lat.) a tarrying or
looking for,

Expeditate, (lat.) signifieth in the
Forrest Law, to cut out
the balls of the dogs feet, for the preservation of the
Kings Game.

Expedient, (lat.) fit or convenient.

Expedition, (lat.) quick dispatch, also a
setting forth upon a journey, war, or any other
businesse.

Expell, (lat.) to drive out.

Expence, (lat.) cost or charges.

Experience, or Experiment, (lat.)
proof, trial, or practise.

Expiation, (lat.) a pacifying God by prayer
for any offence committed, or a making amends for any
fault, by the doing of some
good deed

Expiration, (lat.) a giving up the
ghost.

Explanation, (lat.) a making plain or
manifest.

Explement, or Expletion, (lat.) a
filling up of any place or room.

Explication, (lat.) an unfolding or
explaining.

Explicite, (lat.) unfolded.

Exploit, (French) a valiant act.

Exploration, (lat.) a spying, a diligent
searching out.

Explosion, (lat.) an exploding, a
sleighting, or hissing
off from the Stage.

Expolition, (lat.) a making bright, or
polishing.

Exposition, (lat.) an expounding or
interpreting.

Expostulation, (lat.) a reasoning the case,
or complaining about an injury received.

Expression, (lat.) an uttering or
pronouncing, it is
ofttimes also taken for the thing expressed.

Exprobration, (lat.) an upbraiding, or
calling a thing to mind to any ones
reproach.

Expugnation, (lat.) a winning by
force.

Expuition, (lat.) a spitting out.

Expulsion, (lat.) a driving out by
force.

Expumication, (lat.) a making sleek, or
smooth, with a pumice-stone.

Expunge, (lat.) to blot out, to
abolish.

Exquisite, (lat.) performed to the height,
exact.

Extant, (lat.) having a being, set forth to
view, appearing above others.

Extemporary, (lat.) done ex
tempore, i. e. immediately, forthwith.

Extension, (lat.) a stretching out, or
inlarging.

Extent, in Common Law, is a
Commission to the
Sheriff, to seize and value the Lands and Tenements of one
who being bound by the Statute, hath forfeited his
bond.

Extenuation, (lat.) a making small, also an
undervalueing.

Extercoration, (lat.) a cleansing, or
carrying forth of
dung.

Etermination, (lat.) a throwing out or
banishing.

External, or Exteriour, (lat.)
outward.

Extersion, (lat.) a wiping out.

Extimulation, (lat.) a moving or
exciting.

Extinct, (lat.) put out, quenched.

Exstinguishment, in Common Law is a part of
consolidation, as when a man hath a yearly rent out of any
lands, and afterwards
purchaseth the whole lands, both the rent and the property
are consolidated into
one possession, and therefore the rent is said to be
extinguished.

Extirpation, (lat.) an utter destroying or
rooting out.

Extorsion, (lat.) an exacting, or
injurious taking away,
especially of money, as it is usually taken in Common
Law.

Extraction, (lat.) a drawing out, also the
same as Estreat, also a descending from such or
such a Family.

Extrajudical, that which is done out of
Court.

Extramundane, (lat.) being without the
World, as extramundane spaces, between
one world and another. Dr. Charlton.

Extraneous, quasi exterraneous, (lat.) one
of a strange land.

Extravagant, (lat.) idle, of a wandring
mind.

Clerk of the Extreats, an Officer
belonging to the
Exchequer, who receiveth the extreates out of the
Remembrancers



Office, and writeth them out to be levyed for the King.
See Estreats.


Extrication, (lat.) see Districation.

Extrinsecal, (lat.) outward.

Extrusion, (lat.) a thrusting out.

Extuberation, (lat.) a swelling or
bunching up.

Extumescence, (lat.) the same.

Exuberancy, (lat.) an overflowing or abounding.

Exuccous, (lat.) juicelesse.

Exudation, (lat.) a sweating out.

Exulation, (lat.) a being exild or banished.

Exulceration, (lat.) a blistring, or
turning to an
Ulcer.

Exultation, (lat.) a triumphing for
joy.

Exundation, (lat.) an overflowing.

Exuperation, (lat.) an excelling or
surpassing.

Exustion, (lat.) a burning.


E Y

Eyebite, to fascinate or bewitch by a
certain evil influence from the eye.

Eyebright, or Euphrasia, an herb
so called, very good for
the eyes.

Eyre, the Court of Justices Itinerant, from
the French word Erre, a journey; also
Eyre of the Forrest, the judicature which used
anciently to be held every three years, by the Justices of
the Forrest journeying up and down to that
purpose.

Eyth, or Eth, (old word)
easie.


E Z

Ezechias, a proper name, signifying in
Hebrew, strength of the Lord.

Ezechiel, the name of a Prophet among the
Jews; the word signifies in Hebrew, seeing the
Lord.


F A

FAbian, a proper name, from
Fabius. The chief of this name was
Fabianus Bishop of Rome, martyred under
the Emperour
Decius.

Fabius, a famous Captain of the
Romans, who for the great overthrow he gave to
Hannibals Army, was sirnamed
Maximus.

Fabrication, (lat.) a making of a
Fabrick or
Building.

Fabulous, (lat.) full of Fables, or
invented Tales.

Facade, (French) the outside, or fore-front
of a house.

Faces, Decury, or Deconate, from
the Greek word Deka, signifying ten, because in
every Sign there are three Faces, every Face consisting of
ten degrees. They are called Faces for that they are
equivalent to Signs, Formes, and shapes, by reason they
shew the nature and inclination of the Planets in them as
in their own houses.

The term "deconate" is not found in OED.



Facetious, (lat.) wittily merry, or
pleasant.

Facility, (lat.) easinesse.

Facinorous, (lat.) belonging to high or
wicked designs.

Factitious, (lat.) made like another,
counterfeited.

Factor, (lat.) an Agent for a Merchant
beyond Sea.

Faculty, (lat.) the power or ability of
performing any action, as the Animal,
Vital, and Natural
Faculties in the body of man. In Common Law it signifieth
a priviledge granted to a man by
indulgence or
dispensation, to do that which by the Law he cannot do. It
is also used sometimes for a Mystery or Profession.

Facundity, (lat.) Eloquence.

Faint pleader, a false manner of
pleading, to the deceit
of a third party.

Fair pleading, a Writ upon the Statute of
Malborow, whereby it is provided that no fines
shall be taken of any man for not pleading fairly, or to
the purpose.

Fairie, a Goblin or Phantasm, from the
Dutch word Varelick, i fearful

Faith, the Christian name of divers
women, the signification
commonly known.

Faitours, idle-livers, from the French word
Faitardise, a sleepy disease.

Fall, is an essential debility, and it
happens when a Planet is
opposite to his exaltation,
whereby he is debilitated and very weak.

Falcation, (lat) a mowing.

Falchon, a short sword bending like a hook,
from the Latin word Falx.

Falcidian Law, a Law made by the
Romans in the time
of the Consul Falcidius, which treated of the
right each Roman Citizen had in the disposal of
his goods.

Falcon, a great gun, next to the
Minion.

Falernian wine, wine growing in
Falernus, a
field of Campania in Italy.

Fall off, in Navigation is when a ship doth
not keep so near the wind as we
appoint.



Fallacious, (lat.) full of deceit or craft.


Falouque, (French) a boat or barge, by some
called a brigantine.

Falsification, (lat.) a speaking falsities,
or untruths.

Famagosta, the chief City of the Isle of
Cyprus.

Famigeration, (lat.) a divulging, or
reporting abroad.

Familiar, (lat.) acquainted, also
substantively used, for
a Spirit, or Devil.

Family of love, a Sect or Heresie broached
by Henry Nicholas. Their chief Tenet is, That
Christ is already come in glory to judge.

Fanatick, (lat.) frantick, inspired,
having vain
apparitions.

Fane, from the Greek word Phaino,
a  weathercock; it is sometimes taken for a
Temple.

Fannel, (French) a kind of ornament,
anciently worn by Priests.

Fanus, a certain Deity, representing the
year, anciently worshipped by the Heathens.

Farandman, in the practick of
Scotland a Pilgrim or Stranger.

Farced, (lat.) stuffed.

Fardingdeal, or Farundel of land,
the fourth part of an acre.

Farendon, a famous Market Town with a
strong Castle in Barkshire, remarkable besides
for the Fort raised by Robert Earle of
Glocester, against K. Stephen, who
notwithstanding
won it by desperate assaults.

Farlie things, yearly things.

Farraginous, (lat.) belonging to a
farrago, or mixture of
several graines together,
which they call a maslin.

Farreation, (lat.) a ceremony anciently
performed at Marriages.

Farrow, to bring forth, from the Latin word
parere, it is spoken of sows.

Farsang, otherwise called Parasang, a Persian word, signifying a
league, which is 3 English miles.

Fascicular, (lat.) made into a
fascicle which is a bundle or fardel.

Fascination, (lat.) an eyebiting, or
bewitching by the eye,
or by the force of imagination.

Fasciate, (lat.) to bind, from
fascia a swath.

Fastidious, (lat.) breeding a
loathing.

Fastigiation, (lat.) a making or growing
sharp at the top like a pyramid.

Fastuosity, (lat.) insufferable
pride.

Fatality, (lat.) unavoidable necessity, or
that which is appointed by Fate, which is the order of
affairs from all eternity.

Fatidical, (lat.) foretelling that which is
to come.

Fatigation, (lat.) wearisomenesse.

Fatigue, (French) the same.

Fatuity, (lat.) sottishnesse,
stupidity.

Faunus, the son of Saturn,
civiliz'd mens manners, built Temples, and made Laws, and
was one of the ancientest Kings of Italy.

Favonian, belonging to Favonius or
the West wind.

Faust, (lat.) lucky.

Antedates earliest OED citation (1692-1732).



Fautor, (lat.) a cherisher or
favourer.


F E

Fealty, from the French word feaulte,
i. fidelity, an oath taken at the
admittance of every
Tenant, to be true to the Lord of whom he holds his
land.

Feasible, (French) easie to be done.

Febricitation, (lat.) a falling sick of an
Ague or Feaver.

February, so called of Numa
Pompilius, a februis expiatoriis, or
sacrifices for purging of
souls; for the second day of this moneth a Feast was kept,
and sacrifice was offered to Pluto for the souls
of their Ancestours.

Februation, (lat.) a praying for the souls
of any.

Fecial, or Fæcial,
(lat.) a Herald or Embassadour of war, among the ancient
Romans there were 20 in number, the principal of
whom, was called pater patratus.

Feculent, or Fæculent, (lat.)
full of dregs.

Fee, in Latin feudum,
is taken in Common Law for
all those lands which
are held by perpetual right.

Fee ferm, in Common Law, is land held of
another, to himself and his heirs for ever for a certain
yearly rent.

Fee simple, or absolute, is land whereof we
are seized with these general words; To us, and our heirs
for ever.

Fee taile, or conditional,
hath this limitation;
To us, and the heirs of our body.

Feild, is the whole surface of a sheild
overspread with some mettal, colour or fur, and
comprehendeth in it the charge. A term in Heraldry.

Felicity, (lat.) happinesse.

Fellon, a blister or wheal on the body,
from the Latin word, fel, choler.

Felo de se, a self-murderer.



Felony, in Common Law, is any offence which is
next to petty treason, as murder, theft, rapes, burning
of houses, &c.


Fencemonth, the month wherein Deer begin to
fawn, which is about midsummer,
wherein it is unlawful to hunt in the Forrest.

Fends, things hung over a ships side to
keep another ship from rubbing against it.

Fennel, a kind of herb so called.

Fenugreec, an herb which hath been found
growing in great abundance, in several parts of
Greece.

Feodary, or Feudatary, an officer
belonging to the Court
of Wards and Liveries,
who is to be present with the Escheatour
at the finding of any office, and also to survay and value
the land of the Ward.

Feofment, in Common Law, is the gift or
grant of any Honours, Castles, Manors, &c.
unto another in fee simple, by delivery
of seisin, either by word or writing.

Foeminine, (lat.) belonging to the
Femal Sex.

Foeneration, (lat.) a putting out money to
use.

Feracity, (lat.) fruitfulnesse.

Feral, (lat.) dangerous or deadly.

Feral Signs, are Leo, and the last
part of Scorpio.

Fercost, (Ital.) a kind of ship or
boat.

Fere, (old word) a companion.

Ferdfare, an acquitment of a man to go into
the wars.

Ferdinando, a proper name of men,
called by the Spaniards
Hernando, by the Italians Ferando, by
the French Ferrant. Some think it derived from
the Saxon words Fred rand, i. pure peace. Others
think that the Spaniards have for the sweeter sound drawn
it from Bertrand, i. fair and pure.

Ferdwit, an acquitment of a murderer in the
army.

Feretrius, Jupiter so called a ferendis
spoliis, i. from spoiles taken in war.

Feriation, (lat.) a keeping holiday, a
ceasing from work, idlenesse.

Ferine, (lat.) brutish, beastly,
wild.

Ferit, (Ital.) a blow.

Not found in OED.



Ferity, (lat.) salvagnesse,
brutishnesse.

Ferm, or Farm, a house, or land,
or both, taken by Indenture of Lease, or Lease
Paroll.

Fermanagh, a County of Ireland in
the Province of Vlster, the people whereof were
anciently called Erdini.

Fermentation, (lat.) a swelling with
ferment or leaven, also a working; it is a word much used
in Chymistry.

Ferocity, (lat.) fiercenesse.

Feronia, an ancient heathen Goddesse, a
Goddess of the Woods.

Ferret, from Forare, to pierce, or
Furari, to steal;
a little beast called in Latin Viverra.

Ferry, a passage over the water, from the
Greek word Phero, to carry.

Ferruginous, (lat.) like rust of iron, of
an iron colour.

Ferrumination, (lat.) a soldering
together of mettals, a
word used in Chymistry.

Fertility, (lat.) fruitfulnesse.

Fervent, or Fervid, (lat.) hot, by
metaphor, eager, or
vehement.

Ferula, an herb called in English
Fennel Gyant.

Ferular, (lat.) a kind of chastising
instrument, called
also a Palmer.

Fesspoint, a term in Heraldry, being a line
going thorough the midst of the Escutcheon, called the
girdle of honour, it comes from the Latin word
fascia.

Festination, (lat.) a hastning, or making
speed.

Festivity, (lat.) mirth, rejoycing,
solemnity.

Festucous, (lat.) having a tender sprig or
branch.

Foetid, (lat.) smelling ill or
stinking.

Fetise, (old word) handsome.

Fetters, is ofttimes used figuratively in
Poems and Romances, for Captivity or thraldom, especially
in an amorous sense. Cleopat.

Feud, Feed, or Feid, a combination
of one Family against another, being
inflamed with hatred or
revenge.

Feverfow, an herb called Mothwort, in Latin Febrifuga, because it is good against a
feaver.

See OED, "moth."



Feversham, a flourishing Town in
Kent, where King Althestane assembled
the Nobles and learned men
of his Kingdom to make Laws, and where King
Stephen founded
an Abby for the Monks of Clugny, in which he
himself, Maude his wife, and Eustach his
son, were entombed.

Fewmetts, a term in Hunting, the dung of a
Deer.




F I

Fiants, the dung of a Badger, or Fox, and
all Vermine.

Fibrous, (lat.) full of Fibers, which are
the small strings, or threads which hang about the roots
of any plant, also little strings about the Veins, and
Muscles of a body.

Fibulation, (lat.) a buttoning, or
joyning together.

Fictile, (lat.) made of earth.

Fiction, (lat.) a feigning, or
inventing.

Fictitious, (lat.) feined, invented.

Fidicula, the falling vulture.

Not found in OED but see "harp," n.



Fidelity, (lat.) faithfulnesse.

Fidejussor, (lat.) a pledge, or
surety.

Fidius, an ancient heathen God, said to be
the son of Iupiter, he is called the God of
faithfulnesse.

Fiduciary, (lat.) trusty, also a Feoffee in
trust.

Fierabras, (French) fierce at arms.

Fieri facias, a judicial Writ that lieth
for him that hath recover'd in an action of debt, or
damages.

Fife, a County of Scotland,
shooting far into the East, between two arms of the Sea,
Forth & Tau.

Fifteenth, a certain tribute, which used to
be levied by Parliament, and imposed upon every Citie, or
Borough, through the Realm.

Figment, (lat.) a fiction, or faigned
tale.

Figurative, (lat.) spoken by a
figure.

Filaceous, (lat.) made of thread, or flax,
also full of filaments, which are the small threads, or
strings, about the Roots of Plants.

Filanders, a sort of little Worms, which
breed in Hawks, also Nets for wilde beasts.

Filazers, (French) certain Officers
belonging to the
Common-pleas, who make out all Original Processes, real,
personal and mixt.

Filctale, a kinde of entertainment, made by
Bayliffs for those of their hundreds, for their gain, it
is also called Sothale.

Not found in OED.



File, in Latin Filacium, a thread,
or wyer, whereon Writs, or other Exhibits in Courts are
fastned, also in Heraldry,
it is one of the modern wayes of differencing
Coat-Armours.

Filial, (lat.) relating to a son.

A Fillet  in Heraldrie, is made, or
constituted, by
adding one line to the chief, underneath it, the content
whereof is the fourth part of the chief.

Film, a membrain, or thin skin
enwrapping the brain,
and several other parts of the body, & also the infant
in the womb, of which there are three sorts, Chorion,
Amnios, and Allantois.

Filtration, (lat.) a straining through a
course cloath.

Fimashing, the ordure of all sort of
Deer.

Final, (lat.) having an end, brought to an
end.

Financer, a receiver, or teller in the
Exchequer, from the
French word Finance, wealth, or treasure.

Fine, a mulct, or penalty, also a formal
conveyance of Land, by acknowledging a perfect agreement
before a Judge.

Fine capiendo pro terris, a Writ that
lyeth for him, who being
committed to prison,
obtaineth favour for a summe of
money.

Fine force, a French word, signifying
absolute constraint.

Finite (Philos.) limited, bounded.

Finours of gold, or silver, are those that
purifie those metals by fire from the drosse.

Fire-boote, an allowance to maintain
competent fire for the use of the
Tenant.

Firedrake. a fiery meteor, ingendred
of a hot exhalation inflamed between two Clouds.

Firma, in the practick of
Scotland, is the duty, which the Tenant payes to
his Landlord.

Cf. OED "farm."



Firmament, (from the Latin Firmus,
i. e. solid.) the starry Heaven, it is turned
about the Chrystalline Heaven, being both of an uniform
motion, & finish their course in 250000 years, which
motion appears not, but by the observation of sundry ages.
For 430 years before Christs time, the first star in
Aries was in the vernal intersection, which
still keeps that name, though now removed almost 29
degrees, so that in more then two thousand years the fixed
stars have not travelled from West to East, so much as
one whole sign of the Zodiack.

Firmus, a Roman Emperour of that vast strength,
that bearing himself up from any place with his arms,
and bearing an Anvil upon his breast, he could endure
the smiths



beating upon it for a long time.


First fruits, the profits of every
spiritual living for one
year, in ancient time given to the Pope, afterwards to the
Prince.

Fiscal, (lat.) belonging to a fisque,
i. e. a Treasury, or Exchequer.

Fishing, or Splicing,  a Term used
in Masts, Cables, or in any Timber, cut like wedges at one
end, and fastned together.

Fissure, (lat.) a cleft, or
division.

Fistulary, (lat.) belonging to a pipe, or
to a disease called Fistula, which is a kind of Ulcer
eating into the body with a long narrow passage.

Fitched, (from the Lat. Figere) a
Term in Blazon, as a Crosse Fitched, i. e. sharp
at the end.

Fitz, (Fr. Fils) a word commonly
added to the sirnames of
several great families of
this Nation, descended from the Norman race as
Fitz-Herbert, Fitz-Walter,
i. e. the son of Herbert, or the son of
Walter, it being answerable to Ben in
Hebr. Bar in Chaldee, and Ap in
Welsh.

Fixation, (lat.) a fixing, also a Term in
Chymistry, signifying a fixing of bodies, so as to make
them indure the fire.

Fizgigg, a kinde of dart, wherewith
Marriners strike fishes as they swim.


F L

Flabellation, (lat.) a fanning with a
Flable, or fan.

Flaccid, (lat.) drooping, or
flagging.

Flagellantes, a sort of Hereticks, which
went up and down scourging themselves, and begging Almes,
they were so called from Flagellam a
scourge.

Flagitation, (lat.) an earnest
begging.

Flagitious, (lat.) hainous, wicked.

Flagrancie, (lat.) a lightsome burning,
also a vehement desire.

Flajulet, (French) a certain Musical instrument,
being a kinde of Pipe, or Fluite, but somewhat
lesse.

Not found in OED.



Flamins, certain Roman Priests,
instituted by
Pompilius Numa, so called from the Filamines, or
Coifes, which they wore upon
their heads.

Flammeous, (lat.) flaming, or flame
colour'd.

Flanch, a term in Heraldry, being an
Ordinary formed of an
Arch-line, beginning from the corner of the chief, and
compassing with a
swelling embossement toward the Nombril of the
Escotcheon.

Flandria, the Countrey of Flanders in
Gallia Belgica, being one of those ten Provinces,
remaining in the King of Spains Dominion.

Flasque, a term in Blazon, being an
ordinary consisting of
one Archline drawn somewhat distant from the corner of the
chief, and swelling by degrees toward the midst of the
Escutcheon.

Flatulent, or Flatuous, (lat.)
windy.

Fledwit, a Saxon word, signifying in
Common-law, an Out-lawed fugitive,
coming to the peace, and
discharged from amerciament.

Fleet, a prison in London, so
called because it stands
upon the River Fleta, or Fleet.

Flemeswit, or Flehenwit,
from the Saxon Flezen, to flie away, signifieth
in Common Law, a liberty to
challenge the cattel or
amerciament of ones man a fugitive.

Flexanimous, (lat.) having a flexible or
easie mind.

Flexibility, (lat.) easinesse to
bend.

Flexion, (lat.) a bending.

Flint, the name of a Castle in
Flintshire, begun by King Henry the
second, and finisht by
King Edward the first. Here King Richard
the second being circumvented, was delivered into the
hands of Henry of Lancaster Duke of
Hereford, who shortly after claimed the
Crown.

Floccify, (lat.) to esteem lightly, or at a low rate.

Floddon, the name of a Hill near
Brampton in
Northumberland, memorable for the battel fought
there between Thomas Howard
Earle of Surrey, and James the fourth
King of Scotland, who was
vanquisht and
slain.

Flora, a Goddesse among the
Romans, called the Goddesse of Flowers. Some
report her to have been a famous
Strumpet, who when she
died, left a great sum of money to the Common-wealth,
desiring that her memory might be celebrated with yearly
Feasts which were called Floralia.

Floramor, a flower called the flower of
love, passevelours, or purple velvet flower.

Florein, a kind of coin, valueing about 3
shillings of our money.

Florence, (lat. flourishing) a proper name
of women, also the chief City of Tuscany in
Italy is so called.



Florences, a kind of cloth brought over from
Florence.


Florey blew, a kind of blew colour used in
painting or limning.

Florid, (lat.) flowrishing, or adorned with
flowers.

Flosculous, (lat) sprouting or blooming
with Flowers.

Flotes, certain peices of timber joyned
together with rafters overthwart, which serve to convey
burthens down a River with the stream.

Flotson, or Flotzam, goods that
being lost by shipwrack lie floating upon the sea, which,
with jetson, i. e. goods cast out of the ship,
being in danger of wreck, and beaten on shore;
lagam or ligam, those which lie at the
botton of the sea, and Shares, i. goods divided
among many, are all given to the Lord Admiral.

Flouke of an anchor, that part which taketh
hold on the ground.

Fluctuation, (lat.) a rising or swelling of
waves, a tossing to and fro, also a
wavering in
opinion.

Fluctivagant, (lat.) tossed on the sea,
wandering on the waves.

Fluent, (lat.) flowing.

Fluidity, (lat.) aptnesse to flow.

Fluminous, or Fluvial, (lat.)
pertaining to Rivers, or full of Rivers.

Fluores, the Mineralists call such kind of
stones as coming out of Mines, are like unto pretious
stones.

Flush fore and aft, decks in ships laid
level from stem to stern.

Fluxibility, (lat.) aptnesse to
flow.

Fluxion or Flux, (lat.) a flowing,
also a loosnesse of the body.

Fly, that part of the Compasse where the 32
points of the winds are described.


F O

Focillation, (lat.) a refreshing.

Foder, or Fodrum, from the Dutch
word Voeden,
to feed, a course kind of meat for cattel, also a
prerogative that a Prince hath to be provided of corn for
his horses toward any Expedition. Also Fodder is taken for
2000 pound weight of lead.

Foeculent, (lat.) full of dregs.

Foecundity, (lat.) fruitfulnesse.

Foedity, (lat.) filthinesse.

Foeminine, (lat.) of the Female Sex.

Foeneration, (lat.) a practising of
usury.

Foine, (French) to prick.

Foines, a kind of Fur, which is black at
the top, taken from a little beast of the same
name.

Foison, (French) abundance.

Foist, a Pinnace, or little Ship.

Folgherers, (old word) followers.

Foliage, branched work.

Foliatanes, a certain religious Order of
men, who lived onely upon leaves.

Folio, a book is said to be in Folio, when
it is of a large volume, consisting of sheets onely once
doubled, or making but two leaves a piece.

Folkland, (Saxon) coppy-hold land.

Folkmoot, from the Saxon words folk,
i. people, and Gemettan, to meet,
signifies either the
County Court, or the Sheriffs turn.

Follicle, (lat.) a little bladder or
purse.

Fomentation, (lat.) a cherishing, in
physick it signifies the applying of warm or dry things to
the body.

Fons solis, a Fountain in Lybia,
near the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, which is at
midnight hot as boyling water.

Foothote, (old word) straightway.

Foraminous, (lat.) full of holes.

Foraneous, (lat.) pertaining to a Court or
Market-place.

Forbarr, to deprive for ever.

Force, in Common Law, signifieth
unlawful violence.

Forcible entry, is a violent actual entry
into any house or land.

Forcipated, (lat.) bending, or
hooked.

Fordoe, (old word) to kill.

Foregoers, purveyours going before the King
or Queen in progresse.

Forein matter, a matter tryable in
another Country.

Forein opposer, an Officer of the
Exchequer, to whom all
Sheriffs and Bailiffs do repair to be opposed of their
green wax.

Forejudger, in Common Law, is a
judgment whereby a man is
put by the thing in question.

Foreland, or Forenesse, an ancient
word used for a promontory which jutteth out
foremost.

Foreloin, in hunting, is when a hound going
before the rest of the cry, meets chace and goes away with
it.

Forest, (q. Feresta, i. a station
of wild beasts) is defined to be a safe harbour or abiding
place for Deer, or any sort of beasts that are wild and
delight in woods.

Forestaller, or Regrater, one that
buys ware, before it comes to the Market, and



sells it again at a higher price.


Forfare, (old word) forlorn.

See "forfare", v., in OED.



Forfeiture, in Latin, forisfactum,
or forisfactura,
signifies the transgressing of a penal Law, or the effect
of it.

Forelorn, lost, from the Dutch word
Verloren, whence Forlorn-hope, a party of
Souldiers put upon the most desperate service, in some old
English Writers, Forleten
signifieth the same.

Forletten, (old word) abandoned.

Formality, (lat.) outward shew,
precisenesse.

Formation, (lat.) forming or
fashioning.

Formeth, or seateth, a term in hunting,
applied to a Hare when it squats in any place.

Formidable, (lat.) to be feared.

Formosity, (lat.) beauty, fairness.

Formulary, (lat.) belonging to a form; also
used in the substantive, for a president,
or proceeding in Law.

Fornication, (lat.) whoredom.

Forenesse, see Foreland.

Forses, (Gr. Catadupæ)
waterfalls.

Forsleglon, (old word) slain.

Forspreak, (old word) an advocate.

Not found in OED.



Fortitude, (lat.) valour, or stoutnesse of
mind.

Fortlet, signifieth in Common Law, a
little Fort or place of
some strength.

Fortuitous, (lat.) accidental, or coming by
chance.

Fortuny, a kind of Tourneament or running a
tilt on horseback with Launces, a sport much used here in
old times.

Antedating first citation in OED (1676).



Forwelked (old word) dried.

Forwyned, (old word) withered.

Fosset, a little long Coffer or Chest, from
the Latin word fossa, a ditch.

Fosseway, a highway, digged out and made
passable. see Ikenild.

Fossion, (lat.) a digging.

A Foster, contract for a Forrester.

Fother, or Foder, a twenty hundred
pound weight.

Fotheringhay, a Castle in
Northamptonshire,
kept by William Earle of Aumart, against
King Henry the third, when the Nobles of
England revolted.

Fotion, (lat.) a cherishing.

Fougade, (French) a kind of
firework.

Foulk, a proper name, from the Dutch word
Volg, i. Noble.

Founes, (old word) devises.

Not found in OED.



Fourche, (in French a fork) signifieth in
Common-law a delaying, or putting off an action.

Foutegeld, signifieth in the Forrest law,
an amerciament for not cutting out the balls of great Dogs
feet in the Forrest; it cometh from the Dutch word
Fusz, and Gelten to loosen.

Fownder, is when a ship by an
extraordinary leak
becomes full, or half full of water.

Fox stones, an Herb so called from the
likenesse of the Root.

Not found in OED.




F R

Fracid, (lat.) rotten ripe.

Fraction, (lat.) a breaking, also a
dissention among
parties, in Arithmetick it is taken for a number
having two denominations.

Fragility, (lat.) aptnesse to break,
brittlenesse.

Fragment, (lat.) a broken part, or piece of
any thing.

Fragrancie, (lat.) an odorousnesse, or
sweetnesse of smell.

Fraisheur, (French) freshnesse,
coolnesse,
livelinesse.

Franck, a French Coyn, of about the value
of two shillings.

Franchise, in French, signifieth liberty,
it is taken in Common-law for a
priviledge, or
exemption from ordinary Jurisdiction,
also an immunity from tribute.

Franci, a certain people, anciently
inhabiting a part of
Germany, who entred into Gallia, under the
conduct of Pharamond,
and conquered a great part of the Kingdom, whence it came
afterwards to be called France.

Francis, a proper name of men, or
women, from the German word
Franck, i. e. free, not servile; answerable to
the Greek Eleutherius, and the Latin
Liberius.

Franciscans, an order of Fryars,
instituted by St.
Francis, in the year 1198. they were injoyned
chastity, obedience, poverty, and many other strict rules
of life and conversation.

Frank almoine, (French) signifies in
Common-law, such Lands and Tenements as are bestowed upon
those people that give themselves up wholly to the service
of God for pure almes.

See OED "almoign."



Franck bank, such Copy-hold lands as the
wife, being espoused a Virgin hath after her husbands
decease, for his dowr.



Frank fee, that which is in the hand of the
King, or Lord of a Mannour, being ancient demesne of the
Crown, whereas that which is in the hand of the Tenants
is ancient demesne onely.


Frank ferm, is land, wherein the
nature of Fee is changed by
Feoffement, out of Knights service for certain yearly
services.

Frank law, is taken for a free
injoyment of all those
priviledges, which the Law permits to a man not found
guilty of any hainous offence.

Frank marriage, a Tenure in tail
special, whereby a man
hath Land with a woman to hir, and the Heirs of his body
without doing any service, but fealty to the
Donour.

Frank pledge, a pledge, or surety for
free-men.

Frank ford, a famous Citie upon the River
Mænus, being the chiefest Mart-Town in
Germany.

Franconia, a Countrey in the East part of Germany, called
Frankenland.

Frantick, Phrenetick, (Greek) mad.

Fraternity, (lat.) a brother-hood, also a
company of men entered into a firm bond of society, or
friendship.

Fratricelli, a sort of Hereticks,
instituted by one
Hermannus in the year 1304. they preached
Community among Christians,
and that it was unlawfull for them to be Governours one
over another.

Fratricide, (lat.) the killing of ones
brother.

Fratruels, (lat.) brothers Children.

Fraudation, (lat.) a defrauding, or
depriving.

Fraudulency, (lat.) deceitfullnesse, craftinesse.

Frea, the same as Friga.

Frederick, (Germ.)
rich peace, of this name there have been three Emperours
of Germany, for Frederick we commonly use
Frery and Fery.

Frediswid, (Sax.) very free, a womans
proper name.

Freelooter, a Souldier that makes inroades
into an enemies Countrey, for Cattel,
or any other commodity from the
enemies Countrey, it
cometh from the Dutch words Frey, i. e. free, and
beut, i. e. prey, the Italians call them
Banditi.

Not found in OED.



Free Chappel, a Chappel founded
within a Parish, over and
above the mother Church, unto which it is free for the
Parishioners to come,
or not to come.

Freedstol, (i. e. the stool of Peace) a
certain Chair of stone,
erected by King Athelitan,
in honour of John de Beverly, Arch-Bishop of
York, to which Offenders used to fly for
sanctuary.

Not found in OED.



Free-hold, free Tenure, or Land, which a man holdeth in Fee-tail, or
at the least for term of life.

Free-warren, (in Latin Libera
Warrena) the power of
granting, or denying Licence to any to hunt, or chace in
such, or such Lands.

See OED "warren."



Fremund, (Sax.) free peace, a proper
name.

Frendlesse-man, in the Saxon tongue, signifieth an out-law.

Freoburgh, or Fridburgh, the same, in the Saxon tongue, as
Franck-pledge in French, a surety for
the peace, or good behaviour.

Frery, a proper name of a man,
contracted from
Frederick, which signifieth in Saxon tongue rich
peace.

Frescades, (French) cool refreshments
against the heat of the summer.

To walk in Fresco, (Ital.) to take the
fresh aire, also to drink in Fresco, to drink
fresh liquor.

Fresh disseisin, in Common-law, is that
desseisin
that a man may seek to defeat of his own power, without
the help of the King, or his Judges.

Fresh force, a force done within
fourty dayes.

Fresh shot, is when any great River comes
into the Sea, so that it is fresh water for a mile, or two.

Fresh sute, is such an earnest following of
an Offendour as never ceaseth from the time of the offence
committed untill he be apprehended.

Fretrots, a sort of Hereticks, not much
different from those which are called Adamites.

Friars minors, Augustines Preachers and
Carmelites, (which are the four
principal orders)
see in their proper places, to these also belonging Fryars
observants, Conventuales, Capuchins.

Fricasse, (French) a kind of fried meat.

Frication, (Latin) a rubbing, or
chafing.

Friga, a certain Goddesse, anciently
worshipp'd by the Saxons, under the form of an
Hermaphrodite.

Frigate, in Spanish Fragata, a
spial ship.

Frigefaction, (lat.) a making cold.



Frigeratorie, (lat.) a place to make, or keep
things cool.


Frigidity, (lat.) coldnesse.

Friperer, (French) in Latin Interpolator,
one that cleanseth old Apparel to sell again.

Frisia, one of the seven United
Provinces, called
Friezland.

Frithsoken, a surety, or defence from the
Saxon words Frid, i. e. peace, and Socen, i.
e. to seek.

See OED "frith," n.



Fritiniency, (lat.) the chirping of a
swallow.

Frivolous, (lat.) vain of little
worth.

Frize, a Term in Architecture, the
garnishing of the upper end of a pillar.

Frondosity, (Latin) a flourishing with
green leaves, being just under the
architrave.

Frontal, (lat.) belonging to the
forehead, also used
substantively for an attire of the forehead, called also a
frontlet.

Frontispiece, (lat.) the forefront of a
house, also a picture placet before any book.

Frontiers, the borders, or limits of any
place.

Frontiniack, a kinde of sweet luscious
French wine.

Frontstall, a part of a horses
bridle.

See OED "front," n.



Frote, (old word) to rub.

The Frounce, a disease in a hawks tongues
called in French Barbillon.

Fructifie, (lat.) to bring forth
fruit.

Frugality, (lat.) thriftinesse,
sparingnesse in
expences.

A Fruggin, a Fork to stir about the fuel in
an Oven, from the French word Fourgon,
an Oven Fork.

Fruitery, (French) a place for
fruit.

Frutiges, (lat.) branched work, or the
representation of fruit in Sculpture, or painting.

Not found in OED.



Frumenty, pottage made of wheat, from the
Latin word Frumentum, i. e. wheat.

Frustration, (lat.) a making vain, a
deceiving; In Astrology, it is used when a light Planet would come to a
Conjunction with one more heavy, and before it doth
accomplish it, the more weighty Planet is joyned with
another.

Frustulent (lat.) full of Frusta,
or small pieces.

Frutication, (lat.) a sprouting, or
shooting forth of young
branches.

Fryth, (old word) wood.


F U

Fucation, (lat.) a mending the
complexion by drugs, or
artificial colours.

Fugacity, (lat.) aptnesse to fly
way.

Fugalia, (lat.) certain feasts celebrated
by the ancient Romans in remembrance of the expulsion of
Kings out of Rome.

Not found in OED.



Fugation, (lat.) a putting to
flight.

Fugue, (French) a Term in Musick, when two
parts answer one the other in the same point.

Fugitive goods, the goods of a fugitive, or
him that flies away for felony, which are forfeit to the
King, or State.

Fuir, or Fuer en feit, is when a
man doth corporally fly; Fuer en ley, is, when
being called in the County, he appeareth not untill he be
outlawed.

Not found in OED. "fuir" is French `to flee.'



Fulbert, (Sax.) full bright, a proper
name.

Fulgidity, or Fulgency, (lat.)
glistringnesse, or
brightnesse.

Fulguration, (lat.) a lightning, or
flashing of fire in the
Clouds, which precedes the Thunder.

Fulfremed, (Saxon) perfect.

Not found in OED except in quotations.



Fulians, certain Monks of the Order of St.
Bernard.

Fuliginous, (Latin) sooty, or full of
smoak.

Fullonical, (lat.) pertaining to a Fuller,
or scourer of cloath.

Fulmination, (lat.) a striking with
lightning, also
metaphorically taken for threatning.

Fulvid, (lat.) of a kinde of dusky
colour.

Fumets, by the hunters used for the
ordure of an Hart.

Fumidity, (lat.) smoakinesse.

Fumigation, (lat.) a perfuming with the
smoak of sweet wood.

Fumitory, a kinde of Herb, called in
Spanish Palomilla.

Funambulatour, (lat.) a Dancer on the
Ropes.

Function, (lat.) the performance, or
exercise of any duty, or
office.

Funditour, (lat.) a slinger, or
darter.

Not found in OED.



Funebrous, (lat.) sad, mournfull, relating
to Funerals.

Funestation, (lat.) a polluting with a dead
body.

See OED "funest."



Fungosity, (lat.) spunginesse, or a being
thin, and full of holes like a Mushrom.

Funnel, an instrument very small at one



end to convey liquors into any narrow-mouthed vessel.


Furacity, (lat.) an inclination to steal or
pilfer.

Furbish, (French) to polish or make
bright.

Furcation, (lat.) a putting into the
fashion of a fork.

Furies, faigned by the Poets to be the
three daughters of Acheron, and night,
Alecto, Megæra, and Tisiphone, whose
office was to torment the minds of
transgressours,
they possest Orestes for a while, but afterwards
being appeased they were called
Eumenides.

Furibund, (lat.) mad, or raging.

Furina, a Goddesse among the Romans, who
was held to be the patronesse of theeves.

Furlong, a certain measure containing 20
poles in length, being the eighth part of a mile. It is
also taken for a perch or the eighth part of an acre of
land.

Furnivalls, an ancient Family, Lords of
Fernham in Buckinghamshire, who hold
their Lands by this Tenure, namely to find the King upon
his Coronation day, a glove for his right hand, and to
support his right arm while he holds his Scepter.

Furole, (French) a kind of little Meteor
appearing in the night, by some called St. Hermes
fire.

Furres, which are of several sorts, as
Sables, Lucerns, Genets, Foines, Martens, Minivers, Fitch,
Shankes, Calabre. see in their proper places.

Furring, (in Navigation) is a ripping off
the first planks of a ship, and putting other timbers upon
the first, and so putting
on the planks upon the timbers which they call plank upon
plank.

Furtive, (lat.) given to stealing, or done
by stealth.

Fusibility, (lat.) aptness, or easiness to
be melted.

Fusil, (lat.) a spindle, also a term in
Heraldry, being the resemblance of a spindle in a Coat of
Arms.

Fusion, (lat.) a melting.

Fustian, in Latin Xylinum, a kind
of stuff made of the down of a certain fruit
growing in the upper part
of Aegypt.

Futility, (lat.) vanity, lightness.

Futtocks, those compassing timbers which
are scarfed upon the ground timbers and give breadth to a
ship.

Future, (lat.) that which is to
come.


F Y

Fyre levin, (old word) lightning.


G A

GAbala, a Town of Syria Cava,
which is now called Gibel or
Margad.

Gabardine, a kind of rough Cassock, like an
Irish mantle.

Gabberies, (French) mockeries, gibings,
wilie deceits.

Gabel, (French) any kind of tribute or
impost.

Gabion, a kind of fortification made of
baskets filled with dirt.

Gable end of a house, a term in
Architecture,
signifying the top of a house. Some take it for the fore
part or frontispiece,
called also Delicia.

Gabrantovici, the name of an ancient people
of Brittain, who inhabited some part of
Yorkshire.

Gabriel, the name of the Angel that
appeared to the Virgin Mary, signifying in Hebrew
strong with God.

Gabrosentum, an ancient frontier station of
the Romans, kept by the second Band of the
Thracians; it is thought to have stood in that
part of the Bishoprick of Durham and
Northumberland, where now
Newcastle and Gateshead stand.

Gaddefly, a certain Insect which stings
cattel, called also a Brie.

Gades, two Islands lying westward
beyond the Streights, by
some called Hercules his Pillars.

Gage, in Common Law signifieth a pawn or
surety, also to gage deliverance, or to wage deliverance,
signifieth to put in surety.

Gage a ship, to stick a naile into a pole,
and put it down by the rudder, thereby to know how much
water the ship draws.

Gaging rod, an instrument to measure any
vessel of liquid stuff.

Gaiety, (French) chearfulness,
gallantry. Cleopatra. Some say it is derived from the Latin
word Gaudeo, to rejoyce.

Gainage, in Common Law, is Land held of the
baser kind of sokemen or villeines.

Gainesborough, a Town in
Lincolnshire, where anciently the Danish ships
lay at rode, and where Suene Tiugskege a Danish
Tyrant after he had miserably harrassed the Country, was
stabbed by an unknown man.



Galactite, (Greek) a kind of pretious stone, so
called because it is white as milk.


Galanthis, the servant maid of
Alcmena, who for deluding Juno, that
sought to hinder the birth of Hercules, was
turned into a Weasel.

Galathea, a Sea Nimph, the Daughter of
Nereus and Doris, who being beloved of
Polypheme, and prefering Acis before
him, Polypheme killed his rival with a great
stone which he pluckt out of a rock: whereupon
Acis was turned into a River of the same
name.

Galatia, a region of Asia the
Less, called also
Gallogrecia.

Galaxy, (Greek) a broad white circle in the
sky, which is made by the light
reflected from a great
company of little Stars. It is called the milky
way.

Galbanum, a kind of gum, issuing out of a
plant called Sagapane, or Fennel Gyant.

Gale, when the wind bloweth gently, so that
a ship may bear her top-sailes a trip, it is called a loom
gall; when it is much wind, a fresh or stiff gale.

Galege, or Galage, (in French
Galloches) a kind of outward shooe, worn in dirty
weather, which hath been anciently in use among the
Gaules from whence the word is derived.

Galena, the ancient name of a Town in
Oxfordshire, now called
Wallingford.

Galenus, a famous Physitian of
Pergamus, who flourished, in the time of
the Emperour Commodus, and writ many excellent Volumes.

Galeon, or Gallion, (French) a
great Ship of war.

Galeote, (French) a small Gally; also one
that rows in a Gally.

Galgacus, the name of a valiant
Brittain, who led an army against the
Romans.

Galilæa, a Region of Syria lying
north of Judea.

Galingale, the aromatical root of the rush
Cypresse, called Acorus.

Gallantry, (French) compleatnesse,
accomplishment, or
a bold confident way of courtship. Artam.

Gallego, (Span.) an inhabitant of
Galatia.

Gallia, a great Country of Europe
anciently inhabited by
the Gaules, now called
France.

Galliard, (French) lusty, also
substantively taken
for a kind of dance.

Galliardise (French) lustiness,
livelyness.

Gallie-foist, see Foist.

Galliegaskines, or Galligascoines,
a kind of breeches, first in use among the
inhabitants of that
part of France which is called
Gascoine.

Gallimafry, a kind of meat made up of
several sorts of meats minced together. It was so called
either because it was allotted
to the Gally-slaves, or else because it was invented by
the Gaules.

Galloches, see Galege.

Gallon, (Spanish) a measure containing two
quarts.

Galloway, a County of Scotland, the people whereof were
anciently called Novanti;
also a County of Ireland in the Province of
Conaught.

Galloon, a kind of Lace.

Gallulate, (lat.) to begin to have a great
voice.

Gallus, a River in Phrygia, of
which when the Priests of Cybele drank, they were
agitated with divine fury, whence they were called
Galli; also the name of a young man who suffering
Sol to discover the adultery of Mars and
Venus, was by Mars turned into a
cock.

Galnes, in the practick of
Scotland, signifies
any kind of satisfaction for slaughter.

Gamahez, in Arabick, signifieth certain
figures or images of things wrought
exactly by nature.

Gamaliel, (Hebr.) Gods reward.

Gambado, a thing made of leather for a man
to put his legges into when he rides.

Gamboles, certain games, or tricks which
are in use about Christmasse time, from the
Italian word Gamba, a leg.

Gammot, an incision-knife.

Gamut, the first note in the scale of
Musick.

Ganch, to put men to death as they do in
Turky, by letting them fall from a high place upon sharp
hooks.

Ganges, a very great River rising out of
the Scythian Mountaines, and running
thorough the middest of India.

Gangflower, a certain Flower which
flourisheth in Procession or Rogation-week, by some called
Rogation-flower.

Gangiators, or Gaugeators,
signifies in the practick of Scotland, those that
examine weights and
measures, mark cloth, &c.



Gangræn, (lat.) a spreading sore, an eating
ulcer which mortifies the member by reason of the
greatness of the exhalation.


Gang-week, the next week but one
before Whitsunday, in which
solemn prayer and procession, used to be injoyned by the
Church as a preparation to the Feast of the Ascension. It
is also called Rogation-week.

Gantlet, or Gauntlet, (French) a
certain Military glove.

To run the Gantlope, a punishment used
among souldiers, the offender being to run with his back
naked through the whole Regiment, and to receive a lash
from every souldier. It comes from Gant, a Town
in Flanders, where it was invented, and the Dutch
word Lope, which signifies running.

Ganymed, the son of Tros, whom for
his excellent form, Jupiter fell in love with,
and causing him to be brought up to
Heaven upon an Eagles back,
made him his Cup-bearer instead of
Hebe the
daughter of Juno. Also it is metaphorically taken
for an ingle or boy hired to commit Sodomy.

Garamantes, a people of Lybia, so
called from
Garamas their King, the son of
Apollo.

Garbe, a sheaf of Corn, from the French
word gerbe, a bundle; also handsomness, graceful
carriage, from the Italian word Garbo,
also a sharp piquant relish in wine or beer.

Garbel, or Garboord, a plank next
to the keel of a ship.

Garble, to purifie, to sort out the bad
from the good, an expression borrowed from
Grocers, who are said to garble their Spices,
i. e. to purifie them from the dross and
dirt.

Garboile, (French) tumult or
trouble.

Garcifer, in the practick of
Scotland,
signifies a boy that serves in the Mill.

Not found in OED.



Gard, in Common Law is taken for a custody
or care of defence, as the education
of children under age, or the like.

Gardein, in Common Law, is he that hath the
charge or custody of any person or thing, especially he
that hath the education
of children, and the government of their estates, until
they come to 20 years of age; also that hath the charge of
idiots, or frantick persons during their lunacy, he is
called by the Civilians Tutor or Curator.

Gardein of the Spirituality, is he to whom
the spiritual jurisdiction of any Diocess is committed
during the vacancy of the See.

Garderobe, a kind of herb so called; also
the same as Wardrop.

Gardmanger, (French) a storehouse or sellar
for meat.

Not found in OED.



Gare, a kind of very course wool.

Gargarism, (Greek) the bubling of any
liquor in the throat, to wash the throat and mouth.

Gargarus, the top of the Mountain
Ida.

Gargantua, the name of a great Gyant or
Monster, from the Spanish word Garganta,
a throat.

Garner, see Granary.

Garnet, a tackle to hoise goods into a
Ship.

Garnishment, (French) signifieth in Common
Law, the issuing forth a Writ of scire facias
against the Plaintiff, for an action of Detinue of
charters brought against
the Defendant; also a fee which
prisoners give their
keepers at their admittance
into prison.

Garnison, (French) preparation or
furniture.

Garret, a proper name. see Gerrard.

Garrison, (French) a Town or Strong hold
fortified and kept by souldiers.

Garrulity, (lat.) much tatling, or
prateing.

Garter, the chief of the three Kings at
armes, also half a bend in Blazon. see Bend.

Gasehound, a certain sort of dogs of an
excellent hunting kind, being the same with that which
among the old Greeks was called Agasæus.


Gastenesse, (old word) terror.

Gastrimyth, (Greek) one that speaketh
inwardly, as it were out of his belly.

Not found in OED but see "gastriloquist" (from 1731).



Gastroepiploic vein, see vein.

Gaude, (old word) a toy or trifle.

To Gaude, (old word) to mock, to scoff
at.

Gaudy dayes, certain Festival dayes
observed in Colledges or
the Innes of Court.

Gavelet, an ancient kind of cessavit used
in Kent, whereby the tenant in
Gavelkind shall forfeit
all his Lands and Tenements,
to the Lord of whom they are holden,
if he withdraw his due rents & services.



Gavelkind, from the three Saxon words,
Gife, Eal, Cyn, i. e. given to all the kind,
signifieth in Common-law, an equal
division of the fathers
Lands among all the Children, or of the Lands of a
brother deceased among his brethren, if he have no issue
of his own.


Gaunt, in Latin Gandavum, the
chief City of
Flanders, which is said to have 20 Islands, and
48 Bridges within the Walls.

Gawdy-dayes, see Gaudy-dayes.

Gawen, see Waldwin.

Gawgeours, the same as
Gangeatours, they are also called
Gagers.

A Gazehound,  a certain hound, so
called from the Greek word Agazomai, because of
its admirable quicknesse of sight.

Gazet, (French) a certain Venetian Coyn,
also a brief general relation of the Occurrences, or
Affairs of Christendom.

Gazul and Subit, two
Aegyptian weeds of which being burnt to ashes,
they make the finest sort of glasses, which are called
Venice glasses, because they are made at
Venice.

Not found in OED.




G E

Geat, a sort of precious stone, otherwise
called black Amber, and thought by some to be the same
with Gagates, whence it is derived.

Gebalena, a Countrey bordering upon
Eleutheropolis.

Gebaltark, the streights, vulgarly
called the streights of Gibralter, it comes from the Arabian
word Gebal a Mountain, and Tareck the
son of Abdalla, who brought his Army over those
streights.

Gehenna, a certain Vally, where the
Isrælites sacrificed to Moloch,
Metaphorically
taken for Hell.

Geld, (Saxon) money, or tribute, it is also
called Gild, or Guild.

Geldable, one of the three parts, into
which Suffolk is divided, the other two being St.
Edmund's liberty, and St.
Audrey's liberty.

Geldria, the Dutchy of Gelderland,
in the Low-Countreys.

Gelicide, (lat.) frost.

Gelidity, (lat.) icynesse,
coldnesse.

Gelo, a young boy of Sicily, who
sitting upon the threshold of a School, and
making an out-cry after a
Wolf that had snatched his book out of his hand, the
master and Scholars making
a sudden tumult, were all killed by the fall of the
School-house.

Gelones, a certain people of
Scythia, who paint their faces that they may
appear the more terrible in war.

Geloum, a certain Lake in Sicily,
near which there are two Fountains of that
nature, that the waters of
one make women fruitfull, the other barren.

Gem, or Gemme, a Jewel, or
precious stone, also a bud, or blossome.

Gemination, (lat.) a doubling.

Geminels, (lat.) Twins, also one of the
twelve signes in the Zodiack, into which the Poets faign
that Castor and Pollux, the sons of
Tyndarus and Leda were changed, is
called Gemini.

Gemites, a kinde of precious stone.

Not found in OED.



Gemmerie, a Cabinet to keep Jewels in, a
Jewel house.

Gemote, a Court belonging to a
hundred.

Gemmosity, (lat.) an abounding with Jewels,
also a sprouting forth of blossoms.

Gemony, a place in Rome, where
malefactors were cast
headlong into the River Tiber.

A Gemow-ring, a kinde of double Ring,
linked with two, or more links.

See OED "gemew, gemow," 3.



Gendarme, (French) a horse-man
compleatly
armed.

Genealeathud, (Sax.) approached.

Genealogie, (Greek) a Description of ones
family, descent, or linage.

Generation, (lat.) an engendring, or
begetting.

Generosity, (lat.) noblenesse of minde, or
of bloud.

Genesis, (Greek) the same as
generation from the
Latin, also the Title of the first book of Moses,
because it treats of the beginning, or generation of the
world.

Genethliaques, (Greek) books, which treat
of the foretelling of mens fortunes by the calculation of
their Nativities.

Genets, a kinde of fur, which is taken from
a beast of the same name.

Geneva, a fair Imperial Town upon the Lake
Leman in Savoy, next to the
Borders of
Swizzerland.

Genial, (lat.) festival, joyfull, helpfull
to generation.

Geniculation, (lat.) a joynting.

Genital, (lat.) apt to ingender, or
beget, also Genitals are
taken substantively for the Members of Generation.

A Geniting, a kinde of Apple, which is
first ripe of any others.



Genitive case in Grammer, is the second of the
six Cases, and is commonly known by the sign of '


Genius, (lat.) the good, or evil spirit
attending on every man, or proper to each several place,
also a mans nature, fancy, or inclination.

Genoa, the chief Citie of Liguria
in Italy famous for
Traffick, called also Genes.

Gensericus, a King of the Vandals, he took
Carthage, spoyled the Temples, and made stables
of them for his horses.

Gent, (old word) proper, handsome.

Gentian, an Herb found out, as some say by
Gentius,
King of Illyrium.

Gentilesse, (French) Gentility,
Noblenesse, or
Gallantry. Cleopat.

Gentilisme, (lat.) Heathenisme, or the
belief of the Gentiles.

Gentilitial, (lat.) pertaining to kindred,
or ancestors.

Gentil, a kinde of insect, called a
Maggot.

Genua, see Genoa.

Genuflexion, (lat.) a kneeling, or
bending of the
knee.

Genuine, (lat.) natural, or proper.

Genus, (lat.) a kinde, a stock, or linage,
also one of the five Predicables in Logick, being that
which containeth under it, the species, or lesser
considerations, also a Gender.

Geodoesia, (Greek) the art of
measuring of
Land.

Geography, (Greek) the exact
description of all the
Regions, and Countreys of the earth.

Geomanty, (Greek) a kinde of
divination, by certain
Circles made on the earth.

Geometry, (Greek) the measuring of the
earth, but it is commonly taken for the art of measuring
in general.

Geoponical, (Greek) belonging to
tilling, or manuring the
ground.

George, a proper name, signifying in Greek
husband-man, the chief of this name was George of
Cappadocia, a Tribune under
Dioclesian,
who killed a mighty Serpent in Africa, to whom a
Virgin was cast to have been devoured, he is thought to be
the same with St. George the
Champion.

Georgians, a people inhabiting
Albania, now called Georgia, professing
themselves Christians, though differing in many points
from us, and honouring St. George as their chief
Patron, also a Sect of Hereticks;
instituted at Delft by David George,
whose Doctrine was, that both the Law and the Gospel were
unprofitable for salvation.

Georgicks, (Greek) books that treat of
husbandry, and tillage.

Geornlick, (Sax.) willingly.

Gerah, an Hebrew measure, being the
20th. part of a shekle.

Gerard, (Sax.) all towardnesse, a
proper name, for
Gerard we frequently use Garret.

Gerfalcon, a kinde of bird, which is
between a Vultur and a
Hawke.

Germander, an Herb called English
Treacle.

Germanity, (lat.) a brotherhood,
sisterhood, or very
near relation.

Germination, (lat.) a budding forth.

Gertrude, the proper name of a woman from
the Saxon words Ger, and Trude, i e. all
truth.

Gervase, a proper name of men, from the
German word Gerfast, i. e. all fast, firm, or
sure, answering to the Latin word
Constans, others
contract it from the Greek Gerousios, i. e.
ancient, or honourable, the chief of this name was a
famous Martyr, who suffered under Nero at
Millain.

Gerunds, in Grammar are certain parts of a
Verb, so called from bearing a double
signification, both active and passive.

Geryon, a certain King of the Spanish
Islands, called Baleares, who is fain'd by the
Poets to have had three bodies, and to have been killed by
Hercules.

Gesamund, (Sax.) assembled.

Gestation, (lat.) a carrying.

Gesticulation, (lat.) a making signs by
gestures, or motions of the body, also a kinde of Morrice
dancing.

Gestion, (lat.) a doing, or carriage of any
businesse.

Gests, (lat.) great actions, or exploits
performed.

Getealed, (Sax.) numbred.

Gethild, (Sax.) patience.

Getulians, a certain barbarous people, who
were the first inhabitants of Aphrica.

Geules, a Term in Heraldry, signifying a
red, or Vermilion colour.

Gewgaws, or Gugaws, trifles for
children to play with,
derived as some think from the Latin word
gaudere, to rejoyce.


G H

Gheus, an ignominious Term, heretofore



given to the Protestants in Flanders, the word
signifying as much as beggar.



G I

Gibbositie, a bunchbacked, the Moons 3.
parts full of light.

An entry in the Errata moves the word-entry for "Gibbositie" here from after "Gy."



Gibbosity, (lat.) a bunching out, but more
especially taken for a bunching in the back.

Gibe, (old word) to mock, from the French
word gaber.

Gibellines, see Guelphs.

Gibraltar, see Gebaltarch.

Gibsere, a pouch, a word used by
Chaucer.

Not found in OED.



Gideon, or Gedeon, (Hebr.) a
Breaker or Destroyer.

Gifta, (Sax.) Marriage.

Not found in OED.



Gifu, (Sax.) Grace.

Not found in OED.



Gigantick, big-bodied, Gyant-like.

Gigantomachy, (Greek) the ancient war of
the Gyants against Heaven, often mentioned by the
Poets.

Giglet, or Giglot, a wanton woman
or strumpet. Chaucer.

Gigot, (French) a kind of minced
meat.

Gilbert, a proper name of men,
signifying in the
German tongue Gold-like bright, answering the Lat.
Aurelius, or Aurelian: others write
Gislebert/, i. bright pledge.

Gilbertines, a certain religious Order
instituted by one Gilbert, who for his great
holinesse was Canonized for a Saint.

Gild, see Geld.

Giles, a proper name of men, contracted
from Aegidious, which some derive from the Greek
word Aigidion, i. a little kid. Others derive
Giles from Julius, as Gilian
from Juliana.

Gillet, a womans name contracted in like
manner from Aegidia.

Gillingham, a Forrest in
Dorsetshire, where Edmund Ironside

overthrew the Danes in a great pitch feild.

Gilthead, a kind of fish, so called from
its golden colour.

Gimlet, a piercer to pierce any barrel of
liquor withal.

Gimmal, see Gemmow-ring.

Gingreat, to chirp like a bird.

Ginne, a snare, contracted as some think
from Engin.

Gippius, a certain Roman, who using to
feign himself asleep, while his wife lay with other men;
one time he started up and cryed, non omnibus
dormio, I sleep not to all men; whence it became a
Proverb.

Gippon, (French) a kind of short
cassock, or coat.

Gips, a kind of chalk or mortar.

Girle, a term in Hunting, being a
Roebuck of two
years.

Gironne, a certain term in Heraldry.

Girthol, in the practick of
Scotland, signifieth
a Sanctuary.

Girvii, a people in times past
inhabiting the Fenny
parts of Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire,
&c. the word signifying Fen-dwellers.

Gisarms, a kind of weapon with two pikes,
which some call Bisarmes.

Giste, (French) a Couch or resting place,
also a writing which contains the names of the Towns or
Houses where a King or Prince intends to lie in his
progress.

Gite, (old word) a gown.


G L

Glaciation, (lat.) a freezing.

Gladiatour, (lat.) a Swordman or
Fencer, from the Latin
word gladius, a sword.

Gladin, or Gladiole, a certain
herb whose leaf resembleth a sword.

Gladuse, (Brittish) the proper name of
divers women, from Claudia.

Glandage, (French) mastage, or the season
of feeding hogs with mast.

Glandulous, (lat.) full of kernels, from
the Latin word glans a kernel.

Glanoventa, an ancient Town of
Northumberland,
garrisoned by the first Cohort
of the Morini, so called because it stood upon
the bank of the River Venta, now called
Wantsbeck.

Glastenbury, a famous Abby founded by
Joseph of Arimathæa, near unto which in
Wiral Park groweth a Hawthron, which is reported
to put forth leaves and blossomes upon Christmasse Day, as
fresh as in May, also in the Church-yard there
grew a Wallnut-tree, which as some have
affirmed, did not put
forth his leaves until St. Barnabies
Feast.

Glaucitation, (lat.) a crying like a
whelp.

Glaucus, the son of Hippolochus, he
assisted Priamus in the Trojan war, and taking
Diomeds brazen arms for his own which were of
Gold, he was killed by Ajax, and his body being carried into Lycia by the
winds, was changed into a River; Also the name of a fisher, who tasting of a



certain herb, leapt into the Sea and was made a Sea-god.


Glayve, (old word) a kind of crooked sword
or bill.

Glaze, to vernish.

Glebeland, land belonging to a
Parsonage, from
gleba, a clod or turf.

Glede, (old word) a hot ember or coal, also
a puttock or kite.

Glee, joy or mirth, from the Dutch word
glooren, to recreate.

Gleire, (old word) white.

Glimmering, a glancing or trembling
light.

Globosity, (lat.) a being round like a
bowle or globe.

Globous, (lat.) round like a globe.

Globe, vide Spheare.

Glocester, the chief City of
Glocestershire,
it was called by the Saxons Glevecester,
in Latin Glevum, by the Brittains Cær-Glove,
i. fair City: It is also called by some
Claudia-Cestria, from the
Emperour Claudius, who as it is fabulously reported,
married his daughter Genissa to
Arviragus the Brittish King.

Glocester Hall, a place for Students in
Oxford, built by John Lord
Gifferd of Brimesfeild.

Glome, (old word) a bottom of
thread.

Glomeration, (lat.) a rolling or
gathering into a round lump.

Gloomy, (old word) dusky or dark.

Glose, (old word) to flatter.

Glossator, or Glossographer,
he that makes a Glosse or Comment to interpret the hard
meaning of words or things.

Glutination, (lat.) a joyning together with
glue.

Glycerium, a Curtesan of Thespia,
who gave the picture of Cupid which she had of
Praxiteles, as a legacy to the
Thespians.

Glyster, see Clyster.


G N

Gnarity, (lat.) knowingnesse,
experience.

Gnarr, or Gnurre, a hard knot in
wood, also a churle.

Gnathonichal, playing the Gnatho, i.
e. a parasite or deceitful fellow.

Gnatsnapper, a certain Bird called a
figgeater, in Latin Ficedula.

See OED "gnat."



Gnavity, (lat.) a being industrious,
active, or vigorous, in any business.

Gnew, (old word) gnawed.

Gnoff, (old word) a churl or fool.

Gnomonick, (Greek) belonging to a gnomon,
or pin of a Dial.

Gnosticks, from the Greek word
gnosis, knowledge, a sect of Hereticks,
instituted by one Carpocras in the year 125, they
assumed to themselves a great degree of knowledge, denied
the day of Judgement, and held two Supream Deities, one
good, the other bad.

Gnurre, see Gnarre.

Not found in OED.




G O

Gobonated, a term in Heraldry, as a bordure
gobonated is when it is divided into two colours, in such
sort, as if it were cut into small gobbets.

Go to God, signifieth in Common Law, to be
dismissed the Court.

Godard, a proper name of men,
signifying in the
German tongue, Godly disposition.

Godfrey, another proper name
signifying Gods
peace.

Godwin, (Germ.) victorious in God.

Goetie, (Greek)
Witchcraft, Diabolical Magick.

Gofish, (old word) sottish.

Gog and Magog, signifying in the
Hebrew tongue, covered or
uncovered, are taken in Scripture for certain Nations that
shall persecute the Church.

To be a gog, to be eagerly bent upon a
thing, also to be puft up with pride.

Golden number the full course of the Moon,
which is performed in 19 years. see Cycle.

Golden Fleece, small graines of Gold which
are found by Rivers and Brookes, and gathered up by the
help of sheep-skinnes with the wool on, of these Graines
there were great plenty upon the
Cholchian
shore, which gave occasion to the Fable of Jason
and his Argonauts.

Goldfoile, leaf Gold.

Goldknops, a flower called
Crow-foot.

Not found in OED.



Golgotha, a place hard by Mount Sion, full
of malefactors bones: It signifieth in the Syrian tongue a
place of dead mens sculls.

Golierdies, (old word) ravenously
mouthed.

Golp, (Spanish) a slash or blow.

Goman, (Saxon) a married man.

Not found in OED.



Gomer, an Hebrew measure containing almost
a gallon and a pint over.



Gondola, or Gondolot, a kind of boat
much used at Venice.


Gonfennon, (old word) a little flag.

Gonorrhæa, (Greek) a disease called the
running of the reines.

Good abearing, or Good behaviour,
signi­
fieth in
Common Law, an exact carriage of a subject toward the King
and his leige people.

Goodmanchester, a Town in
Huntingtonshire,
so abounding in tillage, that Kings in times past, coming
that way, were received
in country fashion with 180 ploughs.

Goods escheat, goods confiscate.

Goosewing, in Navigation, is a
fitting up the sail, so as that the ship may go before a
wind or quarter winds with a fair fresh gale.

Gorbelly, one who is all panch or
belly.

Gorcrow, a Raven.

Gordieus, a Mountain of Armenia, where the Ark of
Noah was said to rest.

Gordius, a King of Phrygia, who
being raised from the plough to the Throne, hung up the
furniture of his oxen in the Temple, as a memorial, which
being tied in a very intricate knot, and the
Monarchy of the World
being promised to him that could untie it,
Alexander the Great after he had long tried in
vain, at length cut it in two with his sword, whence the
Gordian knot came to be a proverb, being taken for any
thing which is difficult to be expounded.

Gore, a term in Blazon, and consists of two
Arch lines drawn from the sinister chief and bottom of the
Escutcheon, and meeting in a sharp angle in the
fesspoint.

Gorgious, gallant, sumptuous, some think
from the Greek word Gargairo, i. e. to
shine.

Gorgons, the three daughters of Phorcys
Medusa, Sthenio, and Euriale, with
Medusa Perseus fought, and cutting off her head,
turned it into a stone. Also particularly taken for the
head of Medusa in Astrology.

Gorlois, a Prince of Cornwall,
whose wife Vther Pendragon fell in love with, and
injoying her by the means of his Magical delusions, he
begat King Arthur.

Gormandize, (French) to play the
gourmand, i. a
glutton or great devourer. Some derive it from the Latin
words gulose mandere, i. to eat
greedily.

Gormoncester, a Town in
Huntingtonshire,
the same with Goodmanchester
above mentioned, it was called Gormoncester, from
Gormon, the Dane, unto whom, after an agreement
of peace, King Alfred granted this Town with the
adjoyning Territories, it is thought to have been the same
Town with that which was called in old times
Durosiponte.

Gospel, a Saxon word, signifying good
saying, or Gods word; it is commonly taken for one of the
four Evangelists in the New Testament.

Gossehauke, quasi Grossehauke, a kind of
Hauke called in Greek Asterias, because of its
spots, which are like little Stars.

Gossip, one that undertakes for a child in
Baptism, the word signifieth in the Saxon tongue,
spiritually of kin.

Gossomor, or Gossymear, (Saxon) a
kind of thin Cobweb-like exhalation, which hovers abroad
in the air in hot weather.

Gothia, a Country of Europe,
bordering upon Denmark and Norway, 
the people are called Gothi, or Gothes,
who in former times overrun the greatest part of
Europe.

Goule, (old word) Usury, from the Latin
Gula, i. the throat.

Gourd, a kind of plant, somewhat like a
coucumber, also used by Chaucer for a
bottel.

Gowtes, a word used in
Sommersetshire, common sewes or sinks that run
under ground.

Gowreth, (old word) stareth.


G R

Gracchus Sempronius, a great Captain of the
Romans, who subdued the Celtiberians
a people of Spain, and repaired their chief City
Illurcis, calling it by his own name
Gracchuris: he had two sons by his wife
Cornelia, Caius and Tiberius, who were
both slain in a popular sedition,
seeking to re-establish
the Agrarian Laws.

Graces, the three daughters of
Jupiter and Venus, Aglaia, Euphrosyne,
and Thalia, the Goddesses of Elegance, and
handsome conversation.

Grace, a proper name of divers women, the
signification well known.

Gracility, (lat.) slendernesse.

Gradation, (lat.) an ascending by
degrees.

Gradual, that part of the Mass, which uses
to be sung between the Epistle and Gospel. Also by
degrees.

Graduate, (lat.) he that hath taken a
degree at the University.



Græcia, a famous Countrey of Europe,
the Nurse of learning, and of all the arts; its chief
Regions are Attica, Boeotia, Phocis Achaia,
&c.


Grææ, the three daughters of
Phorcys, who had but one eye and one tooth
among them, which they used
by turns, they helpt Perseus to overcome their
sisters the Gorgons.

Graffer, is used in some of the statutes,
for a Notary, or Scrivener, from the French word
Greffier.

A Graie, a beast called a Brock, or
Badger.

Grains of Paradice, a certain
plant, otherwise called
Cardamomum.

Gramercy, from the French,
Grandmerci, i.
e. great thanks, an expression of giving
thanks.

Gramineous, or Gramineal, (lat.)
grassie, or made of grasse.

Gramineal Crown, see Crown.

Grammatical, (Greek) belonging to the art
of Grammar, i. e. the Method of attaining to any
language by certain Rules.

Granadil, (Span.) a Diminutive of Granado,
which signifieth a Pomegranate,
also a certain Engin like a Pomegranate,
which is to be shot out of a piece of Ordinance.

Granary, (lat.) a place to lay Corn
in.

Grandevity, (lat.) ancientnesse,
seniority of
years.

Grand distresse, in Common-law, is a
distresse taken of all
the Lands, or Goods that a man hath within the County, or
Baylywick.

Grandezza, or Grandeur, (Spanish
and French) greatnesse of state, or of spirit.
Cleopatra.

Grandiloquence, or Grandiloquie,
(lat.) Majesty, or heigth of stile.

Grandimoniensers, a religious order,
erected in the year 1076.
by one Stephen of Avern.

Grandinous, (lat.) belonging to
hail.

Grandity, (lat.) greatnesse.

Grand Sergeanty, a certain kinde of
service, whereby the
Lords of Scrivelby, in Cheshire held
their Land, which was to come well armed and mounted into
the Kings presence upon the day of his
Coronation, and by
publick Proclamation to offer himself to maintain the
Kings right by open Combat, against whosoever should dare
to oppose it, this Tenure belonged by Hereditary
succession to the Family of the Dimmocks.

Grange, from the Latin word Grana,
a building which hath barnes, stables, stalls and all
other places necessary for Husbandry.

Granicus, a River in Bithynia,
famous for the great battel between Alexander and
Darius, wherein above 600000 Persians
were slain and taken.

Granito, (Ital.) a kind of speckled
marble found in divers
places of Italy.

Graniferous, (lat.) bearing kernels, or
grains.

Grantcester, see Gron.

Granule, (lat.) a little grain.

Graphical, (Greek) curiously describ'd or
wrought.

Graplings, crooked irons that hold ships
together, they are called also Grapnels.

Grassation, (lat.) a spoyling, or laying
waste.

Gratiæ expectativæ, certain Bulles
whereby the Pope used to
grant out Mandates of Ecclesiastical livings.

Gratianople, a Citie of Narbon in
France.

Gratianus, the name of a Roman
Emperour sirnamed
Funarius, he was perfidiously
slain by Andragathius, one of his Captains in
Lions in France.

Gratification, (lat.) a rewarding, or
making amends.

Gratis, (lat.) freely, for nothing.

Gratuity, (lat.) a free reward.

Gratulation, (lat.) a rejoycing in
anothers behalf, also a
thanking.

A Grave, see Greve.

Grave a ship, to make her lye drie a
ground, and to burn off the filth with stubble.

Graveolence, (lat.) a smelling rank, or
strong.

Graver, a small piece of steel used in
graving, formed Lozenge, or Diamond square, there are
different sorts of graving,
see Sele-graving.

Gravidity, (lat.) a being with
Child.

Gravity, (lat.) heavinesse, or weight,
being applied to bodies,
also gravenesse, or sobernesse in behaviour.

Graunt, in Common-law, is a gift in
writing, of such a thing as cannot be
passed in word onely.

Greace, (a Term of hunting) the fat of a
Boare, or Hare, the fat of a Boare hath an addition, and
is called Bevygreace.

Greach-breach, see Grith-breach.



Greaves, (French) Armour for the legges.


Grecisme, (Greek) a speaking after the
Idiom of the Greek tongue.

Gree, willingnesse, from the French word
Gre, or the Latin Gratum.

Green cloath, the name of a Court of
Justice that used to fit in the Coumpting-house of the
Kings Court.

Green hew, a Term used in the Forrest-laws,
signifying every thing that groweth green within the
Forrest, it is also called Vert.

Greenwich, (q. Green Creek) a Town in
Kent, where in old times there lay at
Rode a great Fleet of the Danes under
Thurkill their Captain, who put to a cruel death
Ealpheg Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; this
place is also famous for a Royal Palace, built by
Humphry Duke of Glocester, and by him
named Placence, he also built here upon a high
Hill, a pleasant Town famous in Spanish
fables.

Greese, a staire, or step, from the
Latin word
Gressus.

Gregal, (lat.) belonging to a flock.

Gregorie, a proper name of men,
signifying in Greek
watchfull, answering to the Latin
Vigilius.

Gregorian, a kinde of Cap, also
Gregorian
account, a correction of the Calender
by Pope Gregorie the 13th. making the
year to consist of 365 dayes, 5 hours, 49 minutes, and 12
seconds, whereas before
according to the Julian account, it consisted of
365 dayes, and 6 hours.

Gresham Colledge, a fair house in the Citie
of London, once the habitation of Sir Thomas
Gresham, who constituted it a Colledge, and endowed
it with Revenues for the maintaining of Professours of
Divinity, Law, Physick,
Astronomy, Geometry, and
Musick; the said Sir Thomas
Gresham built also
that stately Fabrick, commonly
called the Royal Exchange.

Greve, or Grave, a word of
authority among the Low Dutch, signifying as much as Lord,
or Governour.

Griff-graff, (French) by hook, or by
crook.

Not found in OED.



Griffith, see Gryffith.

A Grigge, a young Eele.

Grilliade, (French) a kinde of meat
broyled.

Grimbald, or Grimoald, a proper
name of men, signifying in the German tongue powr over
anger.

A Griph, (old word) a riddle.

Grishild, (Germ.) the proper name of divers
women, signifying Grey Lady, in Latin Gesia.

A Grit, a kinde of fish, otherwise called a
Grample fish.

Grith-breach, or Gich-breach, a
breach of peace. Grith, signifying in the Saxon tongue
peace.

"Grith ..." is a separate entry in the original, here combined with "Grith-breach" by an entry in the Errata.



Grobianisme, (French) slovenly
behaviour.

Grommets, in Navigation, are little rings
made fast to the upper side of the yard, to which the
caskets.

Groening, the chief Town of West
Frizeland, from
the Dutch word Groen, i. e. Green, because it is
seated in a Green place.

Gromel, or Gromil, a kinde of
Herb, called also Pearle
plant.

Gron, a Saxon word, signifying a fenny
place, whence some derive Grandcester, a Town in
Cambridge-shire.

Not found in OED.



Groop, (old word) a pissing place.

Grosvenour, i. e. great Hunter, the name of
a Noble family of Cheshire, commonly contracted
into Gravenour.

Grot, (Ital.) a Cave.

Grotesch, (Ital.) a kind of mixt, or
confused piece of
painting, or sculpture, antick
work; hence it is taken for any rude misshapen
thing.

Groveling, quasi Ground-lying, a lying
prone, or with ones face downward upon the ground.

To Ground a ship, to bring her on the
ground to be trimmed.

Ground-pine, a kinde of Herb which creeps
upon the ground, and hath a resemblance
to the Pine-tree.

Groundswell, a certain Herb, called in
Latin Senecio, because it quickly
decayes.

Grouppade, (French) a Term in
horsmanship, being a
lofty kinde of management,
& higher then an ordinary Curvet.

Not found in OED.



A Growm, an enginn to stretch woollen
Cloath with, after it is woven.

To grown, the Forresters say a Buck
growneth.

Grumosity, (lat.) a curdling of any liquid
substance into a thick masse, or clod.

Gryffen, a certain animal feathered like a
foul, and having four feet as a beast, some derive it from
the Hebrew word Garaph, i. e. to snatch.


An entry in the Errata corrects the running-on of this entry and the next.



Gryph, see Griph.

Gryffith, an old Brittish name,
signifying strong-faithed.




G U

Guadalquivir, a River of Andaluzia
in Spain, anciently called
Bætis.

Guadiana, a River of Portugal, now
called Ana, which
runs fourteen miles under ground, whence they boast of a
bridge whereon 10000 Cattel may feed.

Guaiacum, a certain drying wood, which is
good against the venereal disease.

Guastald, he that hath the custody of the
Kings mansion houses, Castelein being he, who
onely hath the custody of Castles
and Fortresses.

Not found in OED.



Guastaliens, a religious order of men and
women, begun in the year 1537. by the Countesse of
Guastala.

A Gubbin, (old word) a fragment.

Gubernation, (lat.) a governing, or
ruling.

Gudgeons, rudder irons to ships.

Guelphs and Gibellines, two great
factions in
Italy.

Guenliana, a valiant Lady, the wife of
Gruffin, Prince of Wales, she valiantly
assailing Maurice of London, who invaded those
parts, was with her son Morgan slain in the
battail.

Guerdon, (French) a reward, some
derive it from the Greek
word Cerdos, i. e. gain.

Gugaws, see Gewgaws.

Guidage, money paid for safe conduct,
through a strange Territory.

Guidon, a Cornet of Argolatiers
that serve on hors-back with Petronels.

Guilford, Sax. Geglford) a Town in
Surrey, the Royal
Mansion in times past of the English Saxon Kings,
who had 75 Hages, i. e. houses wherein remained
175 men, here Elfrid the son of King
Ethelred was most barbarously betrayed by
Goodwin, Earle of
Kent, who contrary to his faithfull promise
delivered him into the hands of Harold the
Dane, and by a cruel decimation slew almost all
his men that came with him out of
Normandy.

Guinethia, or Guineth, that part
of Wales commonly called South-wales, it
is also called
Venedotia.

Guild, a society incorporate, from the
Dutch word Geld, i. e. money.

Guld, a kinde of weed growing among Corn,
called in Latin Maneleta, whence came the Law of
Maneleta, ordained by King Kenneth of
Scotland; which was, that if any one suffered his
land to be overrun with
weeds, he should forfeit an Oxe.

Gules, see Geules.

Gule of August, the first day of
August, otherwise called Lammas day, in
old Almanacks St.
Peter ad Vincula, it cometh from the French word
Gueul, i. e. a throat, because on that day, a
certain maid having a
disease in her throat, was cured by kissing the Chains,
that St. Peter had been bound with at
Rome.

Gulf, or Gulph, a streight passage
between two Seas, it comes
from the Greek word Colpos.

Gulosity, (lat.) gluttony.

Gultwit, an old Saxon word, signifying an
amends for trespasse.

Gummilda, the wife of Asmond, King
of Denmark, she killed her self for grief, that
her husband had been slain in battel.

Gunora, a Famous Norman Lady, who
flourished in Shropshire and Cheshire,
and held the Hamlet of Lanton in chief, as of the
honour of Mountgomery, by the service of giving
to the King a Barb'd-headed arrow, whensoever he should come
into those parts to hunt in Cornedon
Chace.

Gunwale, a piece of Timber in a ship, which
reacheth from the half deck to the fore-castle on either
side.

Gurgitation, (lat.) an ingulphing, or
swallowing up.

Gurnard, a kinde of fish, so called.

Gusset, an abatement in Heraldry, form'd of
a Travers line drawn from the dexter chief, and descending
perpendicularly to the extream base parts, or
contrarywise.

Gust, in Navigation, is a sudden winde,
also taken by some for a stranger, or guest.

Guttural, (lat.) belonging to the
throat.

Guzes, in Heraldry, signifieth the ball of
the eye.

Guy, a proper name of men, in Latin Guido, from the French word Guide, i. e.
a leader, or directour.

Guy, a certain rope used in a ship, to keep
any thing from swinging in too fast.


G Y

Gy, (old word) a guide.

An entry in the Errata moves the word-entry for "Gibbositie" from after this entry to 
earlier.



Gyges, a certain Lydian, to whom
Candaules the
King, having shown his wife



naked, she animated him to kill the King, which he did
by the help of a Ring, which made him invisible, and
afterwards marrying
her, he made himself King.


Gymnasiarch, (Greek) the chief
governour of a
Gymnase, which is a place for all manner of
exercise, both of minde and body.

Gymnosophists, (Greek) a Sect of
Philosophers among
the Indians, who went naked,
living in desarts, and feeding upon Herbs.

Gyndes, a River, (not far from
Euphrates)
which Cyrus besieging Babylon, cut
into 46 several Channels.

Gypsation, (lat.) a plaistering with
Mortar.

Gyration, (lat.) a fetching a compasse,
from Gyre, a great circle.

Gyron, in Heraldry, signifieth a quarter,
or half a Cube described by a Diagonal line.

Gysarme, the same as
Gisarme.


H A

HAbberdasher, one that sells a great many
several wares, from the Dutch words, habt jhr das, i.
e. have you that.

Habeas Corpus, a Writ, which a man
Indited before Justices of
Peace, and laid in prison, may have out of the Kings
bench, to remove himself thither at his own
charges.

Haberdepois, see Averdupoise.

Habergeon, a diminutive of
Haubert, See Haubert.

Habilement, (French) cloathing, also
armour.

Hability, (lat.) an aptnesse, or
capacity.

Habit, (lat.) custome, or use, also the
attire, or cloathing of the body.

Habitation, or Habitacle, (lat.) a
dwelling, a place of
residence.

Habitual, (lat.) grown to a habit, or
custome.

Habitude, (lat.) the same as habit.

Hables, (French) a haven, or port.

Not found in OED.



Hachee, or Hach, (French) a
certain French dish made of sliced meat.

Hadock, a kinde of fish, called a
Codfish.

Hadrian, the name of a great Roman
Emperour, who was so called from the Citie
Hadria, whence he deduced his original, the word is
derived by Gesner, from the Greek word
ἀδρὸς, i. e. grosse, or
wealthy.

Hadrianople, (Greek) a Citie of
Macedon in
Greece.

Hæmon, a young man of Thebes, who
loving Antigone,
the daughter of Oedipus and Jocasta,
hearing that she was put to death by Creon, he
killed himself over her Tomb.

Hæmorrhagie, (Greek) a violent bursting
out of bloud.

Hæmorrhoides, (Greek) a certain
disease, called in
English the Piles.

Hæmus, a great Mountain dividing
Thessaly from Thrace, at the foot of
which are the fields of Tempe; it was so called
from Hæmus the son of Boreas, and
Orithya.

Hærede abducto, a Writ that lieth for him,
who having the Wardship of his Tenant
under age, hath him conveyed away from him by
another.

Hæresie, (Greek) a division in the Church,
caused by some erroneous opinion,
contrary to the fundamental points of religion.

Hæsitation, (lat.) a sticking at any
thing, a doubting.

Haga, a word used in some old Writs, for a
house.

Hagard, (French) untam'd, unruly,
also a Hagard Hawk is taken
for a wilde Hawk.

Hagiographer, (Greek) a writer of holy
things.

Haggase, a kinde of pudding made of Hogs
flesh.

Haie, from the French word Haye, a
kinde of Net to catch Conies, which is commonly
pitch't under hedges.

Haile, a word of salutation, from the Saxon
word Heal, i. e. health.

Haire, is when a Masculine and
Diurnal Planet in the day
time appears above the earth, or a Feminine nocturnal Planet in the
night time under the earth.

Not found in OED.



Haimhaldatio Catallorum, signifieth in the
practick of Scotland, a seeking
restitution for goods
wrongfully taken away.

Haketon, a Jacket without sleeves.
Chaucer.

Halbert, a kinde of weapon, called in
Spanish Halabarda.

Halcyon, a bird, called a King-fisher, which
builds its Nest, and breeds upon the Sea-shore, about
the winter solstice,
for the space of fourteen dayes, wherein the weather
useth to be very calm, whence by Metaphor peaceable and
quiet times,



are called Halcyon dayes, the Poets feign that
Halcyon the wife of Cæyx, was turned
into this bird. see Alcyon.


Haledon, a place in
Northumberland, where Oswald King of
that County, in a great pitcht feild against the Brittish
King Cedwall, having erected a cross unto
Christ, obtained the victory, and afterwards
became a devout Christian.
This place was in old times called
Heavenfeild.

Half-merk, or Noble, a piece of coine
valueing 6 shillings 8 pence.

Half-seal, is taken for the sealing of
Commissions unto delegates, appointed by an appeal in
Ecclesiastical or Maritime causes.

Halicarnassus, the chief City of
Caria, where the famous Tomb of Mausolus
was built by Queen Artemisia.

Halidome, (Saxon) holy judgement, whence,
By my Halidome used anciently to be a great oath among
country people.

Halieuticks, (Greek) books treating of the
Art of fishing.

Halifax, signifying in old English holy
hair, a Town in Yorkshire, so called from a
Maides head, that had been cut off by a Priest of that
place, which being hung upon
a yew-tree as a holy matter, was had in great veneration
by the people, who gathering of the sprigs of the tree,
took it for her hair.

Halinitre, (Greek) a kind of Mineral
commonly called Saltpeter.

Hall a Ship, to call to her to know whence
she is, and whither bound.

Hallage, (French) a fee due for clothes
brought for sale to Blackwell Hall, or to the Lord of a
Market, for commodities vended there.

Hallelujah, see Allelujah.

Hallucination, (lat.) error or blindness of judgement.

Halm, from the Hebrew word, halam,
to shake the stalk of corn, from the ear to the
root.

Halsier, a term in Navigation, he that
draws the Halser or Cable wherewith boats are towed along
some Channel.

Halo, (Greek) a circle about the Moon, and
others of the Stars.

Halonesus, an Island in the Aegean
Sea, which was defended by women, when all the men were
slain.

To make Halt, (French) to make a stop, a
term of War.

Hallyattes, a King of Lydia, and
father to Croesus, who was overcome by
Cyrus.

Halymote, see Healgemote.

Hamadryades, (Greek) wood-nimphs.

Hamburg, the cheif City of Lower
Saxony, so called from Jupiter Hamon,
there worshipped.

Hames, two crooked pieces of wood which
encompasse a horse-collar, from the Ham of the leg which
is crooked, or the Latin word hamus, a
hook.

Hamkin, a kind of pudding.

Hamling of dogs, see expeditating.

Not found in OED.



Hamlet, a dwelling house, a diminutive,
from the Dutch word Ham, i. home

Hammocks, hanging beds used in
ships.

Hampton-Court, a Palace belonging to the
Kings of England, standing in
Middlesex upon
the River Thames, it was built in a very costly
and magnificent manner by Cardinal Wolsey, and
finisht by King Henry the eighth.

Hankwit, or Hangwit, (Sax.) a
theif escaped out of custody.

The term "hankwite" was not found in OED.



Hannibal, a great Captain of the
Carthaginians,
who having long made war with the Romans, was
beaten by Scipio, and in the end poisoned
himself, the word signifies in the Punic tongue Gracious Lord.

Hanno, a Carthaginian, who seeking
to make himself master of Carthage, was at length
taken and had his eyes put out.

Hannonia, or Haynault, one of the
17 Provinces of the Low Countries.

Hanselines, upper sloppes.
Chaucer.

Hanse-towns, certain Towns in
Germany, as Hambourg,
Magdenbourg, Lubeck, &c. being the principal
seates of the Dutch Merchants. Hans signifying in
the French tongue, a Society or Corporation of
Merchants.

Hansel, (Dutch) the first money that is
bestowed with a Tradesman in a morning

Hans-en-kelder, a Dutch word,
signifying Jack in the
Cellar; it is commonly taken for a child in the mothers
belly.

Hansiatick, belonging to the Hanse
Towns.

Hanten, (old word) they use, or
accustom.

Haphertlet, a kind of course
coverled for a bed.

Haquebut, (French) the same as
Harquebuse.

Haracana, or Herocane, a violent
whirlwind or tempest,
which hapneth once in 9



years. Some say it comes from the
Spanish word Arancar, to pull up by the roots.


Harald, or Herauld, (French)
quasi herus altus, i. high-master, is an Officer
whose imployment is to denounce war, or proclaim peace, to
judge and examine Gentlemens Arms, to marshal the
Solemnities at a
Princes Coronation, and such like.

Harangue, (French) a Speech or
Oration.

Harase, (French) to tire out, to weary, to
disquiet.

Harbinger, from the Dutch words her
benghen, i. hither keep, an officer in a Princes
Court, that alotteth those of the household their lodgings
in time of progresse;
but vulgarly taken for any one that goeth before, and
provideth lodgeing.

Harbour, a Hart is said to Harbour when it
goes to rest.

Harelip, a lip cloven like a Hares
lip.

Harepipe, a snare made of a piece of elder
or cane to catch a Hare with.

Hariant, or Hauriant, in Heraldry,
is when a fish is represented standing
upright.

Hariolation, (lat.) a southsaying.

Harlot, or Arletta, Concubine to
Robert Duke of Normandy,
and mother to William
the Conquerour, in disgrace of whom all whores came to be
called Harlots.

Harman, a proper name of men,
signifying in Dutch the
General of an Army, answerable to the Greek
Polemarchus.

Harmodius, and Aristogeiton, two
famous conspiratours against Hipparchus the
Tyrant of Athens.

Harmonia, the daughter of Mars and
Venus, and the wife of Cadmus, to her is
attributed by some, the
first invention of Musical Harmony.

Harmonides, a Trojan whom
Minerva inspired
with all kind of manufacture.

Harmonical, or Harmonious, full of
Harmony, i.
musical consent or agreement.

Harold, see Harald.

Harpalice, the daughter of
Lycurgus, she was a great huntresse, and hearing
that her father was taken prisoner by the Getans,
rescued him by force of arms.

Harpe, the name of the Fauchion
wherewith Mercury slew Argos and
Perseus Medusa.

Harping-Irons, certain Irons to strike
great fish withal, being at one end like a barbed arrow,
and having at the other end a cord.

Harpings, the breadth of a ship at the
bow.

Harpocrates, an Image used in the
ceremonies of
Serapis and Isis, made with one hand
upon his mouth, and called by the Aegyptians, the
god of silence.

Harpyes, the three daughters of
Pontus and Terra, Aello, Celæno, and
Ocypete, they were part women, and part birds,
having claws like vultures. Homer saith, that
upon Celæno, whom he calls Podarges,
Zephyrus begat Balius, and Xanthus,
the horses of Achilles.

Hart, in the Forrest Laws, is a Stag of 5
years old, if having been hunted by the King or Queen, he
escape alive, he is called
a Hart royal.

Hart-hall, a place for Students in the
University of Oxford, built by Water
Stapleton Bishop of Exceter, together with
Exceter Colledge, in the time of King
Edward the second, who in imitation of him, built
Oriall Colledge and St. Mary
Hall.

Hatches of a ship, are trap-doors to let
things down into the hold; they are also called
scutles.

Hauberk, or Haubert, (French) a
coat of maile.

Havelock, a certain Danish foundling of the
Royal blood, who as it is reported, was fosterd by one
Grime a Merchant, and from a skullen in the Kings
kitchin, was for his valour and conduct in Military
affairs, promoted to the marriage
of the Kings daughter.

Havering, a Town in Essex, an
ancient retiring place of the Kings of England,
so called from the fabulous conceit of a ring delivered by
a Pilgrim, as sent from St. John Baptist, to King
Edward the Confessour.

Haunt, a term in hunting, the walk of a
Deer, or the place of his ordinary
passage, in French
Enceinte.

Hauriant, see Hariant.

Hauselines, or Hanselines, (old
word) breeches or slops.

Haw, a hedge, from the French word
Hay, also an old word, signifying black, also a
disease in the eye.

Haward, or Hayward, a keeper of
the common Heard of the Town, who is to look that they
neither break nor crop hedges, from the French words
Hay, a hedge, and Garde, custody.



Hawise, a proper name of women. see Avice.


Hawkers, certain deceitful people, that go
up and down from place to place,
buying and selling old
brasse or pewter which ought to be uttered in open
market.

Hawlkes, (old word) corners.

Hawten, (old word) insolent.

Hawthorn, white thorn, from
Hægdoren.
Hæg in Dutch signifying white.

Hazard, or Hasard, the ace of the
dice, metaphorically any doubtful event.

Hay, a Town in Brecknockshire,
called in Brittish Trekethle, i. a Town in a
Grove of Hazel-trees, it was formerly a very flourishing
place till ruined and depopulated
by that arch rebell Owen Glendowerdwy.

Hayboot, signifieth in common Law, a
permission to take thorns to make or
repair hedges.

Hayn, (old word) hatred.


H E

Headborow, the chief of the frank pledge,
the same as Constable, or Tithingman, from heord,
i. head, and borhe, i. pledge.

Heafling, (Sax.) a captive.

Heafod, (Sax.) a head.

Healgemote, or Halymote, a Saxon
word, signifying a Court-baron, or meeting of the Tenants
in one Hall.

Hearse, an empty Tomb, erected for the
honour of the dead, from the Greek word Arsis, a
lifting up.

Hebdomade, (Greek) the number 7. a week which consists of 7
dayes.

Hebe, the Goddess of Youth, and daughter of
Juno, without a father, she was for her beauty
preferred by Jupiter to be his Cup bearer, but one
time falling down, and discovering her secret parts to the
gods, she was removed from her place.

Hebetude, (lat.) bluntness, dulness.

Hebrews, a name given to the
Isrælites, because they spake the ancient Hebrew
Language, which continued in the
Family of Heber,
after the division of tongues.

Hebrides, certain Islands in the
Deucaledonian
Sea, called also Ebudæ, and the Western Islands,
they are 44 in number, but the chief of them are
Levissa, Eusta, Mula, and Ila.

Hebrus, a River of Thrace, where
the head of Orpheus was thrown, after his body
had been torn in pieces by the Bacchides.

Hecalius, a name attributed to
Jupiter by Theseus, from Hecale
an old woman who had devoted her life to Jupiter,
for his safe return.

Hecate, the daughter of Jupiter
and Latona, and the sister of Apollo.
Some think her to be the same with Diana, or the
Moon, also the name of a famous
Inchantresse of Thrace.

Hecatomb, (Greek) a sacrifice wherein a
hundred beasts were offered at one time.

Hecatompolis, an Epithet of the Island of
Crete, which is said to have had a hundred Cities
in it.

Hecatompylæ, the name of a City of
Aegypt, otherwise called Aegyptian Thebes.

Heck, the name of an Engin to take fish
withal, from the Dutch word hecken, i. to pick,
or heck a bramble.

Heckled, (old word) wrapped.

Hecktick feaver, a feaver which is
habitual, and which
inflames the solid parts of the body, it comes from the
Greek word Hexis, a habit.

Hector, the son of Priam and
Hecuba, he was accounted the stoutest of all the
Trojans, slew Protesilaus and
Patroclus, but was at length slain himself by
Achilles, the word signifieth Defender.

Hecuba, the daughter of Dyamas,
the wife of Priam King of Troy, it is
feigned of her, that after the taking of Troy she
was turned into a bitch.

Hederal Crown, a Crown of Ivy, from the
Latin word Hedera.

Heer and Hace, (old word) hoarse
and harsh.

Hegesistratus, an Ephesian, who
was the builder of the City Elea in
Asia.

Hegira, the Epoch or computation of time
among the Turkes.

Heinfare or Hinfare, (old word) a departing
of a servant from his master, from Hine and
fare, passage.

Not found in OED.



Heire of blood, in Common Law, is he who
succeedeth by right of blood in any mans Lands or
Tenements in fee, but heir of Inheritance is he that
cannot be defeated of his
inheritance upon any displeasure.

Heirloom, signifieth all implements of a house,
which having belonged to the house for certain descents,
accrew to the heir with the house it self. Loom
signi­



fying a frame to weave in.


Heighth, a vertue in writing or
speaking, wherein the
expressions are neither too inflate, nor too creeping, but
observing a decent
majesty between both.

Helchesaites, a sect of Hereticks, who held
it no sin to deny Christ in times of persecution;
their first Teacher was one Helchesaus.

Helchysm, the drosse and scum of
silver.

Hele, (old word) to cover.

Helena, the daughter of Jupiter
and Læda, she was married to Menelaus,
and brought forth Hermione, afterwards being
stole away by Paris, and being demanded of
Priamus by the Greeks, the Trojans refused to
send her back, which was the occasion of a very great war,
and of the destruction of Troy. The word
signifieth in Greek pittiful.

Heliacal rising of a Star, is when a Star
which was at first hid by the light of the Sun, afterwards
appears; from the Greek word Helios, i. the
Sun.

Heliades, the daughters of the Sun, and
sisters of Phæton, who wept themselves
into Poplar-trees for the
death of their brother, and their teares became Amber;
their names were Phaæthusa, Lampelusa, and
Lampetia.

Heliconian, belonging to Helicon,
a hill of Phocis, sacred to Apollo and
the Muses.

Helioscopie, (Greek) the furthest point of
the Suns course in his ascention or
descention.

Heliotrope, (Greek) the name of a plant
commonly called Turnsole, also a kind of pretious
stone.

Helle, the daughter of Athamas
King of Thebes, she with her brother
Phryxus, crossing over the Pontick Sea
upon a golden Ram, being
frighted with the danger, fell into the sea, from which
accident, that sea was ever after called
Hellespont.

Hellebore. the name of a certain
plant, called also Melampodium, which is good against
madness.

Hellenistical, belonging to Greece or the
Greek Language, from Hellas, the
ancient name of that Country.

Helme, signifieth in Navigation a piece of
wood fastned to the rudder in a ship or boat, also the
helme of State is metaphorically
taken for the chief place in the
government of a Nation.

Helmed in stark stowers, (old word)
defended in sharp assaults.

Heluation, (lat.) a playing the glutton, a
greedy devouring.

Helve, (old word) a handle of
anything.

Helvetia, a Country invironed by the
Alps and the Hill Jura, the Rivers
Rhene, and Rhone, it is now called
Swizzerland.

Hemerology, (Greek) a Calender, or Book
wherein are registred the passages of every day.

Hemicranie, (Greek) a disease in the head
called the Meagrim.

Hemicycle, (Greek) a half circle.

Hemingstone, a Town in Suffolk,
which one Baldwin le Pettour held of the King,
per Saltum, sufflatum, & Bumbulum seu Pettum, i. e. by this
Tenure, that on every Christmasse Day before the King, he
should dance, puff up his cheekes, and fart.

Hemisphere (Greek) half the compass of the
heavens, or so much as is visible
above the Horison.

Hemlock, a certain plant, called in Latin Cicuta, whose juice being poison used to be given
to capital offenders.

Henares, a River in Spain, near to
which stands a Town called Alcala di
Henares.

Henbane, in Greek Hyoscyamus, an
herb which is counted rank poison.

Henchman, or Heinsman, a German
word, signifying a domestick servant. It is taken among us
for a page of honour.

Hend, (old word) neat, fine, gentle.

Hengston hill, a hill in Cornwall,
where the Brittish Danmonii calling the Danes to
assist them to drive the English out of
Devonshire, were by King Egbert totally
defeated and ruined.

Hengwit, see Hankwit.

Hengest, the name of him who led the first
English men into this Isle, the word signifies in the
Saxon Horseman.

Heniochus, vide Auriga.

Henry, the name of seven Emperours of
Germany, eight Kings of England, four
Kings of France, four Kings of Castile:
the word comes from the German Einric, i. rich
and powerful, or Herric, i. rich Lord, or else is
contracted from Honoricus.

Hent, (old word) to catch.

Hepatical, (Greek) belonging to the
Liver.

Hephæstian mountains, certain burning
mountains in Lycia.

Heptahedrical, (Greek) having seven
sides.



Heptagonal, (Greek) belonging to a Heptagon or
figure of seven angles.


Heptarchy, (Greek) a sevenfold
government, or
government of seven men, as that of the Saxon Kings here
in England.

Heraclea, a City of Narbon in
France, now called St. Gilles.

Heraclitus, the name of a famous
Ephesian
Philosopher who used to weep as often as he thought upon
the misery of the World.

Herald, see Harald.

Herawdes, (old word) feates of
activity.

Herbage, signifieth in Common Law, the
fruit of the earth provided by nature for the cattel, also
the liberty that a man hath to feed his cattel in another
mans ground, or in the Forrest.

Herbert, a proper name of men,
signifying in Dutch,
famous Lord.

Herbigage, or Herborow, (old word)
lodging.

Herbalist, or Herbary, (lat.) one
that hath knowledge in the nature and
temperaments of herbs.

Herbenger, see Harbenger.

Herbert, a proper name, signifying in Dutch
bright Lord.

Herbipolis, a City of Germany, now
called Wirtzberg.

Herbosity, (lat.) plenty of herbs.

Herbulent, (lat.) grassy, full of
herbs.

Hercinia, a great Wood in Germany,
sixty dayes journeys in length, and nine in
breadth.

Herculean, belonging to Hercules,
the cheif of which name was Hercules the son of
Jupiter and Alcmena, he being hated by
Juno because he was born of a Concubine, was by her
ingaged in 12 very dangerous enterprises, which are called
Hercules his 12 labours, all which he overcame to
his great renown; whence every great atcheivment came to
be called a Herculean labour. He is said to have built two pillars on Mount
Calpe, and Mount Avila, as the utmost
bounds of the Western World, with the inscription of
Nil ultra, and at this day those places are
called Hercules pillars. This name
Hercules signifieth in Greek, Glory or Illumination
of the Air.

Here de Cæsar, a certain Epoch or
Account, from which the
Saracens and Arabians
used to compute their number of yeares, as we do from the
year of our Lord. It was also used in Spain for a
great while, the word signifieth as much as the Monarcy of
Cæsar.

Hereditary, or Hæreditary, (lat.)
coming by
Inheritance.

Hereditaments, signifie in Common Law, all
such things as descend to a man and his heirs by way of
Inheritance, and fall not within the compasse of an
Executor as Chattels do.

Hereford, the cheif City of
Herefordshire,
anciently called Tresawith, from the Beech-trees
growing thereabout. It was built as some say by King
Edward the Elder, in that tract of the Country
called of old Ereinuc or Archenfeild,
out of the ruines of the ancient Ariconium; the
fame of this City was augmented by the
Martyrdom of
Ethelbert King of East England, who
going to wooe the daughter of Offa King of the
Mercians, was here forelaid and murthered by the
procurement of Quendred Offa's wife.

Heremitage, or Ermitage, (French)
a solitary place, a dwelling for Hermites, i.
persons that devote themselves to a religious
solitude.

Heresie, see Hæresie.

Heresiarch, or Hæresiarch,
(Greek) the principall Author of any Heresie or Sect.

Heretog, or Hertogh, a Leader of
an Army, or a Duke, from the Saxon words Here an
Army, and Toga, to draw out.

Herility, (lat.) Masterly Authority.

Heriot, or Hariot, hath formerly
been used to signifie a tribute given by a
Tenant to the Lord of the
Mannour for his better preparation toward war;
Here in the Saxon tongue signifying an Army; but
now it is taken for the best chattel that a Tenant hath at
the hour of his death, which is due unto the Lord by
custom.

Herlaxton, a Town in Lincolnshire,
near which was ploughed up a brazen vessel, wherein a
Golden Helmet beset with pretious
Stones (which was given as a present
to Catherine of Spain, wife to King
Henry the eighth) was found.

Herman, see Harman.

Hermaphrodite, (Greek) a word
compounded of
Hermes, i. Mercury and
Aphrodite, i. Venus, and signifieth one of both Sexes, Man and
Woman. See the story of Hermaphroditus and
Salmacis, elegantly described in the fourth Book
of Ovids Metamorphosis.



Hermetical, (Greek) belonging to
Mercury the messenger of the gods, who is called
in Greek Hermes, or to Hermes
Trismegistus, the great Aegyptian Philosopher.


Hermione, the daughter of
Menelaus, she was betrothed by her father, after
the end of the Trojan war, to Pyrrhus
the son of Achilles, which Orestes (to
whom she had been before espoused by her Grandfather
Tyndarus) taking ill, he slew
Pirrhus in the
Temple of Apollo.

Hermitage, Hermite, see Heremitage.

Hermotimus, a certain man of
Clazomena,
whose Soul used to leave his body, and wander up and down,
bringing him news of things that were done a great way
off, his body lying in the mean while as it were asleep,
but at length his enemies finding
his body, burnt it, so that his Soul had no habitation
left to return to.

Hernious, (lat.) bursten bellied.

Herod, sirnamed Antipater, a King
of the Jews, created by the Roman Senate, he destroyed the
Temple, built by Zorobabel,
and erected another more magnificient
in its place, he put his wife Mariamne
to death, and his two sons, Aristobulus
and Alexander.

Heroick, or Heroical, (Greek)
noble, lofty, becoming a Heroe, whence
Heroick Poem, is a Poem treating of
Heroic actions, or persons.

Heroine, a woman of a noble spirit, and
excellent virtues.

A Heron, a kinde of bird, called in
Latin Ardea, ab ardendo, because its dung burns whatsoever it
touches.

Herophila, the name of the Erythræan
Sibil, who having asked Tarquin a very great
price for her three books of Prophesies,
and being refused it, she burnt 2. and afterwards received
as much for that one that was left, as she demanded for
all the three.

Herostratus, one that to purchace
himself fame, burnt the Temple of Diana.

Hersilia, the wife of Romulus, who
after her death was worshipp'd by the name of
Hora, or the goddesse of youth.

Hertford, i. e. the Ford of Harts, the
chief Town of Hertford-shire, having a Castle
upon the River Lea, built as some say, by King
Edward the Elder, and augmented
by Gislebert de Clare, who was Earle of this Town
in King Henry the seconds
dayes, Bede treating of the Synode that was held
here in the year 670. calleth
it Herudford, i. e. Redford.

Herthus, a goddesse worshipt by the
ancient Saxons,
in the same nature as Tellus by the
Latins, some think the word earth to be thence
derived.

Hesione, the daughter of Laomedon,
King of Troy, whom Hercules, having
freed her from a great Whale, gave in marriage to his
friend Telamon, after he had ransack't
Troy, because her father Laomedon
performed not his
promise to him.

Hesperus, the son of Japetus, and
brother of Atlas, who flying from his Countrey,
went and inhabited in Italy, whence that Countrey
came to be called Hesperia,
he had three daughters, Aegle, Arethusa, and
Hesperethusa, called the Hesperides, who
lived in the Hesperian Garden, whose Trees bare
golden Apples, that were kept by a watchfull Dragon, whom
Hercules slew; it is also faigned of
Hesperus, that after his death he was changed
into the Evening Star.

Hests, (old word) commands, or
decrees.

Hete, (old word) a vow, offer, or
promise.

Heteroclite, in Grammar, is taken for a
Nown, that hath a different way of
declining from other Nouns.

Heterodox, (Greek) being of another
opinion, or judgement, then what is
generally received.

Heterogeneal, (Greek) being of another or
different kinde.

Heteroscians, (Greek) people that live
between the Aequator and the Tropicks, whose shadowes
still incline more one way then another.

Hetruria, a Countrey of Italy,
otherwise called Tuscia, or Tuscanie, the people whereof
were in ancient times much given
to sooth-saying; it reacheth from Macra to
Tyber.

Heveningham, a Town in Suffolk,
which gave name and residence to an ancient family,
commonly contracted into Henningham.


Hew, (old word) colour.

Hewmond, (old word) shining.

See OED "helmet," n., 1.



Hexagonal, (Greek) belonging to a
Geometrical figure, having six angles, or corners.

Hexameter verse, (Greek) a verse
consisting of six feet,
it is otherwise called a Heroick verse, because it is used
in Heroick Poems.

Hexaptote, (Greek) a Noune declined with
six cases.

See OED "hexa-."





Hexastick, (Greek) a Stanza, consisting of six
verses.


Heydelberg, a Citie of Germany, so
called from the Dutch words
Heyd, i. e. sweet Broom, and Berg, i. e.
a Hill.


H I

Hiation, (lat.) an opening asunder, or
gaping.

See OED "hiatet," v.



Hibernia, a fair Island, lying on the
Western part of Brittain; it is now called
Ireland.

Hibride, a Mongrel, or a Creature of a mixt
generation; it comes from the Greek word
ὑβρις, disgrace.

Hichel, or Hatchel, an instrument
to kemb Hemp, or Flax withall.

Hickway, a certain bird, otherwise
called a wood pecker, or
wryneck, in Greek Jynx.

Hidage, a certain Tax, which upon
extraordinary
occasions used to be paid for every hide of Land.

Hide of Land, from the Dutch word Heyd,
i. e. a wide field, also Heath and Broom, signifieth
in Law, such a quantity of Land as may be plough'd with
one plough in a year, which according to some mens
accounts is about a hundred Acres, eight Hides, being a
Knights fee.

Hide and Gain, arable Land, or the
same as gainage.

Hidel, a kinde of sanctuary, or hiding
place.

Hierarchie, (Greek) a spiritual
government, also the
holy order of Angels, which consisteth of nine degrees,
Seraphims, Cherubims,
Thrones, Dominations, Principalities,
Powrs, Vertues, Arch-Angles, and
Angels.

Hieratick paper, fine paper, dedicated to
religious uses.

Hieroglyphicks, certain Mysterious
Characters, or Images, used among the ancient
Aegyptians, whereby holy sentences were
express't.

Hierograms, (Greek) sacred writings.

Hierome, or Hieronymus, the name
of one of the ancient fathers, the word
signifying in Greek holy name, there was also a Tyrant of Sicily, so
called, who contrary to the advice of his father Hiero, taking part with
Hannibal against the Romans, was at length slain
by them.

Hieronymians, a certain order of Monks,
instituted by St. Hierome, there were also
certain Hermites so called, whose order was founded in the
year 1365. by one Granel of
Florence.

Hierosolyme, the famous Citie of
Judæa, vulgarly called
Jerusalem.

Higham, a Town in Suffolk, which
gave name and residence to an ancient family so called.

Hight, (old word) named.

Hilarion, a certain Hermite of
Syria, famous for many great miracles.

Hilarity, (lat.) chearfulnesse, or
mirth.

Hildebert, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Dutch famous Lord.

Himple, an old Saxon word, signifying to
halt, or go lame.

Hin, a certain Hebrew measure,
containing 12
Sextaries, or Logins, a Login
being a certain measure, which contains
about the quantity of six Egg-shells.

Hine, or Hinde, is commonly used
for a servant at husbandry.

Hippace, a kinde of Cheese made of Mares
milk.

See OED "curd," n., 1b.



Hipparchus, a Tyrant of Athens,
who succeeded Pisistratus, and having deflowr'd a
Virgin, Harmodius and Aristogeiton
conspired against him,
and slew him, also the master of horse, a chief Officer
among the Athenians, was called
Hipparchus.

Hippe, the daughter of Chiron, she
was a great huntresse upon Mount Peleus, and
being got with Childe, was changed into a Mare.

Hippiades, (Greek) images
representing women on
hors-back.

Not found in OED.



Hippocentaurs, see Centaurs.

Hippocrates, a famous Physician of the
Island of Coos, he lived 104 years, and was had
in great honour by Artaxerxes, King of
Persia.

Hippocren, a Fountain of Boeotia,
sacred to the Muses.

Hippodame, see Pelops.

Hippodrom, (Greek) a place for tilting, or
hors-racing.

Hippogryph, (Greek) a beast
represented to the
fancy, being half a horse, and half a griffin.

Hippolyta, a Queen of the Amazons,
whom Hercules gave to Theseus for his wife.

Hippolytus, the son of Theseus and
Hippolyte, he
addicted himself wholly to hunting,
but being accused of adultery by Phoedra his
mother in Law, because he had denied her, when she
sollicited him to lye with her, he fled away and was
torn in pieces by
the wilde horses that drew his



Chariot, afterwards his limbs being gathered up, and he
restored to life by Aesculapius, at the request
of Diana, he went into Italy and was
called Virbius, and built a Citie, which from
his wives name was called Ancia.


Hippomachie, (Greek) a fighting on
hors-back.

Hippomanes, the son of Megareus
and Merope, who winning the Race from
Atalanta, the daughter of Sichæneus, by
throwing golden Apples in
her way, he obtained her for his wife, but because he
could not abstain from lying with his wife in the Temple
of Cybele, he was turned into a Lion, and she
into a Lionesse.

Hippon, the name of a Citie of
Africa, whereof St. Austin was Bishop.

Hippona, an ancient goddesse, who was
worshipped as the goddesse of Hors-coursing,
and her image used to be placed in stables.

Hippinax, an Ephesian Poet, who writ so sharply against some that
painted him ridiculously, that he caused them to hang
themselves.

Hippotades, the sirname of Aeolus,
King of the winds.

Hipsicratea, the wife of
Mithridates, King of Pontus, who loved
her husband so much, that she followed him in all dangers
and extremities.

Hircine, (lat.) belonging to a Goat.

Hirculation, (lat.) a certain disease in a
Vine, which causeth it to bear no fruit.

Hircus, the left shoulder of
Auriga.

Hirsute, (lat.) rough, bristly, full of
haire.

Hispalis, a famous Citie of Spain,
situate upon the River Boetis; it is now called
Sevil.

Hispania, the Kingdom of Spain,
anciently divided into
Boetica, now called Granada. Lusitania,
now called Portugal
and Tarraconensis, which containes the Kingdom of
Arragon, and part of Castile.

Hispid, (lat.) having rough haires, or
bristles.

Historiographer, (Greek) a Writer of
Histories, a Historian.

Historiologie, (Greek) a historical
discourse.

Histrionical, (lat.) belonging to a
Histrio, or stage-player.

Hithe, a little Haven to land wares out of
boates.


H L

Hlaford, or Laford, (Saxon) a
Lord.

Hleafdian, or Leafdian, (Sax.) a
Lady.


H O

Hoane, a Saxon word, signifying a fine
whetstone.

Hobbie, a kinde of Hawk, called in
Latin Alaudarius,
also a little Irish Nag.

Hoblers, certain Irish Knights,
which used to serve upon Hobbies.

Hock, and Hocks, an old English
phrase, signifying mire and dirt.

Not found in OED.



Hocktide, a certain festival time,
celebrated about Candlemasse, for the death of Hardiknute, the
last King of the Danes; it is also called
Blazetide, in Latin Fugalia.

Hocus-pocus, a made word, signifying a
Jugler, a shewer of tricks by Legier de Main, or
sleight of hand.

A Hodge-poge, or Hotch-pot, a
Hachee, or flesh cut to pieces, and sodden
together with Herbs, also a Law-term, signifying a
commixtion, or putting together of land for the better
division of it.

Hodget, a Persian Priest.

Hodiernal, (lat.) belonging to the
present day, or
time.

Hoghenhine, in Common-law, is he that
cometh to a house Guest-wise, and lieth there the third
night, after which he is accounted one of the
family.

Hogoo, a word vulgarly used for a high-
savour, or taste, it cometh from the French word
Hautgoust.

Hogshead, a measure
of wine, containing the fourth
part of a Tun.

A Hogsteer, a wilde Boar of three years
old.

Hoker, (Sax.) peevishnesse.

Holland, one of the three parts, into which
Lincolnshire is divided, from which the Earle of
Holland deriveth his Title, the other two are
called Kesteven, and Lindsey.

Holm, a certain Tree, called otherwise a
Hollie-tree, also the same as Halm.

Holocaust, (Greek) a burnt-offering, or
sacrifice laid whole on the Altar.

Holour, (old word) a whore-monger.

Holsatia, quasi Holt Sassia, i. e. wooddy
Germany. Holtz, signifying in Dutch,



wood, it is a Countrey of Germany
vulgarly called
Holstein.


Homage, the Oath that a Vassal, or Tenant
sweareth to his Lord, also the Jury
of a Court Baron, consisting of such as owe Homage to the
Lord of the Fee, from the Greek word Omoo, i. e.
to swear.

Homer, a famous Greek Poet, called at first
Melesigenes, because he was born by the River
Melete, he writ a Poem concerning the wars of
Troy, which was called Ilias, and
another of the Travels of Vlisses,
called Odysseis.
He is called by some the Moeonian
Prophet.

Homesoken, or Hamsoken, an
immunity from an amerciament, for entring into houses
violently, and without Licence; it cometh from the Dutch
words Heym, a house, and Suchen, to
seek.

Homicide, (lat.) Man-slaughter, or
Murder.

Homily, (Greek) a Speech, or Sermon.

Homoeomerie, (Greek) a likenesse of
parts.

Homogeneal, (Greek) being of the same
kinde.

Homologie, (Greek) a confessing, or
agreeing.

Homonymous, (Greek) things of several
kindes, having the same denomination, a Term in
Logick.

Honie-suckle, a kinde of flowr,
otherwise called a
wood-binde.

Honi soit qui mal y Pense, a common French Motto, signifying in
English, blame be to him, who thinketh ill.

Honour, in Common-law, is taken for the
more noble sort of Seigneuries.

Honour-point, in Heraldry, is the upper
part of an Escutcheon, when the breadth thereof is divided
into three equal parts.

Honorary, (lat.) done, or conferred
upon any one in token of
honour.

Honorius, the name of one of the
Roman Emperours, the son of
Theodosius the first, who divided the Empire
between his two sons, assigning to Arcadius the
Eastern part, to Theodosius the Western
part.

Honymoon, an expression commonly
applied to new married
people, who loving violently at first, soon cool in their
affection.

Hope-Castle, a Castle in
Flintshire, to which King Edward the
first retired, when the Welsh-men set upon him
unawares; it is near Cærgurle Castle.

Hophas, a River that flowes by
Haliartus, a
Citie of Boeotia, formerly called
Isomantus.

Hoplochrysme, (Greek)
the anointing of weapons with the
weapon-salve.

Hoqueton, (French) a
a kinde of short Coat
without sleeves.

Horæ, or the hours, they were faigned by
the Poets to be certain goddesses, the daughters of
Jupiter and Themis, their names, see in
Hyginus.

Horary, (lat.) hourly.

Horatius Cocles, a famous Roman, who
fighting against Porsenna,
King of the Hetrurians,
defended a bridge himself against
all the enemies forces, untill the bridge was cut down,
and after that he leapt into Tyber, and swomme to
his own people, also Horatius Flaccus, a famous
Lyrick Poet of Venusium, who was in high
favour with Augustus and Mecænas:
whence Horatio is a proper name frequent now
adayes, derived as some think from the Greek
ὁρατὸς, i. e. of good
eye-sight.

Hord, (Lat.) a Cow great with Calf.

Horizontal, (Greek) belonging to the
Horizon, i. e. that Circle which divides the
upper Hemisphear, or so much of the Heavens as we can see round about us from the lower Hemisphear, or so much of
the Heavens as is hid from our sight.

A Hornet, a kinde of insect, called in
Latin Crabro, which useth to infest horses and
other creatures, and is ingendred of the carcases of dead
horses.

Horngeld, a Tax within the Forrest to be
paid for horned beasts; it comes from horn, and the Dutch
word Gelden, i. e. to pay.

Horodix, (Greek) a kinde of Dial, or
instrument to shew how the hours passe a­
way.

Horological, (Gr.) belonging to a
Horologe, i. e.
an Hour-glasse, Clock, or Dial.

Horoscope, (Greek) a diligent marking of
hours, also so much of the firmament as riseth every hour
from the East, also the Ascendent of ones Nativity, or a
diligent marking of the time of a Childes birth.

Horridity, or Horrour, (lat.)
frightfulnesse,
dreadfulnesse, a quaking for fear.

Horseheal, a kind of Herb, otherwise called
Elicampane.

Hortation, (lat.) an exhorting, or
perswading to any
thing.

Hortensius, an eloquent Roman, whose daughter Hortensia; so
pleaded her cause before the Triumvirs; M.
Antony, Octavius,
and Lepidus; that the great Tax was taken off,
which they had laid upon the people.



Hortyard, a Garden-yard, haply the same with
Orchard.


Hosanna, an Hebrew word signifying, Save I
beseech thee, being a solemn acclamation
used by the Jews in their Feasts of Tabernacles.

Hospitallers, certain Knights of an
Order so called, because
they had the care of Hospitals, i. houses erected
for the relief of Pilgrims,
and poor or impotent people.

Hostage, (French) a pledge left in war for
performance of Covenants.

Hosteler, in Latin hospes or
hostellarius, a keeper of an Hostery or Inne, an
Host.

Hostility, (lat.) hatred or enmity.

Hotchpot, see Hodgepodge.

Hoten, (old word) they promise.

Housage, a fee that a Carryer or any one
payes for setting up any stuff in a house.

House in Astrology, is the twelf part of
the Zodiack being divided into twelve equal parts.

Housebote, Estovers out of the Lords wood,
to uphold a tenement or house, from hous and the
Dutch word bote, a making
good. see Estovers.

Houton, (old word) hollow.

Not found in OED.



The Howld of a ship, the room betwixt the
keilson and lower decks.

The Hownds, the holes of the checks fastned
to the head of the masts.

Howsel, to administer the Sacrament to one
that lyeth on his death-bed.

House-in, is when a ship after she is past
the breadth of her bearing, is brought in narrow to her
upper workes.


H U

Hubba, the name of a Danish Captain, who in
old times invaded this Island.

Hue and Cry, in Common Law, is a
pursuite of one having
committed felony by the highway, by describing the party,
and giving notice to several Constables from one Town to
another.

Hugh, the proper name of a man,
signifying comfort.
Others derive it from the Dutch word Hougen, to
cut.

Huguenots, a name which used to be given in
derision to those of the reformed Religion in
France, from a gate in Tours called
Hugon. Others derive it from these words Huc
nos venimus, Hither we are come, wherewith they begin
their protestation.

Huik, or Huke, a kind of mantle
used in Spain and Germany.

Hulk, a kind of great and broad ship, from
the Greek word Olcas.

Hull, a Town in Yorkshire, situate
upon the River Hull, anciently called
Kingston (q. Kings Town) upon Hull. It
being built by King Edward the first, and beautified with fair
buildings by Michæl de la Pool Earle of
Suffolk. This Town is very well accomodated for
Ships and Merchandize.

Hull, in Navigation, is taken for the body
of a ship without masts, sailes, or yards.

Hulling, is when a ship at sea hath taken
in all her sailes in calm weather.

Hulstred, (old word) hidden.


Humanity, (lat.) the nature and
condition of man, also
gentlenesse, mildnesse.

Humane, or curteous Signs, are Gemini,
Virgo, Libra, Aquarius.

Humber, a great River (or rather an arm of
the sea) in Yorkshire.

Humectation, (lat.) a moistning.

Humidity, (lat.) moistness.

Humiliates, a certain religious Order of
men, so called from Humiliare, lLat.) to humble
or bring low, because they led very strict or mortified
lives: they were instituted in the year 1166.

Humorist, (lat.) one that is fantastick, or
full of humours.

Humour, (lat.) moisture, also a mans phancy
or disposition. The four predominate
humours in a mans body, are blood, choler, flegme, and
melancholy.

Humfrey, or Humfred, the proper
name of a man, signifying in Dutch
Hous­
-peace.

Hundred, a part of a Shire consisting of
ten tithings, each tithing consisting of ten housholds,
called in Latin Decennæ.

Hundreders, men empanelled of a Jury upon
any controversie of land, dwelling within the Hundred
where the land lieth.

Hundrelagh, the Hundred Court, from which
all the officers of the Kings Forrest were freed.

Not found in OED but see "hundred."



Hungaria, the Kingdom of Hungary
divided into two parts by
the River Danubius,
it was anciently called Pannonia.

Hunnes, a people of Scythia, who in
the



time of the Emperour Valentinian overrun all
Italy and Gallia, but at last
overcome by the prayers
of Pope Leo, they retired themselves into
Hungary.


Huntington, the chief Town of
Huntintonshire,
in the publick seale called Huntersdune,
i. the hill of Hunters, alluding to which name
Leland calls it in Latin Venantodunum:
near unto the bridge is to be seen yet the plot of a
Castle built by K. Edward the Elder, in the year
917, and by K. Henry the second demolished, to
put an end to the contention which the Scottish
men and the St. Lizes had so often had about
it.

Hurlebats, or Whirlebats, used
among the ancients, called in Latin Cæstus.

Hurlers, certain great stones in
Cornwall, which
the people thereabout perswade
themselves to have been in times past men transformed into
stones for prophaning
the Sabbath Day, with hurling of the Ball.

Hurleth, (old word) maketh a noise.

Huscarles, a name given in ancient times to
those that were gatherers of the Danish tribute.

Husfastene, in some of the Statutes is
taken for him that holdeth house and land.

Not found in OED.



Hustings, the principal and highest Court
of London, it cometh from the French word
Haulser, i. to lift up.


H Y

Hyacynthus, a youth who being
beloved of
Apollo, and playing with him at a play called
Discus, Zephyrus who was slighted by
Hyacinthus, blew the Discus thrown by
Apollo, full upon Hyacinthus his head,
and killed him, which mischance Apollo lamenting,
turned him into a flower called a Jacinth, vulgarly
Crowtoes. There is also a pretious stone called a Hyacinth
or Jacinth, being of a waterish colour.

Hyades, the seven daughters of
Atlas, by his wife Aethra, they were
called Ambrosia,
Eudoxa, Pasithoe, Corone, Plexauris, Pytho, and
Tyche, who lamenting their brother Hyas
devoured by a Lion, were taken up into Heaven by
Jupiter and changed into Stars.

Hyaline, (Greek) of a colour like
glasse.

Hybernall, (lat.) belonging to the
winter-season.

Hybla, a mountain of Sicily,
famous for its Bees, and for the abundance of Time which
grew there.

Hybreas, a famous Orator, born in
Nylassus, a City
of Caria, who was advanced to be chief Governour
of that City under Euthydamus Prince of
Caria, but when Labienus
came against that Country, he so incensed him by saying he
was Emperour of Caria, that he destroyed the
City.

Hydra, a monstrous Serpent bred in the Lake
of Lerna; it was feigned to have a hundred heads,
and was at last slaine by Hercules: also a
celestial constellation.

Hydragogy, (Greek) a conveying of water by
furrows and trenches from one place to another.
Hydragogues are medicins
that are prepared to draw forth the water from any
Hydropical parts.

Hydrargyrous, (Greek) belonging to
Quicksilver.

Hydraulicks, (Greek) certain
waterworks, whereby
musick is made by the running of waters.

Hydrography, (Greek) a description of
waters.

Hydromancy, (Greek) a kind of
divination by
waters.

Hydromel, (Greek) a kind of drink made of
honey, by some called Metheglin.

Hydrophoby, (Greek) a certain disease
caused by melancholy, which causeth in those that are
affected with it, an extream dread of waters.

Hydropick, (Greek) troubled with a certain
disease called the Dropsie.

Hyemal, (lat.) bleak or winterly.

Predates earliest OED entry (1674).



Hyena, (lat.) a beast like a wolf, which
some say, changeth Sex often, and
counterfeiteth the
voice of a man.

Hylas, the son of Theodamas King of Mæonia,
whom Hercules took away by force, and carryed him
with him in the Expedition to Colchos; but
Hercules going on
shore about Mysia, sent him for water to the
River Ascanius, and the Nimphs of the River being
in love with him, pulled him in, so that Hercules
long expected him, and hearing no news of him, left the
Argonauts and wandred up and down the Wood for a long time
in quest of him.

Hyleg, is that Planet or place in
Heaven whereby being
directed by his or its digression, we judge of the life or
state of any person.



Hyllus, the son of Hercules by
Deianira, he being driven out of his City by
Eurystheus, fled to Athens, and there built a Temple to
Misericordia the Goddesse of Pitty.


Hymen, or Hymenæus, son of
Bacchus and Venus, he was the first that
instituted Marriage, and
therefore by some called the god of Marriage, he hath that
name from a thin skin (called in Greek hymen)
which is within the secret parts of a woman, and is said
to be a note of Virginity.

Hymne, (Greek) a spiritual Song, or Psalm
sung to the praise of God.

Hypallage, (Greek) a certain figure wherein
the order of words is contrary to the meaning of them in
construction.

Hyperbolical, (Greek) spoken by way of
Hyperbole, i. a figure wherein an
expression goes beyond
truth, either by way of excess or diminution.

Hyperboreans, a certain Northern
people; some say, dwelling
under the North Pole; others say they are a people of
Scythia.

Hyperion, the son of Cælus, and
brother of Saturn, he is thought by some to be
the first that found out the motion of the Stars, and is
oftimes mentioned in Poetry for the same with the
Sun.

Hypermeter, (Greek) a Verse that hath a
syllable above its ordinary measure.

Hypermnestra, one of the 50 daughters of
Danaus, they being commanded to kill their
Husbands, the 50 sons of Aegyptus, she onely of
all the sisters saved her Husband Lynceus, who
afterwards killed Danaus.

Hyperphysical, (Greek)
supernaturall.

Hypocondriacal, (Greek) subject to
melancholy, because under the hypocondria
or sides of the upper part of the belly, lie the Liver and
Spleen which are the seat of melancholy.

Hypocritical, (Greek) belonging to a
Hypocrite, i. e. a dissembler, or one that maketh
a false shew of Piety or Holinesse.

Hypogastrick, (Greek) belonging to the
Hypogastrium or lower part of the belly.

Hypoge, (Greek) a cellar or place under
ground.

Hypostatical, (Greek) belonging to a
Hypostasis or Personal subsistence.

Hypothenusal line, a term in Geometry, it
is that side of a right-angled triangle which is subtended
or opposite to the right angle.

Hypothetical, (Greek) belonging to a
Hypothesis, i. e. a supposition, also a Hypothetical
Syllogism in Logick, is that which begins with a
conditionall conjunction.

Hypsicratea, see Hipsicratea.

Hypsiphile, the daughter of Thous
and Queen of Lemnos, she intertained
Jason in his voyage to Colchos, and had
twins by him; she was banisht out of Lemnos for
saving her father, when all the men of the Island were
killed by the women, and was intertained by
Lycurgus King of Nemea.

Hyrcania, a Country of Asia,
bordering southward upon
Armenia.

Hyreus, a Countryman of
Bœotia,
who desiring of Jupiter, Mercury, and
Neptune, whom he had intertained at his house,
that he might have a son and not marry, the three Deities
made water upon the dung of an Oxe which had been newly
offered, out of which when the tenth moneth was almost
expired, was borne Orion.

Hyrse, a kind of plant, otherwise called
Millet.

Hysterical, (Greek) as hysterical passion,
a certain disease in women commonly
called Fits of the Mother.

Hysteron Proteron, (Greek) a
preposterous manner
of speaking or writing, expressing
that first which should be last.

Hyttenia, a part of Attica,
formerly called Tetrapolis, because it had four
chief Cities Probalynthus, Oenoe, Tricorythus, and
Marathon.


I A

IAcchus, one of the names of
Bacchus, from the Greek word Iacchein,
to cry out, because his preistesses the Bacchæ
used in the celebration of his Orgies to make strange and
unusual noises.

Jacynth, the name of a certain pretious
stone of a blewish colour, also a flower
called Hyacinthus,
see Hyacynthus.

Jacob, (Hebr.) a supplanter, or
beguiler.

Jacobins, certain Friars of the Order of
St. Dominick.

Jacobites, a sort of Hereticks instituted
in the year 530. by one Jacobus Syrus, they used
circumcision, and acknowledge but one nature in
Christ.

Jacobs staff, a certain Geometrical
instrument



so called, also a staff that Pilgrims
use to walk with to James Compostella.


Jactancy, (lat.) a boasting.

Jaculation, (lat.) a shooting, or
darting.

Jambes, (French) the side-posts of a
door.

Jambeux, (French) armour for the
legs.

Iambick, (lat.) the foot of a verse,
consisting of two
syllables, one short and one long.

Jamblichus, a famous Pythagorean
Philosopher of
Chalcis, a Citie of Syria, he was the
Disciple of Porphyrius.

James, the proper name of a man,
contracted from
Jacob, in Spanish Jago, in French
Jaques.

Jampnorum, a certain Law-term used in
Fines, signifying certain Acres of Furze.

Not found in OED.



Janizaries, Turkish foot Souldiers, which
are of the Guard to the Grand Signior.

Jane, the Christian name of divers
women, mollified, as some
think, from Joan.

Jannock, a kinde of Oaten bread, much used
in the North of England.

Jansenisme, the opinion of Cornelius
Jansenus, Bishop of
Tyre, he was a great opposer
of universal redemption.

Janthe, a certain Virgin, the daughter of
Telessa, who the first day of her
marriage was transformed
into a man.

Janus, the name of an ancient King of
Italy, who intertained Saturn (when he
was banish't out of Creet, by his son
Jupiter) and of
him learn't husbandry, and the use of the Vine, he built a
Citie called Janiculum, from which all
Italy was also called Janicula, he is
pictured with two faces, and from him the first moneth of
the year is called January.

Iapetus, the son of Titan and
Terra, he married the Nymph Aria, and
begat Prometheus
and Epimetheus.

Japygia, a Countrey upon the Borders of
Italy, called also Calabria, and
Magna Græcia, the narrowest entrance of it
reacheth from
Tarentum to Brundusium.

Iarbas, a King of Getulia. see Dido.

Jargon, the same as Gibbrish, or
Pedlars French.

Jarre of Oile, an earthen pitcher,
containing twenty
Gallons, also the Order of Knights of the Jarre, was
instituted by Don Garcia, King of
Navarre, who riding one day on hunting, and
entring into a Cave, he saw an Altar with the image of the
Virgin Marie, and a Pitcher of Lillies, at which
sight being moved with devotion,
he founded this order.

Iarrock, a kinde of Cork.

Iasion, or Iasius,
the son of Iupiter and Electra, to him
Ceres brought forth Pluto, who was the
first that taught men the use of money.

Iasmin, or Iesemin, a kinde of
flowr, so called.

Iason, the son of Aeson, King of
Thessaly, he was sent by his Uncle
Pelias to Colchos, to fetch the Golden
Fleece, and having overcome the Dragon, and
Brazen-footed Bull, that were set to guard it, by the help
of Medea, who was in love with him, he brought
her away with him, and married her, but afterwards falling
in love with Creusa, the daughter of
Creon, he left Medea,
who in anger burnt Creusa, and her Palace
together.

Iasper, a precious stone of a green
colour, also the proper
name of a man, in Latin Gasparus.

Iaveline, (Ital.) a kinde of Dart, or
Launce.

Iberia, the ancient name of
Spain.

Ibexe, or Evick, a kinde of a
mountanous Goat, in
Greek called Aegoreros, in Latin Capricornus.

Ibis, a certain Lybian bird
feeding upon Serpents,
formerly worshipped in Aegypt, which with its long bill first taught the use of
Glisters.


I C

Icarius, the son of Oebalus, he
being slain by the Sheapherds of Athens, whom he
had made drunk, and being discovered by his Dog
Mæra, his
daughter Erigone hanged her self for grief, and
was afterwards
translated among the heavenly signs, and was called
Virgo, the Dog also pined away and died, and was
translated among the signs.

Icarus, the son of Dædalus, who
flying too near the Sun with his waxen wings which his
father had made for him, melted them, and fell into the
Sea, which from thence was called the Icarian
Sea.

Iceni, a certain people, anciently
inhabiting those Provinces, which are now called
Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgshire, and
Huntingtonshire.

Ichdien, a Motto, or device, heretofore
belonging to the arms of the Princes of



Wales, it signifies in the old Saxon, I
serve.


Ichneumon, (Greek) an Indian Rat.

Ichnography, (Greek) a Description, or
Plat-form of any thing in writing, according to which
example it is to be made.

Ichthyologie, (Greek) a Description of
fishes.

Ichthyophagi, a certain people, who feed
altogether upon fish, which they catch with Nets, made of
the bark of a Palm-tree, and build their houses with the
bones of fish.

Icleped  (old word) called, or named.

Icond, (old word) learned.

Iconoclastes, (Greek) a breaker, or
demolisher of images, a
surname attributed to several of the Greek Emperours, who
were zealous against the worshipping of images in
Churches, from Icon an image, and
clazein to break.

Icorven. (old word) cut, or carved.

Ictericall, (Greek) troubled with the
overflowing of the gall, a disease vulgarly called the
Jaunders, or the Jaundice, from the French word
Iaulne, i. e. yellow, because it maketh the skin
to appear of a yellow colour.


I D

Ida, a Mountain of Troas, where
Paris gave Judgement for Venus, about
the golden apple, against
Iuno and Pallas; whence Venus
is called the Idalian Queen.

Idas, the son of Neptune, he seeing
Marpesia, the daughter of Mars, dancing
in a wood, which was sacred to Diana, carried her
away by force, his father Neptune
having given him very swift horses, whereat Mars
was so inraged that he threw himself into the River Lycorma,
but Apollo meeting Idas, and fighting
with him for Marpesia, Iupiter sent
Mercury to part them, and Marpesia being
left to her own freedom, which of them she would choose
made choice of Idas.

Idea, the form of any thing represented to
the imagination.

Identity, (lat.) a made Term, much used in
Logick, and signifying as it were the samenesse of any
thing.

Ides of a moneth, are eight dayes in
every moneth, as in March,
May, July, and October, from the fifteenth to the eight,
being reckoned backward in other moneths from the
thirteenth to the sixth, it comes from the old Latin word
Iduo, to divide.

Idiom, (Greek) the peculiar phrase of any
language.

Idiopathie, (Greek) a peculiar
passion.

Idiosyncrasie, (Greek) the proper, or
natural temper of any thing.

Idiotical, (Greek) private, also
belonging to an Idiote,
i. e. one born of so weak an understanding, that
the King by his prerogative, hath the government and
disposal of his Lands and
substance, and to that purpose, a Writ de Idiota
Inquirendo is to be directed to the Sheriff, to
examin the party suspected of Idiocie, or
Idiotisme.

Idolatrie, (Greek) the worshipping of false
gods, but most properly an offering of Divine honours to
any Idols, pictures, or images.

Idomeneus, the son of Deucalion
Grandchilde of Minos,
King of Creet, he returning
from the Wars of Troy, and going about to offer
up his son, who was the first that met him upon Land,
according to the vow he made to sacrifice whomsoever he
met first, he was driven out of the
Kingdom by his subjects,
and arriving in the Countrey of Calabria, he
built the Citie of Salentinum.

Idoneous, (lat.) fit, convenient.

Idyl, (Greek) a kinde of Eclogue, or
Pastoral Poem, such as was written by Theocritus,
Moschus, and others.


I E

Jearecapstern, an Engin used in great ships
to hoise the yards and sayls withall.

Not found in OED.



Ieat, see Geat.

Iejunation, (lat.) fasting.

Iejunity, (lat.) hungrynesse, also
barrennesse,
shallownesse of judgement, or stile.

Ienticulation, (lat.) a breaking ones
fast.

Ieofail, in Common-law, is when a pleading,
or issue, is so badly pleaded, or joyn'd that it will be
errour if they proceed,
it is contracted from the French words, I'ay failli,
i. e. I have failed.

Ieopardy, danger, or hazard, it comes from
the French words, jeu, i. e. play, and perte,
i. e. losse.

Ieremie, a proper name, signifying in
Hebrew, High of the Lord.

Iesuati, an order of Monks, so called from
their having the name of Jesus often in their mouths,
they were begun at Senæ, in the



year 1365. by Francis Vincent, and John
Columbanus.


Jesuites, those of the Society of
Jesu, a certain religious Order instituted by St.
Ignatius Loyola, they had to the three vows of
Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience,
the vow of Mission annexed, which bound them to go
whithersoever the Roman Bishop should send them for the
propagation of the
Faith, and to execute whatsoever he should command
them.

Jesus Colledge, a Colledge in
Oxford, built not long since by Hugh
Price Doctor of the Laws.

Jet, (old word) a device.

Jetson, the same as
Flotson.

Jews-eares, a kind of mushrome or
excrescence about the
root of the Elder-tree.

Jewsstone, a kind of stone called also a
Marchesite.


I F

Ifere, (old word) together.

Ifretten, (old word) devoured.


I G

Ignaro, (Ital.) a foolish ignorant
fellow.

Ignifluous, (lat.) running or flowing with
fire.

Ignify, (lat.) to set on fire, to cause to
burn.

Ignipotent, (lat.) powerful in fire.

Ignis fatuus, (lat.) a kind of slight exhalation
set on fire in the night time, which ofttimes causeth men
to wander out of their way. It is metaphorically taken for
some trivial humour or phancy, wherewith
men of shallow understandings are apt to be
seduced.

Ignition, (lat.) a setting on fire.

† Ignivomus, (lat.) fire spitting, or
vomiting out flames of
fire, an Epithet proper to
Aetna, and some other mountains of the like
nature.

Ignoble, (lat.) of an obscure birth, or of
a base spirit.

Ignominious, (lat.) dishonourable, full of
shame or reproach.

Ignoramus, is a word used by the grand
Inquest empanelled in the inquisition of causes criminal
and publick, when they mislike their evidence as
defective, or too weak to make good the presentment, which
word being written upon the Bill, all farther inquiry upon
that party is stopped. It is also taken substantively for
a foolish and ignorant person.

† Ignoscible, (lat.) fit to be
pardoned or forgiven.

J H S, a certain character whereby hath
anciently been expressed Jesus, the proper name
of our Saviour, the middle letter being taken for a Greek
E, but more likely the three initial letters of these
words Jesus Hominum Salvator, i. Jesus the
Saviour of man, have been commonly
used for brevities sake.


I K

Ikenild street, one of the 4 famous ways,
that the Romans anciently made in
England: It
taketh its name from the Iceni, (so the people
inhabiting Norfolk, Suffolk, and
Cambridgeshire, are called) the other three wayes
were termed Foss, Erminstreet, and
Watlingstreet.


I L

Ilcester, contracted from
Ivelcester, a Town in Somersetshire, it
was assaulted by Robert Mowbray, when the Nobles
of England conspired against King William
Rufus, to set up his
brother Robert Duke of Normandy in the
Royal Throne.

Ilia, the daughter of Numitor,
King of the Albanes, who by her Uncle
Amulius was made a Vestal, but being got with
child, she brought forth twins, Romulus and
Remus, of whom Mars was reported to have
been the father.

Iliades, (Greek) the Title of a famous
ancient Poem writ by Homer concerning the
destruction of Troy, which was formerly called
Ilium, from Ilus one of the Kings
thereof, who inlarged it, after it had been built by
Dardanus the son of Jupiter.

Iliacal, (Greek) belonging to the
Ilia or small guts.

Iliac passion, a certain dangerous disease
caused by the wind getting into those guts.

Ilioneus, the son of Phorbas a
Trojan, he went with Aeneas into
Italy, and being famous
for his Eloquence, was sent on all his Embassages.

Illaborate, (lat.) unlaboured, or done
without paines.

† Illachrymable, (lat.) pittilesse,
[also unpittied.



Illaqueation, (lat.) an entangling or
ensnaring.


Illation, (lat.) a conclusion or
inference.

† Illatration, (lat.) a barking at
any one.

† Illecebrous, (lat.) alluring,
charming, or inticing.

Illegitimate, (lat.) Bastard of a base
birth, unlawfully begotten.

Illepid, (lat.) dull and unpleasant in
conversation.

Illiberal, (lat.) niggardly, without
generosity.

Illicite, (lat.) unwarrantable, or
unlawful.

† Illigation, (lat.) a binding or
wrapping within.

Illimitate, (lat.) unbounded, having no
limits or bounds.

Illiterate, (lat.) unlearned.

† Illucidation, (lat.) a giving
light, also an explaining or making clear.

Illumination, (lat.) the same.

Illusion, (lat.) a deceiving, a
mocking.

Illustration, (lat.) a making cleer, a
setting forth.

Illustrious, (lat.) Noble, Famous,
Renowned.

Ilus, a Trojan, who when the
Temple of Pallas was burning, ran into the midst
of the flames and recovered the Palladium, which
because no mortal eye was permitted
to behold, he was strook blind, but afterwards the
Goddesse being appeased, his sight was restored.

Illyricum, a Country of Europe, so
called from Illirius the son of Polyphemus; it is
now known by the name of Slavonia.


I M

Imagery, (French) painted or carved work of
Images.

Imagination, (lat.) a feigning or
phancying, also the
faculty it self likewise called
the Phancy.

Imaus, a great mountain dividing
Scythia, into two
parts, whereof one part is called Scythia within
Imaus, and the other Scythia without
Imaus.

Imbargo, (Span.) a word used among Merchants, signifying an arrest
or stop of ships or merchandizes upon any
occasion.

Imbarke, (Ital.) to go aboard a ship, a
term used in Navigation.

Imbecillity, (lat.) weakness.

† Imbellick, (lat.) unwarlick,
cowardly.

Imbellish, (French) to
adorn, to beautifie.

† Imberbirk, (lat.) without a beard,
beardless.

Imber-week, see Ember.

Imbibition, (lat.) a greedy receiving or
drinking in of any liquid substance.

Imborduring, a term in Heraldry, when the
field and circumference of the field are both of one
mettal, colour, or fur.

Imbossed work, from the Dutch word
Inbossieren, to carve or grave, is work made with
bunches or knobs in stone or mettall.

Imbossement, the manner of that
work.

Imbrication, (lat.) a making square, or
bending like a gutter-tile, also a covering with tile,
from Imbrex, a gutter-tile.

Imbrocado, (Spanish) cloth of Gold or
Silver.

Imbroyle, (French) to put into a
combustion, to set
together by the eares.

Imbuition, (lat.) a thorough moistning,
also a seasoning, also a staining; whence cometh our word
Embrue.

Imitation, (lat.) a following or doing like
another.

Immaculate, (lat.) unspotted,
undefiled.

Immanity, (lat.) salvagenesse, wildness,
cruelty; Also such a hugenesse as renders a thing
unmanageable.

Immansuete, (lat.) untractable,
untame.

† Immarcescence, (lat.) unfadingness,
incorruptibleness; hence the participial
Immarcessible.

Immaturity, (lat.) unripenesse.

Immediate, (lat.) next, or presently
following.

Immedicable, (lat.) unhealable,
incureable.

† Immemorable, (lat.) unworthy of
mention, unremarkeable.

Immensity, (lat.) unmeasurableness,
hugeness, exceeding largenesse.

Immersion, (lat.) a dipping, ducking, or
plunging in.

† Immigration, (lat.) a going to
dwell, a passing into.

Imminent, (lat.) ready to fall, hanging
over.

† Imminution, (lat.) a diminishing,
or lessning.

Immission, (lat.) a putting in, a planting
into.

Immobility, (lat.) unmoveableness,



a being not to be removed.


Immoderate, (lat.) unmeasurable,
intemperate.

Immolation, (lat.) an offering up to God, a
sacrificing.

Immorigerous, (lat.) rude, uncivil,
disobedient.

Immortality, (lat.) a living for ever,
everlastingness.

Immortalize, (lat.) to make
immortal.

Immunity, (lat.) exemption from any office,
freedom, priviledge.

Immure, (lat.) to inclose, to shut up
between two walls.

Immutability, (lat.) constancy,
unchangeableness.

† Impacted, (lat.) driven in.

Impaire, see Empaire.

Impale, (Ital.) to spit upon a stake;
also to crown or adorn; also
to fence about with pales: It is a term sometimes used in
Heraldry.

Imparity, or Imparility, (lat.)
inequality,
unevenness.

Imparlance, see Emparlance.

Impassible, (lat.) not moved with any
affection, but more especially, cold in the passion of
love. Cleop.

Impe, a term in Falconry, signifieth to
insert a feather into the wing of a Hawk, instead of one
which was broken. It comes from the Saxon word
imp or himp, i. to graff or inoculate,
and is metaphorically taken for to fill up any vacancies.
It is taken also for a kind of graffing used by
Gardeners.

Impeach, or appeach, (French.) to
hinder; also to accuse one
as guilty of the same crime whereof he which impeacheth is
accused; it cometh originally from the Latin word
impedire.

Impeachment of waste, in Common Law,
is a restraint from
committing of waste upon
Lands or Tenements.

† Impeccability, (lat.) an
impossibility of sinning or offending; it is a term proper
to Scool-Divinity.

† Impedition, or Impediment, 
(lat.) a hindering.

Impel, (lat.) to thrust on.

Impendent, (lat.) hanging over head,
also ready to fall
upon.

Impenetrable, (lat.) unpierceable, not to
be pierced.

Impenitent, (lat.) unrepentant, not
repenting.

† Impennous, (lat.) having no feathers.

Imperative Mood, in Grammar, is that Mood
which implyeth a commanding.

Imperceptible, (lat.) not to be taken
notice of, unperceiveable.

Imperial, (lat.) belonging to an
Imperatour, i. e. a Commander or Emperour.

† Imperil, (from the Lat.
periculum) to bring into danger.

Imperious, (lat.) given to domineer or
insult, of a commanding spirit.

† Imperforable, (lat.) not to be
bored thorough, a Decompositum, or word
compounded of two
præpositions and a verb.

Impersonal, (lat.) a term used in
Gramar, and signifieth
that word whether pronoun
or verb which hath but one termination
for all the three persons, or at least which wanteth a
termination for one of them.

Impertinence, (lat.) a thing not
belonging to the
purpose.

† Impervestigable, (lat.) not to be
found out by strict inquiry or search.

Impervious, (lat.) through which there is
no passage.

Impetiginous, (lat.) scabby, or troubled
with an itching distemper.

Impetrate, (lat.) to obtain by earnest
request or intreaty, whence the participial
Impetrable.

Impetuosity, (lat.) a driving forward with
great force and violence.

† Impiation, (lat.) a
defiling.

Impiety, (lat.) wickednesse, a being void
of piety.

† Impignoration, (lat.) a putting to
pawn.

† Impigrity, (lat.) a being free from
sloth; quicknesse, activity.

† Impinge, (lat.) to run against any
thing, also to drive fast into, as a naile
into a board; whence the
Participle Impacted,
above mentioned.

† Impinguation, (lat.) a fatning, or
making fat.

Implacability, (lat.) an
unreconcileablenesse,
a disposition not to be appeased.

Implantation, (lat.) a planting or
fastning into.

Implead, in Common Law, is to sue or
commence a suit.

Implement, (lat.) a filling up of any
vacancy, also things
necessary about a house, or belonging to a trade, are
called Implements.

Implication, (lat.) a folding or
wrapping within, an
entangling, also a



necessary consequence, and in this last sence we use the
word to imply, which is hence derived.


Implicite, (lat.) folded, or intangled
together, also implicite faith, is taken in a translate
sence, for such a belief as is altogether
upheld by the judgement, and authority of a great company
agreeing together.

Imploration, (lat.) an humble
petitioning, a
desiring any thing with great submission.

† Implume, (lat.) bare, without
feathers.

Impolite, (lat.) rough, and
unpolish't.

Imporcation, (lat.) a making a Balk, or
ridge in the ploughing of land.

Imporous, (lat.) having no pores,
a word proper onely to Philosophy.

Importance, (French) moment, weight
consequence, a carrying in it some great matter from the
Latin words, in the preposition,
and portare to carry.

Importunate, (lat.) troublesome, or
wearying with too often, or unseasonable requests.

Imposition, (lat.) an imposing, or
laying a strict injunction,
also the same as Impost

Imposititious names, (latin) original
names.

Impositour, (lat.) one that belongeth to a
Printing-house, and imposeth the pages into a form for the
presse.

Impossibility, (lat.) that which cannot be
done.

Impost, (French) a tribute, or tax, but
more especially we use it for the tax
received by the Prince
for such merchandizes
as are brought into any haven from other Nations, whereas
Custome is for wares shipped out of the land.

Impostour, (lat.) a seller of false wares,
also any kinde of deceiver, or jugler.

Impostume, a word commonly, but
corruptly used for
Aposteme, (Greek) which is a gathering together of evil
humours into any one part of the body.

Impotency, (lat.) an unablenesse, or want
of strength, it is many times taken for an
unaptnesse to generation.

Impoundage, a confining, or putting into a
pound.

Impregnation, (lat.) a making
fruitfull, a filling,
or causing to swell.

Imprecation, (lat.) a cursing, or calling
down some mischief upon anothers head.

Impregnable, (lat.) not to be won, or taken
by force.

Imprese, the same as devise, it cometh from
the Italian word Imprendere, to
undertake.

Impression, (lat.) an imprinting,
stamping, or making a
mark.

Imprest money, is money paid to
Souldiers before
hand.

† Imprimings, beginnings, from the
Latin Imprimis, i. e. first of all, a word used
in the beginnings of Inventories, or
Catalogues of goods.

Improbation, (lat.) a disallowing, or not
approving.

Improbability, (lat.) a matter which can
not be proved, an unlikelinesse.

Improbity, (lat.) dishonesty,
wickednesse.

† Improcerity, (lat.) a lownesse,
want of talnesse, or stature.

† Improcreability, (lat.) a
barrennesse, or unaptnesse to procreate.

† Improperation, (lat.) a making
haste, also an upbraiding any one with a fault.

Impropriation, (lat.) see appropriation.

Improvidence, (lat.) carelesensse, or
forgetfulnesse to provide, want of
foresight.

Improvement, an advancing of profits, a
thriving, a benefiting in any kind of
profession.

Imprudence, (lat.) want of discretion, or
understanding.

Impudence, (lat.) overboldnesse,
shamelesnesse.

Impugnation, (lat.) a contradicting, or
resisting.

Impuissance, (French) weaknesse,
distresse, want of
outward supports.

Impulsion, (lat.) a driving forward, a
thrusting on, also a constraining.

Impunity, (lat.) a going unpunished, an
exemption from punishment.

Impurity, (lat.) uncleannesse.

Imputation, (lat.) a laying to ones
charge.

Imputrescence, (lat.) a keeping from
putrefaction, or
rotting an uncorruptiblenesse.


I N

Inaccessible, (lat.) not to be come
at.

Inachus, the most ancient King of the
Argives, the son of Oceanus and
Thetys and the brother of Aesopus,
concerning his daughter Jo, see beneath in
Jo, from this



King Inachus the chief River of Argia
took its denomination.


Inaffability, (lat.) discurtesie,
unpleasantnesse in
conversation.

Inaffectation, (lat.) carelesseness,
freeness from
vain-glory.

Inambulation, (lat.) a walking from place
to place.

Inamiable, (lat.) unlovely,
unpleasant.

† Inamissible, (lat.) not to be
lost.

Inamorato, (Ital.) a lover.

† Inaniloquution, (lat.) an
idle or vain
speaking, from inanis, empty, and loqui,
to speak.

Inanimate, (lat.) having no life,
without a soul.

Inanity, (lat.) emptiness, or a being void
of air, or any other body. It is a Philosophical term used
by Dr. Charlton.

Inarable, (lat.) not to be plonghed.

† Inargentation, (lat.) a silvering
over, a covering with silver.

Inaudible, (lat.) not to be heard.

Inauguration, (lat.) an asking counsel of
Augures or Soothsayers, also the
conferring of honours
or preferment upon any one, also a consecrating.

Inaurated, (lat.) covered with Gold, gilded
over.

Inauspicious, (lat.) unlucky,
ill-boding.

Inborow, and Outborow, in ancient
times, was the office of him that was to allow free
liberty of Ingress and Egress to those that travelled
between the two Realmes of England and
Scotland. This office belonged
in King Henry the thirds time, to
Patrick Earle of Dunbar.

Incalescence, (lat.) a growing warm or
lusty, a taking heat.

Incandescence, (lat.) a being inflamed with
wroth, a growing angry.

Incanescence, (lat.) a growing gray-headed,
a waxing hoary.

Incantation, (lat.) an inchanting or
charming.

Incapacity, (lat.) an uncapableness, or
being unfit.

Incarceration, (lat.) a putting in
prison.

Incarnadin colour, (French) a flesh
colour, or the colour of a
Damask Rose.

Incarnation, (lat.) a making flesh to grow,
or a being made of flesh.

Incastellated, (French)
narrow-heeled.

Incendiary, (lat.) one that puts things
into a flame or combustion, a sower of
division or strife.

Incense, (lat.) to inflame or stir up
anger.

Incensory, (French) a censing-pan,
or Church-vessel, wherein they use to burn
incense, being a kind of rich Perfume or Gum, distilling
from a Tree of the same name, and is also called
Frankincense.

Incentive, (lat.) a stirring up, or
provokement, a motive.

Incentor, (lat.) the same as
Incendiary, also Incentor, Accentor, and
Succentor, are three sorts of Singers in parts.

Inception, (lat.) a beginning or
undertaking of any
businesse: whence Inceptour,
he that hath newly taken his degree
in the University.

Incern, (lat.) to sift, to examine
strictly.

Incessant, (lat.) continual, without
ceasing.

Incestuous, (lat.) unchast, committing
incest, which is an untying of the Virgin Zone, or Cestus;
but it is commonly taken for a defiling one that is near
in blood or kindred.

Inchoation, (lat.) a beginning of any
work.

Incident, (lat.) hapning to, or falling out
of necessity: It is also substantively taken in Common
Law, for a thing necessarily
depending upon another, as more principal; as a
Court-Baron is so incident
to a Manor that it cannot be separated.

Incineration, (lat.) a reducing to ashes or
cinders.

Incision, (lat.) a cutting deep into any
thing, a making a gash.

Incisure, (lat.) the cut or gash it
self.

Incitation, (lat.) a stirring up, or
provoking.

Inclamitation, (lat.) an often calling
upon.

Inclemency, (lat.) rigour, sharpness, a
being without pitty or compassion.

Inclination, (lat.) a bending or leaning
toward, a disposition to any thing. It is also taken in an
amorous sense. Artam.

Inclusion, (lat.) an inclosing, a shutting
in.

Inclusive, (lat.) containing.

Incoacted, (lat.) uncompelled.

Incogitancy, (lat.) a not thinking or
minding, rashnesse, inconsiderateness.

† Incohible, (lat.) unrestrainable,
not to be restrained.

Incolumity, (lat.) a being free from
danger, safeness.



Incomity, (lat.) unsociableness, want of
civility in conversation.


Incommensurable, (lat.) holding not the
same proportion, or not to be measured with another
thing.

Incommodious, (lat.) unprofitable, or
unfit.

Incommunicable, (lat.) not to be made
common or imparted to another.

Incompact, (lat.) not close fastned or
joyned together.

Incomparable, (lat.) without compare, not
to be compared with.

Incompatible, (lat.) not agreeing one with
another, not induring to be joyned together.

Incompensable, (lat.) uncapable of
being recompenced.

Incompossible, (lat.) affirming what
another denies. A term
proper onely to Logick.

Incomprehensible, (lat.) not to be taken
hold of, not to be conceived by the mind.

Inconcinnity, (lat.) ungracefulness, a
being ill disposed, or placed out of
order.

Incongealable, (lat.) not to be congealed
or frozen.

Incongruity, (lat.) a disagreeableness, an
unfitness.

Inconsideration, (lat.) rashness,
unadvisedness.

Inconsolable, (lat.) not to be cheared or
comforted.

Inconstancy, (lat.) unstableness, fickleness.

Incontinency, (lat.) a not abstaining from
unlawful desires.

Incorporation, (lat.) a mixing together
into one body or substance.

Incorporeal, (lat.) being bodiless or
without a body.

Incorrigibility, (lat.) a being past
correction.

Incorruptible, (lat.) never consuming or
decaying, free from corruption.

Incrassation, (lat.) a thickning, a
making gross.

Increate, (lat.) not made,
uncreated.

Incredibility, (lat.) a being not to be
believed.

Incredulity, (lat.) a not believing, a want
of belief.

Increment, (lat.) an increasing, or growing
big.

Increpation, (lat.) a chiding, or finding
fault with.

Incressant, resembling the Moon not come to
the full, a term in Heraldry.

Incrustation, (lat.) a making or
becomeing hard on the
outside like a crust, a rough-casting, or
pargetting.

Incubation, (lat.) a lying down, a sitting
over, or brooding.

Incubus, (lat.) a certain disease called
the night-mare, which is caused by the ascending of raw
humours up into the brain, and obstructing the animal
spirits; it oppresseth people in their sleep, and causeth
them to imagin that some great weight is lying upon them.
There is also mention made in some Stories of certain
spirits, that having taken upon them
humane shapes, have mixed
in carnal copulation
with mortal persons, the male spirit is called
Incubus, the female Succubus.

Inculcation, (lat.) an often repeating and
insisting upon the same thing, that it may the more deeply
be imprinted in ones mind.

Inculpable, (lat.) unreproveable, not to be
blamed.

Incumbent, (lat.) lying or leaning upon,
also it is substantively taken for him that is preferred
to any spiritual living, and is in possession of it.

Incumbrance, see Encumbrance.

Incurable, (lat.) not to be cured of any
disease or malady.

Incur, (lat.) to run upon.

Incursion, (lat.) a running into, a
hitting against, also a
making an inroad.

Incurvation, (lat.) a crooking or
bending.

Incussion, (lat.) a violent shaking, or
dashing against any thing.

† Incusation, (lat) a blaming or
accusing.

Indacus, a servant to the Emperour
Leo, so swift of foot, that he could outrun any horse.

Indagation, (lat.) a diligent
searching.

Inde, (French) a certain Mineral
wherwith they use to
paint or die of a blew colour, called also Indico, because
it is brought out of India. It is of two sorts,
English Inde, and Inde Baunias.

Indecent, (lat.) unbecoming,
unfitting.

Indeclinable, (lat.) not to be declined, or
shun'd, also in Grammar that Noun is said to be
indeclinable, which varies not Cases.

Indecorum, (lat.) an unseemlinesse, an
unhandsome carriage.



Indefatigable, (lat.) not to be wearied or
tired.


Indefinite, (lat.) not limited, undefined,
undetermined.

Indelible, (lat.) not to be cancelled,
razed or blotted out.

Indemnity, (lat.) a freeness from
damage, loss, or
danger.

Indenture, a writing containing some
contract between two or more, (from the French word
Endenter) it being indented or jagged on the
top.

Independency, (lat.) a not depending upon
another, absoluteness of ones self; but it is commonly
taken for that profession
or sect of men who manage all things belonging to
Church-discipline within their own Congregations, and
allow not of a dependance upon a national Church.

Indeprecable, (lat.) not to be
perswaded or
intreated.

Indesinent, (lat.) incessant, without
ceasing.

Indeterminate, (lat.) not determined or
decided, but left indifferent.

Index, (lat.) a token or mark to shew or
direct, the Table of a Book.

India, a famous and vast Country, lying
very far toward the East, and extreamly abounding in
riches. It is denominated from the River Indus.
America or the New World is also called the West
Indies.

Indian mouse, a little beast called in
Greek Ichneumon, which creeping in at the mouths
of Crocodiles, eates up their entrailes, and kills
them.

Indication, (lat.) a shewing or making
manifest; also a term in Physick,
signifying the right
way which prescribeth what is to be done in relation to
the restoring of health.

Indicative mood, in Grammar is that mood
which barely affirms and no more.

Indicavit, the name of a writ, by which the
patron of a Church may remove a suit commenced against his
Clerk, from the Court Christian, to the Kings Court.

Indico, the same as Inde.

Indiction, (lat.) a certain computation of
time, which came in place of the
Olympiads, every
Indiction is the space of 15 years, by which compute all
publick writings were
dated at Rome; it signifieth
also a tribute, or tax.

Indifference, (lat.) a carelesse, general,
and unconcerned affection. Cassandra.

Indigence, (lat.) need, penurie, or
want.

Indigenous, (lat.) an indweller, or native
of any Country.

Indigestion, (lat.) cruditie, want of
digestion or concoction in the stomack.

Indigitation, (lat.) a pointing at, or
shewing with the finger.

Indignation, (lat.) a being angry
with.

Indignity, (lat.) unworthiness, unworthy
dealing.

† Indiligence, (lat.) want of
diligence, sloth.

Indiscretion, (lat.) want of discretion or
prudence.

Indiscriminate, (lat.) where no
separaration or
difference is made.

Indissoluble, (lat.) not to be dissolved,
untied, or taken asunder.

Indistinct, (lat.) not distinguisht or
known one from another.

Inditement, see Enditement.

† Inditiation, (lat.) a giving a mark
or sign.

Individual, (lat.) not to be divided or
separated, an individual, or individuum in Philosophy is
taken for a small particle or body, so minute, that it
cannot be divided, and is by some called an Atome: also in
Logick it signifies that which cannot be divided into more
of the same name or nature, and is by some called
Singulare.

Indivisible, (lat.) not to be
divided.

Indivisum, (lat.) in Common-law, is that
which two hold in common without partion or
dividing.

Indocility, or Indocibility,
(lat.) an unaptnesse to
be taught or learn.

Indoctrination, (lat.) an instructing or
teaching.

Indolency, (lat.) a being without
pain.

Indomable, (lat.) not to be tam'd.

Indorcement, in Common-law is a
condition written upon
the other side of an obligation or conveyance, from the
Italian word Endossare.

Indubitation, (lat.) a not doubting, a yielding for certain.

Inducement, (French) a perswasion, or
drawing on.

Induciary, (lat.) belonging to a league or
truce.

Induction, (lat.) a leading into, a
drawing on or inticing,
also in Logick, it is taken
for a kind of argumentation or Imperfect
Syllogisme, wherein the species is



collected out of the Individuals, the
Genus out of the species,
and the whole out of the parts.


† Indulcation, or Indulciation, 
(lat.) a sweetning, a making
sweet.

Indulgence, (lat.) a gentlenesse in
suffering, a favouring,
a pardoning; it is also taken for the form of some special
act of grace, granted by the Pope to divers persons, upon
some special occasions, which some call an
Indult.

† Indument, (lat.) a cloathing, or
garment.

Induration, (lat.) a making hard.

† Indusiated, (lat.) cloathed with a
garment called Indusium, i. e. a shirt or
smock.

Industrie, (lat.) pains, labour, diligence:
some derive it from induere and
struere:
it being as Minshew saith, as it were a
certain structure,
wherewith the mind is indued.

Inebriation, (lat.) a making drunk.

Ineched, (old word) put in.

Ineffable, (lat.) unspeakable, not to be
uttered.

† Ineffugible, (lat.) unavoidable,
not to be shunned.

Inelaborate, (lat.) not labourd, or
taken pains for.

Ineluctable, (lat.) not to be
overcome by wrestling, or
taking great pains.

Innerrable, (lat.) not to be declared or
related.

Ineptitude, (lat.) unaptnesse, also
fondnesse.
vainnesse.

Inequality, (lat.) unequalnesse,
unevennesse.

Inequitable, (lat.) not to be rid
through.

† Inertitude, (lat.) lazinesse,
slothfulnesse.

Inescutcheon, a term in Heraldry, being an
Ordinary formed of a threefold line, representing the
shape of the Escutcheon.

Inestimable, or Inæstimable,
(lat.) which cannot be rated, of too high a price to be
valued.

Inevitable, (lat.) not to be shuned or
avoided.

Inexaturated, (lat.) not to be filled or
satisfied, of an unsatiable appetite.

Inexhaustible, or Inexhaurible,
(lat.) not to be drawn out or emptied.

Inexorable, (lat.) not to be perswaded or
intreated.

Inexpiable, (lat.) not to be purged or
cleansed from sin, never to be satisfied for.

Inexpleble, (lat.) not to be filled.

Inexplicable, (lat.) not to be unfolded or
explained.

Inexpugnable, (lat.) not to be taken or won
by force.

Inextinguible, (lat.) not to be put out or
quenched.

Inextirpable, (lat.) not to be rooted out,
whose stock or linage can never be utterly
destroyed.

Inextricable, (lat.) not to be wound out,
or disentangled.

Inexuperable, (lat.) not to be overcome, or
surpassed.

Infallible, (lat.) not to be deceaved,
never failing.

Infancie, (lat.) the first age of man,
which is from the first year till the
seventh.

Infandous, (lat.) not to be spoken,
monstrously wicked and hainous.

Infangtheft, a word used in the practic of
Scotland, signifying a liberty to sit and decide
upon any theft committed within a mans own jurisdiction,
by his own servant;
Out-fangtheft being the like liberty, when a
theft is committed by a stranger.

See OED "infangthief" (an error for which).



Infantes and Infantas of
Spain, all the Sons and Daughters of the King of
Spain, are so called, τατ έξοχὺν, or by
way of eminence, except the Eldest, who are
called Principe,
and Princesa.

Infanterie, (Ital.) the Foot Souldierie of
an army.

Infanticide, (lat.)
Infant-killing, a murdering
of Children or Infants.

Infatigable, see Indefatigable.

Infatuation, (lat.) a besoting, a making
foolish.

Infaust, or Infaustous, (lat.)
unluckly, unfortunate.

Infelicity, (lat.) unhappinesse.

To Infeof, a Law Term, to grant in
Fee.

Inferial, (lat.) belonging to
Funeralls.

Inferiour, (lat,) lower, of a meaner
degree.

Inferiour, Planets are those which are
placed below the Globe of the Sun.

Infernal, (lat.) belonging to the deep, or
hell.

To Infer, (lat.) to bring in, to conclude
from something gone before.



Infertil, (lat.) barren, unfruitful.


Infestation, (lat.) a troubling, molesting,
or disturbing.

† Infestive, (lat.) without sport,
joy, or solemnity.

Infibulation, (lat.) a buttoning or
buckling in.

Inficiation, (lat.) a denying.

Infidelity, (lat.) untrustinesse,
unfaithfulnesse.

Infimous, (lat.) lowermost, meanest.

Infinitive, (lat.) having no end or
measure, the Infinitive
Mood in Grammer, is that Mood which hath neither number
nor person, as other moods.

Infirmary, an Hospital or Spittle for sick
folks.

Infirmity, (lat.) weaknesse
indisposednesse.

To Infix, (lat.) to fasten in.

Inflammation, (lat.) an inflaming, a
swelling or burning with heat.

Inflate, (lat.) swelling, or puft up with
wind; hence an inflate expression, is an expression
swelling with big words, but to little purpose.

Inflexible, (lat.) not to be bowed or
bended, and by metaphor unruly: it is also taken in an
amorous sense, when a Lady is not to be moved by the most
earnest importunity of her
servant. Artam.

Infliction, (lat.) a laying a punishment
upon.

Influence, (lat.) a flowing in, also the
power which celestial bodies have over earthly
things.

Influx, (lat.) a flowing in.

Infacundity, (lat.) unfruitfulnesse,
barrennesse.

Information, (lat.) an informing,
telling, or making
known.

Informatus non sum, a formal answer, made
by an Atturny, that is commanded by the Court to say what
he thinks good in defence of his Client, whereby he is
deemed to leave his Client undefended, and so judgement
passeth for the adverse party.

Informers, certain Officers belonging to
the Kings bench, who complain of those that offend against
any penal statutes; they are also called Promoters, and by
the Civilians,
Delatores.

Informity, (lat.) unhandsomenesse,
uglynesse, a being out of shape or form.

Infrangible, (lat.) not to be broken or
discouraged.

Infriction, or Infrication, (lat.)
a rubbing or
chafing in.

To Infringe, (lat.) to break to pieces,
also to indamage or diminish.

Infucation, (lat.) a laying on of drugs, or
artificial colours upon the face.

Infuscation, (lat.) a making dark or
dusky.

Infusion, (lat.) a powring, in, it is used in Physick, for a
steeping of roots or leaves, or any kind of medicine, in
some liquid substance for a certain time, till the
chiefest of their virtue be drawn out.

Ingannation, (Ital.) a deceaving.

Ingemination, (lat.) a doubling, also a
repeating the same word over again.

Ingenerable, (lat.) not to be begotten or
produc't.

Ingeniculation, (lat.) a bending of the
knee, a kneeling.

† Ingeniosity, or Ingenuity, 
(lat.) ingeniousnesse,
wittynesse, also Ingenuity is taken for a free condition
or state of life, also a liberal or free nature.

Ingestion, (lat.) a carrying or
conveying in.

Ingle, see Catamite.

Inglorious, (lat.) without glory,
obscure.

Ingot, a little wedge, or masse, of gold,
from the French word Lingot, because it something
resembleth a tongue.

Ingrailed, from the Latin,
Ingredior, a term in Heraldry, as a bordure
ingrailed, is when the line, of which the bordure is made,
crooks inward toward the field.

Ingrate, (lat.) displeasing, not accepted,
also unthankful, whence Ingratitude,
unthankfulnesse.

Ingredient, (lat.) is taken, in Physick,
for one of the simples, put into a
compounded medecine.

Ingree, (old word) in good part.

Ingression, (lat.) an entring or walking
into, also a beginning,

Ingressu, (lat.) a writ of entrie, whereby
a man seeketh entrie into Lands or
Tenements.

Ingrosser, in Common law signifies one thnt
buys up corn growing, or dead victuall
to sell again.

Ingurgitation, (lat.) a greedy
swallowing, or
gluttonous devouring, as it were a craming a bottomlesse pit.

Ingustable, (lat.) untastable, not to be
tasted.



Inhabitable, (lat.) not to be dwelt in, or
inhabited, but the præposition in, hath not
the same force in the word Inhabitant, this signifying a
dweller, or one that lives in this or that place.


Inhalation, (lat.) a breathing in, a
breathing upon.

Inhesion, or Inhæsion, (lat.) a
sticking close, a cleaving unto.

Inheritance, in Common Law, is a
perpetuitie of lands
or tenements, to a man and his heirs.

Inhibition, (lat.) a forbiding, in Common
law, it is taken, for a writ, forbidding a Judge to
proceed farther in the cause depending
before him, but inhibition is a writ issuing out of a
higher Court, Christian
to an inferiour, whereas prohibition issues out of the
Kings, to a Court Christian,
or to an inferiour temporall Court.

Inhonestation, (lat.) a shaming or
disgracing, a making
dishonest.

Inhospitality, or Inhospitability,
(lat.) a not affording intertainment, a churlishness to
strangers, also an unfitnesse for
intertainment.

Inhumanity, (lat.) cruelty,
barbarousnesse, as
it were a putting off, and devesting
ones self of human nature.

Inhumation, (lat.) a burying, or putting
into the ground.

† Inideous, (lat.) unfit.

Injection, (lat.) a casting in, it
signifieth in Physick,
particularly, a conveying of any liquid substance, into
any part of the body, by glister or Syringe, or the like.

Inimitable, (lat.) not to be followed or
imitated.

Iniquity, (lat.) want of equity,
corruption,
injustice.

Iniswen, the white Island, a name which in
ancient times was attributed to this Island of
Brittain.

Initiation, (lat.) an entrance, or
admittance into any
Faculty or Art.

Injucundity, (lat.) unpleasantnesse.

Injunction, (lat.) an injoyning, or
commandement, as it were a joyning or fastening a command
upon any one, also a decree out of Chancery, to give
possession to the plaintife for want of apparence in the
defendent, or to stay a proceeding in a Court, upon
suggestion made, that the rigour
of the law is against equity.

Injurious, (Lat. from in and
jus) wrongfull,
as it were against right and law.

An Inkling of a matter, a small rumour or
report, as it were a tinckling, or little sound, or, as
others say, from Inclinare, because by it the ear
is somewhat inclined.

Inlagary, in Common Law, is a restitution
or restoring of one outlaw'd, to the
benefit or estate of a
subject; the word Inlawgh signifying in the Saxon
tongue, one that is in franco plegio,
that is, under a certain law; and in Decenna, for till a
man be 12 years of age, he is not accounted under
law.

Inlay, see Marquetry.

Inmates, signify in Common law, those that
are admitted for their mony, to dwel joyntly with another
man in his house, passing in and out by one door, and not
being able to maintain themselves.

Innatable, or Innable, (lat.) not
to be swimed in.

Innate, (lat.) naturally inbred.

Innavigable, (lat.) not to be sailed in,
unpassable for any ship or boat.

Innes of Chancery, eight houses
appointed for young
Students in the elements of law, namely, Thavies
Inne, anciently the mansion house of J.
Thavie, Armourer of London. 2.
Furnivalls Inne, once the mansion of Sr. Rich.
Furnival, afterwards of the Talbots, Earls
of Shrewsbury. 3. Bernards
Inne, once belonging to J. Macworth, Dean of
the Cathedral of Lincoln, and in the holding of
Lionel Bernard. 4. Staple Inne, once
belonging to the English Merchants of the
Staple. 5. Cliffords Inne, once the
dwelling house of Malcolm de hersey, afterwards
of the Cliffords, Earls of Cumberland,
of whom it is now rented. 6. Clements Inne, once
a Messuage belonging to
the Parish Church of St. Clement Danes. 7.
New Inne, once the dwelling house of Sr. J.
Tyncaulxe, it hath been also called our Lady's
Inne. 8. Lyons Inne, once a dwelling house,
known by the name of the Black Lyon.

Innes of Court, 4 houses or Celledges, for
the intertainment of Students of the law, namly, the two
Temples, Inner and Middle, which were anciently the
habitations of the
Templars, or Knights of Jerusalem,
(to which was added the outward Temple, which is now
called Essex House) Lincoln's Inne, built by
Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, for his own
dwelling house, and Grais Inne, anciently the
mannour house of Baron Gray, in the time of
Edward the
third.

Innitent, (lat.) endeavouring,
lean­



ing, or insisting upon.


Innocents day, the 28 of December, wherein
Masse used to be said, for the souls of the Innocent
Children slain by Herod, it is also called
Childermas day.

Innocuous, (lat.) doing no hurt,
harmlesse.

Innominable, (lat.) not to be
named.

Innovation, (lat.) a making new, also a
bringing in of new customs or opinions.

Innoxious, (lat.) safe, dangerless,
wherein there is no
hurt.

Innubilous, (lat.) cloudlesse, not
overcast.

Innuendo, a Law term, used in pleadings, to
declare a thing or person that was
mentioned before
obscurely.

Innumerable, (lat.) not to be
numbred.

Innutrition, (lat.) a nourishing
inwardly.

Ino, the daughter of Cadmus and
Harmonia, and
nurse to Bacchus, she was second wife to
Athamas, King of Thebes, and for causing
Phryxus and Helle, whom he had by his
first wife Nephele,
to be banisht, she was punished by Juno, who
possest her husband, with such a raving madnesse, that he
took her for a lionesse, and forced her with her son
Melicerta, to cast her self into the sea, where,
by the compassion of the gods, they were changed into sea
Deities.

Inobservable, (lat.) not to be observed,
unworthy of observation.

Inocciduous, (lat.) never falling, setting,
or going down.

Inoculation, (lat.) a graffing, or
inserting a bud or
kernel into the bud of another
tree.

Inodoration, (lat.) a making to smell, a
perfuming.

Inopacous, (lat.) not dark, or
shadowed.

Inopinate, (lat.) not thought of, or
expected.

Inoptable, (lat.) not to be wisht.

Inorganical, (lat.) wanting Organs, or
Instruments of motion or operation.

Inquietude, (lat.) restlessenesse, want of
repose, or quiet of minde. Cleop.

Inquiline, (lat.) a native, he that
dweleth where he was born,
from in and Colo. i. to dwel.

Inquination, (lat.) a making foul, a
polluting or defiling.

Inquirendo, an authority given to a
person, to inquire into
something for the Kings advantage.

Inquisition, (lat.) a searching into, or
inquiring after; also the name of a grand councel,
instituted by Ferdinand, the
Catholick King of
Spain, who having subdued
the Empire of the Moors in that
kingdom, ordered, that no
Moors should be suffered to stay in
Spain, but such as should be baptized; and for
inquiry into those matters: this Councel was erected, and
called the Sacred Councel of the inquisition, whereof the
Arch-bishop of Toledo, or the Arch-Bishop of
Sevil was President, assisted by 12 other
Councellours.

Inrolement, a registering or recording any
lawful act in the Roules of the
Chancerie.

Insanity, (lat.) unsoundnesse of body or
mind.

Insative, (lat.) unsown, unplanted,
growing
voluntarily.

Insaturable, (lat.) not to be filled, or
satified.

Inscious, or inscient, (lat.)
unknowing, ignorant.

Inscription, (lat.) a title or name, writ
or engraven over any thing.

Inscrutable, (lat.) not to be found out by
searching, hidden, mysterious.

Insculption, (lat.) a carving, or
engraving.

Insecable, (lat.) not to be cut.

An Insect, (lat.) the smallest sort of
Animal, as a Fly, Bee, or Ant, some think them to be so
called, because they have a kind of division, or section,
between the head and the belly.

Insectation, (lat.) a railing against, as
it were a following and prosecuting with evil
language.

Insectile, (lat.) not to be cut.

Insection, (lat.) a cutting into.

Insemination, (lat.) a sowing into.

Insensate, (lat.) mad, foolish, void of
sense.

Insensible, (lat.) not to be perceived,
also not having any sence, also the same as impassible.
Artam.

Insertion, (lat.) an engraffing, a planting
into.

Insiccation, (lat.) a drying.

Insident, (lat.) sitting upon, also
setling.



Insidiation, (lat.) a laying ambush, a waiting
to ensnare.


Insimulation, (lat.) an accusing.

Insinuation, (lat.) a winding ones self in
by little and little, a getting into favour by degrees, as
it were a going into the bosome.

Insipid, (lat.) having no taste or relish,
unsavory.

Insipience, (lat.) foolishnesse, want of
knowledge or discretion.

Insist, (lat.) to stay upon, to
urge.

Insition, (lat.) a cutting into, a
graffing.

Insolation, (lat.) a laying in the Sun, a
bleaching.

Insolency, (lat.) pride, arrogancy, as it
were an unwonted behaviour, or doing contrary to common
custom.

Insoluble, (lat.) see Indissoluble.

Insomnious, (lat.) wanting sleep, also apt
to dream.

Inspection, (lat.) a looking narrowly
into.

Insperable, (lat.) not to be hoped.

Inspersion, (lat.) a sprinkling
upon.

Inspiration, (lat.) an inspiring or
breathing into.

Inspissation, (lat.) a thickning or
making thick.

Instability, (lat.) unsteadfastness,
inconstancy.

Instancy, (lat.) a being near at hand, also
earnestness or urgency.

Instauration, (lat.) a renewing or
repairing.

Instigation, (lat.) a stirring or pricking
on, a provoking.

Instillation, (lat.) an instilling, or
causing to drop by little
and little.

Instimulation, (lat.) the same as
Instigation.

Instinct, (lat.) a natural inward motion,
or prompting.

Institutes, (lat.) ordinances, precepts, or
commandments, and particularly certain bookes of the Civil
Law, collected by Justinian.

Institution, (lat.) an ordaining or
appointing.

† Insubid, (lat.) hasty, inconsiderate, rash.

Insubria, a Country of Italy,
anciently called Gallia Cisalpina, now
Lumbardy, from the Lumbards, a people of
Pannonia which conquered it.

Insular, (lat.) belonging to an Island, or
Island-like.

Insulsity, (lat.) unsavoriness,
unpleasantness,
also folly, bluntness of wit.

Insultation, (lat.) a leaping on, also a
boasting or insulting.

Insuperable, (lat.) not to be vanquisht or
overcome.

Insupportable, (lat.) not
to be born or indured.

Insurrection, (lat.) a rising
against.

Intabulation, (lat.) a laying on of boards
or planks.

Intactible, (lat.) not to be
touched.

Intakers, a sort of theeves so called,
because they receive such
things as the outparters
bring to them.

Intamination, (lat.) a defiling or
polluting.

Intangible, (lat.) the same as
Intactible.

Integral, whole, in Arithmetick
integral numbers are
opposed to fractions.

Integration, (lat.) a making whole, or
restoring.

Integrity, (lat.) sincerity, uprightness,
as it were soundness, and intireness of mind.

Integument, (lat.) a covering, a garment to
cover with.

Intellectual, (lat.) belonging to the
Intellect, i. e. the faculty or act it self of
understanding.

Intelligence, (lat.) knowledge,
understanding,
wisdom.

Intemperance, (lat.) inordinatness of life,
a want of temperance to contain a mans desires and
lusts.

Intempestivity, (lat.) unseasonableness, a
doing a thing out of due season and order.

Intenebration, (lat.) a darkning or
obscuring.

Inteneration, (lat.) a making tender, a
softning.

Intense, (lat.) stretched to the utmost,
contrary to remisse, as intensely cold, i. cold
in a high degree, remissely cold, i. cold in a
low degree.

Intent, or Intentive, (lat.)
seriously bent upon a business.

Intentation, (lat.) a threatning, as it
were a trying or
indeavouring against.

Intercalation, (lat.) an interserting or putting between; it is
particularly applyed to
the putting in of a day into the moneth of February in
Bissextile or Leap-year.

Intercession, (lat.) a praying or
media­



ting in the behalf of another, as it were a stepping between
to keep off harm or danger.


Intercident, (lat.) falling between as an
intercidental day, an extraordinary
critical day, which being
caused by the violence of
the disease, falls between the ordinary
critical dayes.

Intercision, (lat.) a cutting between or in
the midst.

Interclusion, (lat.) a shutting between, or
a stopping up the passage between one thing and
another.

Intercolumniation, (lat.) the distance 
be­
tween two Columns or Pillars, also some kind of work placed
between them. It is a term used in Architecture.

Intercostal, (lat.) being between the ribs,
as those veins and muscles which run along in those parts,
are called in Anatomy, the intercostal veins and
muscles.

Intercurrent, (lat.) running or passing
between, whence the substantive
intercourse commonly used.

Intercutaneous, (lat.) being between the
skin and the flesh.

Interdict, or Interdiction, (lat.)
a forbidding or
debarring one the use of any thing. In Common and Canon
Law, interdiction is
particularly taken for an Ecclesiastical censure
prohibiting the use of Divine rites to the person
condemned, also such persons whom all men are
forbidden to receive
into their house, are said to be interdicted of fire and
water.

Interduct, (lat.) a leading between, also a
space left between
full periods in writing or
printing.

Interemption, (lat.) a killing or violent
depriving of life.

† Interequitation, (lat.) a riding
between.

Interest, a Verb impersonal in Latin signifieth, it concerns or belongs unto; but we commonly
use it substantively for a concernment, right, or
appertainment, also
usury, the use of money lent, being as it were the right
of him that lends.

Interfaction, (lat.) an interrupting or
disturbing any one by speaking in the midst of their discourse.

Interfection, (lat.) a killing.

Interfectour, an interficient or
destroying Planet, and
which is placed in the eighth house (in a Nativity) either
five degrees before the cusp of the house, or 25 after.
Secondly, the Lord of the eighth house. Thirdly the Planet
that is joyned to the Lord of the eighth house. Fourthly
the Planet that disposeth of the Lord of the eighth house
when he is not therein.

Interfeer, (French) to hit one leg against
another, also to exchange blows.

Interfluent, or Interfluous,
(lat.) flowing between.

Interrogatories, in Common Law, are
questions demanded of witnesses brought in.

Interjacent, (lat.) lying between.

Interjection, (lat.) a casting between: It
is commonly used for one of the eight parts of Speech in
Grammar, expressing some sudden passion of the
mind.

Interim, an Adverb signifying in Latin, in
the mean while; but we commonly use it substantively for
the time passing between.

Interiour, (lat.) inward, being on the
inside.

Interition, (lat.) a perishing or
decaying.

Interloquution, (lat.) a speaking or
discoursing
between.

Interlopers, in Common Law, are those that
without legal authority, intercept the trade of a company,
as it were Interleapers.

Interlucation, (lat.) a letting in of light
between, by the cutting away of boughs, a term in
Gardening.

Interlude, (lat.) a kind of Stage-play,
that which is sung or represented between the several
Acts.

Interlunary, (lat.) belonging to the
Interlunium, or space between the old and new
Moon.

Intermeation, (lat.) a passing
between.

Intermedian, or Intermeate, (lat.)
being in the middle, or
lying between.

Intermeteth, (old word) medleth.

Intermication, (lat.) a shining between, or
in the midst.

Intermission, (lat.) a putting between,
also a deferring or leaving off for a while.

Intermissions, a term in Architecture, the
spaces between the wall and the pillars, or between
pillars and pillars.

Intermixtion, (lat.) a mingling between or
amongst.

Intermural space, (lat.) a space between
two walls.



Internal, (lat.) inward.


Internecion, (lat.) a making a universal
slaughter, or utter destroying.

Internigration, (lat.) a mingling of
black.

Internuntiation, (lat.) a going or
sending of a message
between several parties.

Interpellation, (lat.) an interrupting or
disturbing.

Interplication, (lat.) a folding
between.

Interpolation, (lat.) a fixing or
inserting
between.

Interposition, (lat.) an interposing or
putting between.

Interpretation, (lat.) an interpreting,
expounding, or explaining.

Interpunction, (lat.) a distinguishing by
making points or pricks between.

Interreign, in Latin Interreguum,
the space between the death of one Prince or Ruler, and
the succession or election of another; whence
Interrex, he that ruleth or beareth sway during
that space.

Interrogation, (lat.) an asking or
demanding a
question.

Interruption, (lat.) a troubling or
disturbing any one in
the midst of a businesse.

Interscription, (lat.) an interlining, a
writing between two lines.

Intersecants in Heraldry, are pertransient
lines which crosse one another.

Intersection, (lat.) a cutting in the
midst.

Intersertion, (lat.) a graffing, or putting
in between.

Intersonant, (lat.) sounding between or in
the midst.

Interspersion, (lat.) a sprinkling or
scattering
between.

Interspiration, (lat.) a breathing
between.

Interstitial, (lat.) having an interstice
or space between.

Intertexture, (lat.) a weaving
between.

Interval, (lat.) a distance or space either
of place or time.

Intervenient, (lat.) coming between.

Intervert, (lat.) to turn upside down, also
to beguile, or deceitfully to take
away a thing committed to any
ones trust.

Intervigilation, (lat.) a watching
between whiles.

Intestable, (lat.) uncapable by the Law to
make any Will, or be taken for a
witnesse.

Intestine, (lat.) inward, lying within the
entrailes.

Inthronization, (lat.) a placing upon a
Throne or Seat of Majesty.

Intimation, (lat.) a signifying, or
secret declaring.

Intimidation, (lat.) a making timorous or
fearful.

Intinction, (lat.) a dying, a dipping
into any coloured
liquor.

Intire, (lat.) whole or sound.

Intitulation, (lat.) an intiteling, an
adding a title unto any
thing.

Intollerable, (lat.) not to be born, or
endured.

Intonation, (lat.) a thundering or
making a terrible
noise.

Intoxication, (lat.) a poisoning or
envenoming.

Intractable, (lat.) not to be managed or
trained, unmanageable.

Intrado, (Spanish) an entrance, also a
yearly revenue.

Intraneous, (lat.) inward.

Intricacy, or Intrique, (lat. and
Fr.) an intanglednesse, incumbrance, or winding like a
labyrinth.

Intrinsecal, (lat.) inward or
secret.

Introduction, (lat.) a leading in, also a
beginning or preface to any discourse.

Introgression, (lat.) a going in.

Intromission, (lat.) a sending
inward.

† Introruption, (lat.) a breaking in,
a rushing in by violence.

† Introversion, (lat.) a turning
upside down, also a turning ones thoughts
within, a looking inward a word
used in practical Divinity.

Intrusion, (lat.) a wrongful or
unmannerly thrusting
in.

Intuition, (lat.) a clear seeing into, a
distinct beholding.

Intumescence, (lat.) a swelling, or rising
up into a heap.

Intumulation, (lat.) a throwing a heap
upon, a burying.

Invagination, (lat.) a putting into a
sheath or scabbard.

Invalid, (lat.) of no force, strength, or
value.

Invasion, (lat.) an assailing, or setting
upon anothers right or dominions.

Invecked, from the Latin Invehere,
a term in Blazon, as a bordure Invecked, is when the
line of which the bordure is made inverts its points not
toward the field, but into it self.



Invection, (lat.) a carrying in, or
against.


Invective, (lat.) railing, sharp, bitter in
expressions, as it were violently carried on against any
one.

Inveigle, to allure, or intice, from the
Dutch word avanglen, i. to cast alluring
eyes.

Invellop, see Envelope.

Inventory, (lat.) a certain writing
wherein is contained a
Catalogue, or reckoning up of the Goods & Chattels of
a deceased party, which are to be prized, or valued by
sufficient men, and exhibited to the Ordinary.

Inversion, (lat.) a turning the inside out,
a changing the order of things, or words.

Invest, (lat.) to give possession, which
used to be done by delivering the Tenant a rod, and
administring him an Oath, also to instal with any honour,
or dignity.

Investigation, (lat.) a making diligent
search, or inquiry.

Investiture, (lat.) a giving possession, an
endowing with honour.

Inveterate, (lat.) grown old, rooted, and
setled by long custome.

Invigilation, (lat.) a carefull watching, a
diligent over-seeing.

Invigorate, to inspire vigour, life, and
spirit.

Invincible, (lat.) not to be conquered, or
overcome.

Inviolable, (lat.) not to be violated, or
broken.

Inviron, (French) to encompasse.

Invisible, (lat.) not to be seen, or
discerned.

Invitation, (lat.) an inviting, bidding, or
calling unto.

Inumbration, (lat.) a casting a shadow
upon.

Inunction, (lat.) an anointing
thoroughly.

Inundation, (lat.) an overflowing with
water.

Invocation, (lat.) an invoking, or
calling upon.

Involation, (lat.) a flying into, or a
flying upon.

Involve, (lat.) to wrap, or fold in, to
entangle, or overwhelm.

Involuntarie, (lat.) unwilling.

Inurbanitie, (lat.) incivility, want of
courtesie, or affability.

Inure, or Enure, to accustome,
also in Common-law, it signifieth to take effect, or be
available.

Inusitate, (lat.) not accustomed,
unwonted.

Inutility, (lat.) unprofitablenesse.

Invulnerable, (lat.) not to be
wounded.


J O

Io, the daughter of Inachus, King
of the Argives, she being beloved of
Jupiter was transformed into a Cow, that she
might not be known of Juno, who neverthelesse
suspecting, caused her to be watch't by Argus,
who had many eyes, but Argus
being slain by Mercury,
Juno sent a Gadfly to sting her, which made her run
up and down restlesse, till at length she arrived at
Aegypt, where being restored to her former shape,
she was married to Osiris, and called
Isis.

Joab, (Hebr.) Fatherhood.

Joachim, an Hebrew proper name,
signifying preparation
of the Lord.

Joan, a proper name of women,
answerable to that of John in men, it was the name of several great
Queens, as those of Aragon and
Naples.

Joannitiques, a certain order of Monks,
that wear the figure of a Chalice upon their
breasts.

Job, (Hebr.) sighing, or sorrowing.

Joblin, (French) a sot, or gull.

Not found in OED.



Jocasta, the daughter of Creon,
King of Thebes, and the wife of Laius,
after whose death she was married unknowingly to her son
Oedipus, to whom she brought forth
Eteocles and Polynices, who slaying one
another in a contest about the Kingdom,
she killed her self for grief.

Joculatory, or Jocous, (lat.)
jesting, sportive, done or spoken in jest.

Jocund, in (Latin Jucundus)
chearfull, pleasant, or joyfull, from Jocus, i. a jest.

John, a proper name, signifying in
Hebrew gracious, there have
been divers great Kings, and other famous men of this
name, as Kings of England, Scotland, Spain, and
Portugal, 23 Popes of Rome, also
Joannes Hircanus, a famous Captain of the
Jews, who conquered Samaria,
Idumæa, and a great
part of Syria; Joannes Acutus, or
Hackwood, an English-man, who performed several
great martial exploits in Italy, under the Dukes
of Milain; Joannes
Guttenberg, a German, who invented the Art of
printing, this name was anciently
pronounced Juon.

Joinder, in Common-law, is the
coup­



ling of two in a suite one against another.


Joyning-issue, a Term in Common-law, the
referring a point of a matter depending
in suite, to the tryal of the Jury.

Joynt-Tenants, in Common-law, are those
that hold Lands, or Tenements by one Title, or without
partition.

Joynture, a Term in Law, being a
Covenant, whereby a
husband assureth unto his wife in respect of marriage
lands, or Tenements for
Term of her life, or otherwise.

Jolaus, the Nephew of Hercules, he
drove his Unkles Chariot, when he fought against
Cycnus the son of Mars, afterwards when
he grew old, he was restored to youth by the prayers of
Hercules.

Jollitrin, (Fr.) a youngster, or young
Gallant.

Not found in OED.



Jonas, a proper name, signifying in
Hebrew a Dove.

Jonathan, another Hebrew name,
signifying the gift of
God.

Joncade, (French) a certain kinde of spoon
meat.

Ionia, a Countrey of Asia the
lesse, having twelve great
Cities, whereof Miletus and Ephesus were
the chief, the inhabitants
of this Countrey descended anciently
from the Greeks, whence their language
was called the Ionick Dialect.

Ionick Order in Architecture, see Corinthian.

Jopæan, a certain expression, used in
Hymnes, or songs of rejoycing.

Not found in OED.



Jopas, an African King, who was one of those that sought
to have married Dido, he was a great Musician,
and sung in verse, of the course of the Moon, and the
motion of the Stars.

Jordan, (Hebr.) the River of
judgement.

Joscelin, the proper name of a man, in
Latin Justulus, being a diminutive from Jost, in Latin Justus, or
Jodocus, the chief of this name was Joscelin of Lovan, son to
Godfrey, Duke of Brabant.

Joseph, (Hebr.) encrease of the
Lord.

Josias, (Hebr.) fire of the Lord.

Josuah, (Hebr.) the Lord Saviour.

Jot, a little, or very small matter, from
the Greek letter Iota, or the Hebrew
Jod.

Jotacisme, (Greek) a running much upon the
letter Iota, or I, also a bad pronunciation
of the same letter.

Jouketh, a Term in Faulconry, they say the
Hawk Jouketh, and not sleepeth.

Journal, (French) a book of every dayes
passages, also so much land as may be plough'd in a day by
one team of oxen.

Journee, (French) a dayes journey, also an
expedition of war, a day of battell.

Joyce, the proper name of a woman, in Latin Jocosa, i. merry, pleasant.

Joyes of the Planets, are when they are in
those houses where they are most powerful and strong, as
Saturn joyeth in Scorpio.


I P

Iphianassa, Iphinoe, and Lysippe,, 
the daughters of Proetus, King of Argos,
who for despising the goddesse Juno, &
equalling their own
beauties to hers, were struck with such a Phrensie, that
they imagined themselves
transformed to Cowes, but Melampus being sent
for, & offered for the cure of them half the Kingdom,
and which of the daughters he lik't best, soon brought
them to their former estate, and married
Iphianassa.

Iphiclus, the son of Amphitryo by
Alckmena, he was
born at the same time with Hercules, who was
begot by Jupiter.

Iphicrates, a Captain of the
Athenians, famous for many great victories.

Iphigenia, the daughter of
Agamemnon, and Clytemnestra, she was
adjudged to be sacrificed to Diana, because that
goddesse being incensed against Agamemnon for
killing one of her harts,
kept the Navy of the Greeks by contrary windes from their
intended course, but after that Vlisses had by
craft obtained her of her mother, and all things in a
readinesse for the sacrifice,
Diana accepted of a Hart, so that
Iphigenia was set free and sent to
Taurica, where she was made Over-seer of the
rites of that goddesse, (which were performed by the
sacrificing of men) by Thoas the King of that
place, who was afterwards slain by Orestes, who
was designed to be offered for a sacrifice.

Iphimedia, the wife of Aloeus, who
being ravish't by Neptune, brought forth Twins,
Othus and Ephialtes, who grew every
moneth nine fingers in talnesse, till they came to be of a
very vast stature, they helpt the Gyants against the Gods,
and were at length slain by the Arrows of Apollo
and Diana.

Iphinoe, see Iphianassa.

Iphis, a young man of a great beauty, who
fell in love with Anaxarete, see Anaxarete.

Iphis, is also the name of a Cretan Vir­



gin the daughter of Lygdus and Theletusa,
she was by her mothers prayers to the goddesse
Isis changed into a man, least Lygdus
finding himself deceived should be incensed, for he
going to travel, and giving
a strict charge to Theletusa, whom he left with
Childe, that if she brought forth a Female Childe, she
should put her out from her, he was made to believe that
it was a Boy, and as soon as his supposed Son came of
age, he provided him a wife named Janthe, for
whom as it hapned, Iphis proved a real husband.


Ipswich, the chief Town of
Suffolk, it was sacked by the Danes in
the year 991. this Town is famous for the birth of
Cardinal Wolsey
who was a Butcher's son of this place, and who began to
build here a very magnificent Colledge. here is yet
to be seen the ruines of the old Town, which was called
Gipwich.


I R

Iracundious, (lat.) of an angry
disposition,
inclinable to anger.

Irascible, (lat.) capable of anger,
irascible faculty is
that faculty of the Soul from whence anger and passion is
stirred up, and kindled in men.

Irchenfield, or Archenfield, that
part of Herefordshire, where the Citie of
Hereford now standeth, and where the old Town of
Ariconium stood in ancient times.

Irene, the mother of Constantine
the 7th. she reigned at Constantinople
joyntly with her son called a Councel at Nice,
consisting of above 300 Bishops, wherein the setting up of
images in churches was confirmed by a decree, being
expelled from the Empire by her son, who reigned alone
for  seven years, she at length took him by craft,
put out his eyes, and cast him into prison where he
died.

Iris, the daughter of Thaumas,
feign'd by the Poets to have been the messenger of the
gods, there is a kinde of watry
Meteor, so called
in Greek, appearing in the Clouds of divers colours, which
we call the Rain-bow.

Irmunsul, or Ermisul, a certain
God worshipped by the ancient Brittains, and thought to be
the same with Mercury.

Ironical, (Greek) spoken in mockery, or by
that figure called Irony, which is a speaking
contrary to what a man means by way of bitter gibing, or
scoffing.

Irradiation, (lat.) an enlightning, or
casting beams upon.

Irrational, (lat.) unreasonable.

† Irrecordable, (lat.) not to be
remembred.

Irrecuperable, (lat.) never to be
recovered,
unrecoverable.

Irredivivous, (lat.) not to be
revived.

Irrefragable, (lat.) unbreakable, also
undeniable, not to be confuted.

Irregularity, (lat.) disorderlinesse, as it
were a being without rule, also an
incapacity of taking
holy orders, as being maimed, or very deformed, base-born,
or guilty of any hainous crime, a Term in
Canon-law.

Irreligious, (lat.) having no Religion, or
piety towards God.

Irremeable, (lat.) through which there is
no passing back, or returning.

Irremediable, (lat.) not to be remedied, or
helped.

Irremissible, (lat.) not to be remitted, or
pardoned.

Irremunerable, (lat.) not to be
rewarded.

Irreparable, (lat.) not to be restored, or
repaired.

Irreprehensible, (lat.) not to be
reprehended, or
blamed.

Irresolute, (lat.) unresolved,
doubting, or wavering.

Irrevocable, (lat.) not to be revoked, or
called back.

Irrigation, (lat.) a watering of
Gardens and Meadows out of
some neighbouring River.

Irrision, (lat.) a laughing at, a scoffing,
or flouting.

Irritation, (lat.) a provoking, or
stirring up.

† Irrite, (lat.) void, of no
effect.

Irrogation, (lat.) an imposing upon.

Irroration, (lat.) a bedewing, or
besprinkling.

† Irruent, (lat.) rushing, or running
violently upon.

Irrugation, (lat.) a wrinkling, a
contracting into
wrinkles.

Irruption, (lat.) a breaking violently
in.

Irus, a poor man of Ithaca, who
was a continual messenger between Penelope and
those that came to court her in her
husbands absence, for
which Vlisses, when he came home, killed him with
his fist.


I S

Isaac, (Hebrew) laughter, as
Gelasius in Greek.



Isaca, or Isca, a river in
England, vulgarly
called Ex, from whence the City Exon,
or Exeter, is denominated.


Isagogical, (Greek) belonging to
Isagogue, (i.
e.) an Introduction or beginning.

Isca Danmoniorum, see Excester.

Isca Silurum, the name of a Town in
Monmouthshire, commonly called
Cærleon.

Iscariot, the sirname of Judas,
that betrayed our
Saviour, from the Hebrew, Isch Carioth.

Ischiatic, (Greek from Iscrias the
hip) troubled with a pain in the hip, which pain is
commonly called the Sciatica, or hip gout.

Isicle, q. Iceseekle, from the dutch word
Iskekel, a tappe of ice, a drop of water
frozen.

Isis, a goddesse, worshipped by the
Egyptians, she was at first called Io,
and was the daughter of Inachus, King of
Argos, See Io.

Isis, the river Ouse, in
Wiltshire, which meeting with Thames, is
called Thamisis.

Islip, a Town in Oxfordshire,
anciently called Gistlipe, famous for being the
birth-place of King Edward the
Confessour.

Ismælite, one descended from
Ismæl, the son of Abraham, by his
Concubin Agar.

Isonomy, (Greek) an equality.

Isoceles Triangle, (in Geometry) is that
which hath two equal sides, and two equal opposite Angles.

Isota de Nugarolis, a Virgin of
Verona, the daughter of Antonius de
Nugarolis, she was very famous for Philosophy,
Philology, and Poetry.

Isped, (old word) dispatched.

Isræl, (Hebrew) prevailing in the
Lord.

Issue, in Common Law, signifieth either
children begotten between a man and his wife, or the
profits of lands, or the profits growing from a fine, or a
matter depending in
suit, whereupon the parties joyn.

Isthme, (Greek) a narrow neck of land,
lying between two seas, the most famous Isthmus,
is that of Greece, whereupon Corinth stands; from
thence were denominated
the Isthmian Games, instituted by
Theseus, in honour of Neptune.

Istria, a Country of Italy,
joyning to Illyricum.

Isurium Brigantum, the name of an
ancient City in
York-shire, so called from the River Vre
running by it: It was many ages since, rased to the
ground, but out of the ruines of it was built a Town, now
called Ealdburgh or Aldborow.


I T

Italia, or Italie, one of the most
famous Countries of Europe, so called from
Italus, otherwise called Atlas, an
ancient King thereof, who had two daughters,
Electra, whom he marryed to Camboblasco,
King of the Janigenæ, and Roma, whom he
made Queen of the Aborigenes, she is said to have
laid the foundation of the City Rome, which was
afterwards finished by Romulus, others derive
Italy from the Greek word Italos, an Ox,
because that Country abounded with Oxen, it was
anciently called
Hesperia, from Hesperus, the brother of
Atlas.

To Italianize, a made word, signifying to
speak or do like an Italian.

Iteration, (lat.) a saying or doing the
same thing over again, a repeating.

Ithaca, an Island in the Ionian
sea, where Vlisses was born, it is full of Goats,
but no Hare can live there.

Itinerary, (lat.) belonging to a journy,
also substantially used for a Calender of miles, or a
note-book, wherein are set down the passages of a
journy.

Itylus, the son of Zethus and
Aedon, See Aedon.

Itys, the son of Tereus, King of
Thrace, by Progne, the daughter of
Pandion, King of Athens, he was slain by
his mother, and set before Tereus, to eat at a
banquet, (because he had deflowred her sister
Philomel, who
after her hands and tongue were cut off, wrought the
relation of it with her needle) but Tereus
discovering in the midst of the banquet, the slaughter of
Itys, by seeing the head of the child, he pursued
Progne and her sister, with his sword drawn, who
running from him, Progne was changed into a
swallow, Philomell,
into a Nighingale, and Itys into a
Pheasant.


J U

Juba, a King of Mauritania, he was a
constant friend to Pompey's party, he overthrew
Curio, and all his forces sent into
Africa, by Cæsar: when
Pompey was over­



come, he joyned his forces with Scipio, and dyed
fighting with Petreius.


Jubarb, q. barba jovis, because of its
perpetual greennesse, a
kind of plant, otherwise
called Housleek.

Jubeb. fruit or Jujubes,
(Arab. zufalzef) a kind of Pruan, used much in
Physick, and sold by Apothecaries; it was a fruit known
among the Seres, a people of Scythia,
and therefore called in Latin Sericum.

Jubilation, (lat.) a solemn rejoycing, a
shouting for joy.

A year of Jubile, a great festival, or time
of rejoycing, celebrated every 50th year by the Jews, in
remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt, it
came at length to be solemnized among the
Christians, being
first instituted by Pope Boniface,
the eighth in the year 1300, who ordained it to be kept
every hundred years, it comes from the Hebrew word
Jocel, rejoycing.

Jucundity, (lat.) pleasantnesse.

Judea, a Country of Syria, in Asia
the greater, bordering eastward upon the dead sea, it is
also called Chananæa, or the land of
Promise.

Judaisme, (lat.) the faith or religion of
the Jews.

Judicatory, (lat.) a place of Judgement or
hearing of causes.

Judicial, or Judiciary.  (lat.)
belonging to a cause,
tryal, or judgement.

Judith, (Hebr.) praising, a proper name of
women.

Ivetot, a Town of lower Normandy
in France, which hath in former times been
governed by a titular King; whence a man of a great Title,
and a small inheritance,
is in derision called a King of Ivetot.

Jugal, (lat.) belonging to a yoak.

Jugament, (lat.) a yoaking or
coupling.

Jugular, or Jugularie, (lat.)
belonging to the throat, whence the jugular veins are
those veins which ascend along the sides of the neck, to
the bottom of the head.

Jugulation, (lat.) a cutting the throat of
any one, a killing.

Jugurth, the son of Manostabales,
brother of Micipsa, King of Numidia;
whom his Uncle, dying, constituted heir of his
kingdom, together with
his two sons, Adherbal and Hiemsal, but
Jugurth, that he might possesse the Kingdom to
himself, slew them both: whereupon the Romans
made war upon him for a long time, wherein at length being
overthrown by Marius, he fled to Bocchus, King of
Mauritania, by whom he was betrayed to
Sylla, and being brought to Rome, dyed in
prison.

Jujubes, see Jubeb fruit.

To Juke, to pearch or roost as a
Hawk.

Julep, a kind of physical medecine, to open
the inward parts, and prepare for purgation, being a
decoction mingled with sirrups, or sweetned with
sugar.

Jullaber, a certain hillock in
Kent, so called from one Jullaber, a
Giant, or as some say, a Witch, who was here enterred, but
Cambden rather thinks it so named from
Laberius Durus, a Captain of Julius
Cæsars, who was here slain.

Julian, sirnamed the Apostate, because that
being brought up in the Christian religion, he fell back
to Heathenisme: he was the son of Constantius,
and by his valour came to
be made Roman Emperour, he prohibited to the
Christians all kind of learning, that through their
ignorance, they might become uncapable to defend their
religion: at last, in an expedition against the
Persians, being mortally
wounded, he cryed out,
vicisti Galilæe, Thou hast overcome, O
Galilæan, meaning Christ; and soon
after dyed: also, a proper name of women, contracted
Juliana, some write it Gilian.

Julian account, see Gregorian
account.

Julio, a kind of Italian coin,
made by Pope Julius, valuing about six pence of
our mony.

Julius Cæsar, the first of the Roman
Emperours, he subdued France, Spain,
Brittain, the Low Countries, and the greatest part of
Germany, afterwards he entred into a civil war
with Pompey, whom he utterly
defeated at the battle of Pharsalia, and his two
sons, Cneus and Sextus Pompeius in
Spain; and having reigned three years in
Rome, as absolute Emperour, he was at length
slain in the Senate house, by Brutus and
Cassius, the word signifies in Greek
softhaired.

Julius, the sirname of Ascanius, the
son of Aeneas, and his first wife
Creusa, he came along with his father into
Italy, and built the City Alba in the
place, where he found the white Sow with the 30 Pigs:
also the son of Ascanius, who stood in
competition for the kingdom of Alba, with



Silvius Posthumus the son of Aeneas by
his second wife Lavinia; the word signifieth in
Greek, the soft down appearing on the chin of a young
man, before he comes to have a perfect beard.


July, the name of the fifth moneth from
March, which was heretofore accounted the first
moneth of the year, it was so named
from Julius Cæsar, being in former time called
Quintilis.

Jumentarious, (lat.) belonging to a horse,
or any kind of labouring beast,
called in Latin jumentum.

Juncture, (lat.) a joyning together, also a
joynt, also juncture of time, the very nick or moment of
time.

June, the fourth moneth of the year from
March the first. Some say it was so called from
Juno, as it were junonian moneth. Others
from Junius Brutus, who begun his Consulship in
that moneth: it is called in Greek Hecatombæon,
from the Hecatombs or Sacrifices of a
hundred Oxen which used to be offered to Jupiter
in this moneth.

Junke, in Navigation, is any piece of an
old cable.

Juno, the daughter of Saturn and
Ops, and both wife and sister to
Jupiter, to whom she brought forth
Vulcan and Mars, and a daughter called
Hebe, whom she conceived by eating of green
Lettice: she is called Juno a juvando, i. from
giving help, also Lucina, from causing men to see the light of the World, being said to be present at the
birth of all children that come into the World, and to sit
crosse-legged when any miscarry. She is also called
Sospita a Sospitando, i. e. keeping in
safety.

Juno's teares, a kind of plant otherwise
called Vervain.

Junto, or Junta, (Span.) a meeting
together of men to
sit in council.

Ivory, (French) the Elephants tooth being
the finest and whitest kind of bone, of which boxes and
several sorts of things are made.

Jupiter, the son of Saturn by his
wife Ops, born at the same birth with
Juno, and hid in the mountain Ida in
Creet, where he was bred up by the
Curetes unknown to his father Saturn,
who intending to devoure
all his male children, his wife Ops gave him a
great stone wrapt up in swadling
clouts, to eat instead of his son Jupiter, who
coming to age and understanding his fathers designs
against him, conspired against
him, and cast him out of his dominions,
and divided the government of the World between himself
and his two brothers;
the Heavens he reserved to himself,
to Neptune he gave the Empire of the Sea, and to
Pluto the lower Regions of the Earth.

Jupiter Belus, the second King of
Babylon, or as
some say the first, he was the son of Nimrod,
called also Saturn.

Juration, (lat.) a swearing, or taking an
oath.

Jurats, (French) certain officers
otherwise called
Eschevins, or Sheriffs.

Jurden, or Jordon, a kind of
Urinal or Chamberpot, also Jordan is the name of
a River dividing Perea from the rest of
Judæa.

Juridical, (lat.) belonging to the Law,
judicial, or which will bear an action.

Jury, (in lat. Jurati) signifieth
in Common Law, a company
consisting of 24 or 12 men empanelled, and sworn to
deliver a truth upon such evidence as shall be
delivered them touching the matter in question,
there being three sorts of trials, either by Assize or
Jury, by Battel, or by Parliament. In every general
Assize, there is both a Grand Jury consisting of 24
substantial men,
chosen indifferently out of the whole County, and others
called Petit Juries, consisting of 12, to whom are
referred such things concerning life and death, as the
Grand Jury have approved
of.

Jurisdiction, (lat.) authority to make or
execute Laws. Also it is used for any kind of power or
authority.

A Jurist, a Lawyer.

Jurisprudence, (lat.) knowledge or skil in
the Laws.

Jurn, or Journchoppers, the
regraters or changers of yarn.

Juror, one of the twelve men in a
Jury.

Jury-mast, is one made at sea in case of
necessity, by fastning several pieces
together.

Jussel, a minutal from jus,
signifying a dish made of several meats minced together.

Jussulent, (lat.) full of broth or
pottage.

Justes, (French) tikings or combats on
horseback with Speares and Lances.

Justice, or Justicer, (French) an
officer deputed by the King or Common-wealth, to act by
way of judgement.



Justice of the Kings Bench, is the capital or
chief Justice of England, he is a Lord by his
office, which is most especially to hear and determine
all pleas of the Crown, that is such as concern offences
committed against the Crown, Dignity, and Peace, of the
King; as Treasons, Mayhems, and the like.


Justice of Common pleas, is he who hears
and determines all causes at the Common Law, that is, all
civil causes between common persons, as well personal as
reall. He is also a Lord by his office.

Justice of the Forrest, or Justice in eyre
of the Forrest, is he that hath the hearing and
determining of all offences within the Kings Forrest
committed against Venison
or Vert, and is also a Lord by his office.

Justices of Assises, such as were wont by
special commission to be sent into this or that County to
take Assises for the ease of the subjects.

Justices of oyer and terminer, are
Justices deputed upon
some special and extraordinary
occasions, to hear and determine
causes.

Justices in eyre, those that were wont to
be sent with commissions into divers
Counties, to hear such
causes as were termed the Pleas of the Crown, and were for
the case of the
subjects who must have come to the Kings Bench, if the
cause were too high for the County-Court, from the French
word Erre, a journey.

Justices of Goale delivery, are such as are
sent with commission to hear and
determine all causes
appertaining to such as for any offence are cast into
Goale.

Justices of Nisi prius, the same now
adayes with Justices of
Assises.

Justices of tryal baston, or trayl
baston, were certain Justices appointed by
Edward the first
to make inquisition through the Realme, upon all Officers,
as Mayors, Sheriffs, Escheatours, &c.
touching extortion, briberies, intrusion into other mens lands, and Barratours
that used to take money for beating of men, and they had
power either to punish by death, or to exact a ransome.
This term comes from two French words, treille an
arbour or form, and baston a staff or pole, to
note that the Justices imployed in this
commission, had authority to proceed without any solemn Judgement-seat,
but wheresoever they could apprehend the malefactours.

Justices of peace, are such as are
appointed by the Kings
commission to attend the peace in the County where they
dwell, whereof such whose commission begins Quorum vos
unum esse volumus, are called Justices of the
Quorum.

Justicies, a Writ directed to the Sheriff
for the dispatch of justice in some
especial cause wherewith
of his own authority he cannot deal in his
County-Court.

Justiciable, (French) subject to Law, under
authority.

Justicians, a certain religious Order
instituted in the year
1412 in the Abby of St. Justine at
Padua, by one Lewise Balus a
Venetian.

Justification, (lat.) a clearing,
justifying, or making
good; in Common Law it is a shewing a good reason why a
man did such a thing as he is called to
answer.

Justinianus, a name by which two of the
Roman Emperours were called. The first was famous for
causing the Civil Law to be reduced into the Pandects and
the Code; whence Students of the Civil Law are called
Justinianists: the second for the great wars he
had with the Saracens and Bulgarians.

Justinopolis, a City of Istria,
built upon the Sea side by the Emperour Justine:
it is now called Cabo d' Istria.

Jutties of houses, are certain parts of a
building, which jut or stand out farther than the rest.

Juturna, the daughter of Daunus,
and sister of Turnus King of the Rutuli,
she was by Jupiter in recompence of the losse of
her maiden-head immortalized, and made Nimph of the River
Numicus.

Juvenility, (lat.) youthfulnesse,
lustinesse, or vigour.

Juventas, the Goddesse of Youth, the same
with Hebe.

Juverna, an ancient name of
Ireland.


I W

Iwimpled, (old word) muffled.


I X

Ixion, the son of Phlegyas, he having
slain his son in law Erioneus, after he had
long wandered up and down, and could not be absolved
either by gods or men; at length Jupiter
pitying him, took him up into Heaven and expiated him; but he



after his purgation remaining among the gods, fell in
love with Juno and sollicited her to
unchastity, which she making known to Jove, he
formed a cloud in the shape of Juno, and
Ixion thinking it to have been the goddesse,
begat a race of Centaurs, and being soon after
sent down to the earth, he boasted every where that he
lay with Juno, for which being struck down to
Hell with a Thunderbolt, he was condemned to be alwayes
rowled on a wheele.



K A

KAb, or Cab, an Hebrew measure
containing three pints
of our measure.

Kalends, see Calends.

Karena, the twentieth part of a drop, a
term used in Chimistry.

Not found in OED.



Karobe, or Carobe, a kind of
fruit, also an herb called St. Johns bread, also
a very small weight used by Goldsmiths, being the 24 part
of a grain.

Karos or Caros, a certain disease
in the head which causeth much drousinesse.

Katharine, see Catharine.


K E

Keel, the lowest and first timber laid in a
ship, the botton of a ship, also a vessell to coole new
beer or ale in.

Keen or Kene, (old word) sharp,
some think it comes from the Greek word a cone, a
whetstone.

Keeper of the great Seal of England, is he
under whose hands passe all Charters, Commissions, and
grants of the King, strengthned by the Great or Broad
Seal, without which they are of no effect. He is a Lord by
his office, and one of the Kings privy Council.

Keeper of the privy Seal, is also a Lord by
his office, and one of the privy
Council; under his hands
passe all Charters signed by the King, before they come to
the Broad Seal.

Keeper of the Forrest, is he who hath the
principal government of all things
belonging to the
Forrest: he is also called chief Warden of the
Forrest.

Kele, (old word) to coole.

Kemeling, (old word) a Brewers
vessel.

Not found in OED but see "keeler."



Within Ken, within sight or view, a term in
Navigation, and comes from the Saxon word Kenne, i.
e. to know or discover.

Kenchester, a Town in
Herefordshire, built as some think out of the
ruines of old Ariconium.

Kenhelm, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Saxon, defence of his
kindred.

Kenneleth, (applyed to a Fox) when he is in
his hole. A term in hunting.

Kenodoxy, or Cenodoxy, (Greek)
vain-glory.

Kenotaph, see Cenotaph.

Kerchief, (French
Couvrechef)
a kind of linnin dresse which women use to wear upon their
heads.

Kerck, or Kirk, (old word) a
Church.

Kern, an old Brittish word, signifying a
horn.

Not found in OED.



Kern, a kind of light-armed foot
souldier among the Irish; we use it also for an ordinary Country
farmer, also to Kern, signifieth to powder or to
salt.

Kernel, (lat. Kernellare) an old
word, signifying to embattle a house.

Kerry, a County of Ireland in the
Province of
Mounster.

Kers, or Cresses, a kind of plant
so called.

Kersie, (French) a kind of cloth or stuff
much used.

Kesar, a word which the Brittains used
instead of Cæsar, and is taken in the same sense
at this day, when they say, King nor Kesar.

Kesteven, see Holland.

Key of a River or Haven, a place where
ships ride, and are as it were lock't in. Some deduce it a
quiescendo, i. from resting,
or from the old Latin Casare, i. to
restrain.

Keynard, (old word) a micher.

Not found in OED.




K I

Kichel, (old word) a kind of cake, the same
which is called in Latin Libum.

Kilderkin, (in Dutch
Kindekin)
a kind of liquid measure, being the eighth part of a
hogshead, it contains about eleven or twelve
gallons.

Kiles, from the Dutch word keghel
an Isicle, certain pins to play withal,
commonly called Nine-pins.

Kildare, two Counties of Ireland
in the Province of Leimster.

Kilkenny, two Counties of Ireland
in the Province of Leimster.

Kinburgh, (Sax.) strength and defence of
kindred, a proper name of women.

King, (from the Dutch word koning, i.
to



know, because he ought to be the most knowing of men, or
from Konnen, to be powerful) the supream Ruler
of a Nation.


King of Harolds, or King of Arms,
he is called Garter, and is the same with
Pater patratus, among the Romans. see in
Harald.

Kingsbench, the Court or Judgement-seat
where the King was wont to sit in his own person, and
therefore it was moveable
with the Court or Kings houshold, and was called Curia
domini Regis, or Aula Regia.

Kings Silver, that money which is due to
the King in the Court of Common-pleas, in respect of a
license there granted to any man for passing of a
fine.

Clark of the Kings Silver, is an officer of
the Common pleas, unto whom every fine is brought, after
it hath been with the custos Brevium, and by whom
the effect of the Writ of covenant is entred into a paper
book.

Kingston upon Thames, a Town in
Surry, so called because Athelstane,
Edwin, and Etheldred, were here Crowned
Kings in the open Market-place.

Kintal, see Quintal.


K N

Knap of ground, a little rising
hillock.

Knave, (Sax. Canapa) signifieth
originally a Lacquey or
Waiting-man, and cometh originally from the Hebrew word
Gnavadh, to serve.

Knees, in Navigation, are certain
crooked pieces of timber
used in Ships to fasten the beames unto the sides.

Knight, (Sax. Cnicht) hath been
taken originally for a souldier or horseman in war; those
that were wont to accompany and wait upon the Emperour in
the wars, were called in Dutch Knechts, i. e.
servitours or lusty young men. It is also taken
for a client or vassal, but more
especially one that holds his land by serving his Lord on horseback; it is now
grown to be a Title of great Dignity and
Honour. Of Knight-hoods
there are many sorts, but the most usual in this Nation
are these.

Knight Bachelour, the lowest, but
ancientest Order of
Knight-hood, and cometh from the Germans, among whom it
was an ancient custom, that as soon as the State judged
any of their young men fit to manage armes and weapons,
and allowed him sufficient
for martial exercises, then in the very assembly and
council, either one of the
Princes, the father, or son of the kinsfolk of the young
man, did furnish him with a shield and a javelin, as the
Romans did the toga virilis, or Virile
gown, to those whom they thought capable of publick
imployment, and thenceforth from a part of a private
house, he was accounted a member of the Common-wealth. It
was also an ancient ceremony to honour men with the Girdle
of Knighthood, which he who received, was solemnly to go
to Church, and offerring
his sword upon the Altar, to vow himself to the service of
God; afterwards it came to be usual for Kings to send
their sons to the neighbour Princes, to receive Knighthood
at their hands; Then it was also that besides the Sword
and Girdle, Gilt-Spurs were also added for more
ornament, whence in Latin they are called Equites
aurati; the word Bachelours some derive from the
French Baschevaliers,
as it were Knights of the lowest degree; others from
Batailler to battel or fight: they are also
simply and without any addition called Knights.

Knight Banneret, from the Dutch word
Bannerherr, Lord or Master of the Banner, is a
Knight made in the field, with the ceremonies of cutting
the point of his Standard, and making it as it were a
Banner, and is allowed to
display his arms in the Kings army. This Dignity was given
at first by the Kings of England and
France, to such Gentlemen as valiantly carried
themselves in two Royal Battels, or to such as had ten
vassals and means to maintain
a Troop of Horses at their own charge. Some say the first
original of it was from Edward the third.

Knight Baronet, is a new distinct Order erected
by King James, who for certain disbursements
toward the Plantation in Vlster, created divers
into this Dignity, and made it hereditary by his Letters
Patents to be seen in the Rolles, whereas before
that time there were Baronets who were not Knights, and
these Knight Baronets
were to have precedency in all Writings, Sessions, and
Salutations, before all
Knights of the Bath, and Knights Bachelours, and
Bannerets, except those created under the Kings Standard
in an Army Royal, the King being personally present, and
the King was not to create any person into that degree of Baronet



within the Kingdom of England, above the number
of two hundred.


Knight of the Bath, an Order of Knights
created within the lists of the Bath, and girded with a
sword in the Ceremonies of their Creation, these Knights
were wont to be created with a great many religious
solemnities, which usually belong to
Hermites, and other holy Orders.

Knights of the Carpet, are another sort of
Knights made out of the field, and are so called, because
in receiving their order they commonly kneel upon a Carpet.

Knights of the Garter, an order of
Knighthood, instituted by King Edward the 3d.
some say upon occasion of good successe in a skirmish,
wherein the Kings Garter was used for a token, others
affirm that the King after his great successes abroad and
at home, dancing one night with the Queen and other
Ladies, took up a Garter that hapned to fall from one of
them, whereat some of the Lords smiling, the King said
that ere long he would make that Garter to be of high
reputation, and shortly after he erected this order of the
blue Garter, which consists of 26 martial Nobles, whereof
the King of England
used to be the chief, and the rest be either of the Realm,
or Princes of other Countreys, there are also depending
upon this order 26 poor Knights, who have no other
sustenance, but the allowance of this house, and are also
called poor Knights of Windsor, the site of this
Colledge being the Castle of
Windsor, with the Chappel
of St. George, the Officers belonging to this
Order, are, the Prelate of the Garter, which Office
belongeth to the Bishop of
Winchester, the Chancelour of the Garter, the
Register of the Garter, who was alwayes Dean of
Windsor, the principal
King of Arms, called Garter, and the Usher of the Garter,
which Office belonged to
the Usher of the Princes Chamber,
called Black-rod.

Knights of the Order of St. John
of Jerusalem,
an Order of Knighthood erected in the year 1120. and had
their first foundation
and abode in Jerusalem, afterwards they had their
residence at Rhodes, whence they were expelled by
Solyman, and ever since their chief seat hath
been at Malta, where they have done great
exploits against the
Turk, there was one general Prior that had the
government of the whole Order in England, and
Scotland but toward the end of Harry the
eights reign, they were suppressed in England for
adhering to the Pope.

Knights of the Temple, or Knights
Templars, an Order of
Knighthood erected by Pope Gelasius, about the
year of our Lord 1117. these Knights in the beginning
dwelling not far from the Sepulchre of Christ, intertained
Christian strangers and Pilgrims charitably, and in their
Armour led them through the holy land, to view such things
as there were to be seen, and to defend them from the
Infidels, but because at
the last they abounded in many Vices, and many of them
fell away from Christianity to the Saracens, the
whole Order was suppressed by Pope Clement the
fifth, and their substance given to the Knights of
Rhodes, and other Religious Orders.

Knights of the Shire, two Knights, or other
Gentlemen of worth, that are chosen by the freeholders of
every County, that can dispend fourty shillings per
annum, and be resident in the Shire; formerly none
but Knights were chosen to that Office (Milites gladio
cincti, for so runneth
the Tenour of the Writ) when every one that had a Knights
fee was constrained to
be a Knight, but now custome alloweth
that Esquires may be chosen, so that they be resident in
the County.

Knight Marshal, an Officer of the Kings
house, who hath the Jurisdiction and Cognisance of any
transgression; as also of all Contracts made within the
Kings house and verge.

Knights of Calatrava in
Spain, an Order created by Alonzo, the
ninth King of Spain, conferred upon certain
Cavallero's, who went in Devotion to succour
Calatrava
against the Moors, their badge was a red crosse
on the left side of their breast.

Knights of the Jar, see Jar.

Knights fee, so much inheritance as is
sufficient to maintain a Knight with
convenient Revenue,
which was in ancient time about 800 Acres, it is also
taken for the Rent that a Knight payes for his fee to the
Lord of whom he holds.

Knights service, or Chevalry, a
certain ancient Tenure of
Lands, by which a man was obliged to bear Arms in defence
of his Countrey.

Knighten Guild, a certain Guild, or
Company in
London, consisting of 19 Knights, it was
founded by King Edgar, who gave them a portion
of void ground, lying



without the Citie, now called Portsoken Ward.


Not found in OED.



Knipperdollings, a certain Sect of
Hereticks, who lived in
Germany, about the time of John of
Leyden, they were so called
from one Knipperdolling, who was the first
founder of that Sect.

Knolls of Peace, certain Mounts cast up by
mans hand, in the Sherifdom of Sterling
in Scotland, called in Latin Duni
Pacis.


K U

Kunigunda, or Cunigunda, the wife
of Henry the second, Duke of Bavaria,
and Emperour of Germany, she to free her self
from the aspersion of inchastity that was cast upon her,
caused certain Plough-shares to be heated red hot, and
placed at a little distance one from the other, and went
over them blindfold without receiving any harm, whereby
she cleared her self from all suspition, the like was
reported of Edward the Confessours wife, and this tryal
afterwards became oftentimes
in use upon such like occasions, and was called the tryal
of fire Ordeal.


K Y

Kyle, a County in the South part of
Scotland, by Bede, called Campus
Cyel, i. e. the field Ciel; this with other
Territories Eadbert King of
Northumberland annexed to his Kingdom.

Kyrie Eleison, a form of solemne
invocation, used in
the Liturgy, or Service book, and signifieth in the Greek
tongue, Lord have mercy upon us.


L A

LAbarum, (Greek) a military streamer, or
flag, also a Church Banner, or Ensigne.

Labda, the daughter of Amphion of
the Race of the Bacchidæ, she being lame and
despised by the rest of the Bacchidæ
married Aetion,
to whom she brought forth Cypselus, so called
from a certain Corn measure, wherein his mother hid him
from the ten men, whom the Corinthians by a
publick decree ordained to kill him, because it had been
foretold by the Oracle that
a son of Labda should invade the Tyranny of
Corinth.

Labdacisme, see Lambdacisme.

Labdanum, or Ladanum, a kinde of
sweet Gumme, taken from the leaves of a certain small
shrub, called Cistus Ledon.

Labefaction, (lat.) an enfeebling, or
making weak.

Labels, Ribbands hanging down upon
Garlands, or Crowns, made of flowrs, also little pieces of
parchment cut out longwayes,
and hanging upon Indentures, or other kinde of writings,
also in Heraldry they are those lines, which hang down
from the file in an Escutcheon.

Labeons, (lat.) blaber-lipped
persons.

Labienus, one of Cæsars Captains,
who did very famous actions under him in
Gallia, but when
the Civil wars broke out, fled from him to
Pompey's party.

Labile, (lat.) slippery, apt to slip, or
fall.

Laborariis, the name of a Writ that lieth
against such as having not wherewith to live, do refuse to
serve.

† Laboriosity, (lat.) laboriousnesse, painfulnesse.

Labour, a ship is said to Labour
in the Sea, when she rowles and tumbles very much, either
a Hull, or under Sail.

Labyrinth, (Greek) a Maze, or place made
with so many turnings and windings that a man once entered
in, cannot finde the way out, whereof the two most
famous were, that built by
Miris King of Egypt, and that which
Dædalus built for Minos, King of
Crete, it is also by Metaphor
used for any kinde of intanglement, or intricate
businesse.

Lacca, a kinde of red Gumme, issuing from
certain Trees in Arabia.

Laceration, (lat.) a tearing, or
dismembring.

Lacert, (Latin) from Lacerta, a
Lizard (from Lacertus) the brawny part
of the arm.

Lacession, (lat.) a stirring up, or
provoking.

Laches, in Common-law, signifieth
negligence, from the
French word Lasche, i. carelesse, or
slothfull, or Lascher, to loosen.

Lachesis, the name of one of the
Destinies.

Lacken, (old word) contemned, also
extenuated.

Lachrymation, (lat.) a weeping, or
shedding tears.

Laconisme, (Greek) a speaking briefly, or
after the manner of the Lacedemonians.



Lactary, (lat.) a Dairy house, or place where
they keep Milk, or make Cheese.


Lacteal, or Lacteous, (lat.)
milky, milk white, or made of milk.

Lactucina, a certain goddesse among the
Romans, See Matura.

Lacunation, (lat.) a making holes.

Ladanum, or Laudanum, see Labdanum.

Ladas, a Page of Alexander the
Great, he ran so swift that the print of his foot could
not be discerned in the sand.

Ladon, a River of Arcadia, where
Syriax was turned
into a Reed.

Laghslite, a Saxon word from
Lah Law, and Slite a breach, signifying
a Mulct for breach of the Law.

Lagophthalmie, (Greek) a disease in the
eyes, which causeth one to sleep like a Hare with the
eye-lids open.

Laical, (lat.) belonging to Lay-men, or such as have not to do in
the Ministerial function.

Laines, courses, or ranks laid in the
building of stone, or brick-walls, a Term in
Masonry.

Laire, (a Term in hunting) the place where
a Deer harbours by day.

Lais, a woman of Sicily, who going
to dwell at Corinth, became a very famous
strumpet, and exacted excessive rates for the prostitution
of her body, afterwards removing to Thessaly, she
was in such high request among the men of
Thessaly,
that the women out of envy killed her in the Temple of
Venus, it was by her instigation that
Alexander the Great caused Persepo­
lis to be burnt.

Laius, the son of Labdacus, King
of Thebes, and the
father of Oedipus, see Jocasta, or
Oedipus.

Lake, a kinde of red colour, used in
painting.

Lambith, q. Lomehith, i. e. a Lomy, or
Clayish rode, a Town in Surry, famous for a
stately Palace, belonging to the Arch-bishops of
Canterbury, first built by Arch-bishop
Baldwin, in the year 1183. in this place
Hardy-Canute, the Danish King of
England, giving up himself wholy to luxurious
banquettings, & costly intertainments
expired suddenly, in the midst of his debauchery, and
excessive Cups.

Lambdacisme, (Greek) a pronouncing the
letter L. which is called in Greek
Lambda, with greater force then it should
be.

Lamdoides, the hindermost seam of the
skull.

Lambert, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Saxon fair Lamb, or as others will
have it, Far famous.

Lambition, (lat.) a licking, a lapping with
the tongue, also a going over a thing with a soft
touch.

Lamiæ, (lat.) certain Female spirits, or
apparitions by some called fairies, there was also one
Lamia, a Concubine of Demetrius,
to whom the Thebans built a Temple, under the
name of Lamia Venus.

Lammas day, the first of August,
so called, as some say, because the Priests, on this day,
were wont to gather their Tithe-Lambs, others take it from
the Saxon word Laffmess, i.
Breadmass, it being kept as a feast of
Thanks-giving for the first fruits of the Corn, it is also
called Gule, or Yule of August, see Gule
of August.

Lampadios, a constellation in the head of
Taurus.

Lampasse, vulgarly called the Lampreys, a
disease in the mouth of a Horse, so named, because it is
cured by burning with a Lamp, or a hot Iron.

Lampetia, see Neæra.

Lampoon, a kinde of Drolling Poem, or
Pamphlet, wherein any person of the
present age, is mentioned
with reproach, or scurrility.

Lamprey, or Suck-stone,
a kinde of fish, called in Latin Muræna.

Lampsacus, a Town upon the
Hellespont,
near the Coast of Asia.

Lanarious, or Laneous, (lat.)
belonging to, or made of wool.

Lancaster, or Loncaster, (i. a
Town situate upon the River Lone) the chief Town of
Lancashire, which some think to be the same with
the ancient Town Longovicum.

Lancelot, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Spanish a Lance, or Spear, of this
name was one of King Arthurs Knights of the round
Table.

Lancepesado, see Launcepesado.

Lanch, to put a float a ship, or boat, that
lies aground.

Lanciferous, (lat.) bearing a
Launce.

Landcape, an end of Land, or
continent, which
stretcheth it self out into the Sea.

Landgraviate, a Countrey belonging to 
a Landgrave, which in the Dutch tongue is as much as
Count, or Earle of a Province, or piece of Land given by
the Emperour.



Landlock't, a term in Navigation, is when a man
sees land round about him out of a ship or boat.


Landloper, (Dutch) a vagabond, that runs up
and down the Country.

Landskip, see Lantskip.

Landto, just so far off at Sea, as a man
can see the land.

Landturn, the same off the land by night,
as a breiz is off the sea by day.

Langrel, (a term in Gunnery) a loose shot,
which when it is put into the piece, flies out at length
when it is discharged.

Langued, tongued, a term in Blazon or
Heraldry, from the French word langue, a
tongue.

Languid, (lat.) weak, faint,
languishing.

Languour, (lat.) a drooping,
decaying, languishing.

Laniation, (lat.) a butchering, or
tearing to pieces.

Laniferous, (lat.) bearing cotton or
wool.

Lank, (old word) slender or weak.

Lanner, or Lanneret, a kind of
Hawk, called in French Faulcon Lanier.

Lantgrave, see Landgrave.

Lantskip, Landskip, or Paisage, a
description of Land as
far as may be seen above the Horison, by hills, valleys,
cities, woods, rivers, &c. in a mixt picture
which contains both persons, and the
description of a
Country, or any part of a Country; the persons are called
the Argument, the
Landskip the Parergon or By-work.

Lanuginous, (lat.) covered with Lanuge,
which is a soft thin down or cotten-like substance, which
groweth upon some kinds of fruit, also that which
appeareth upon the chins of young men before they come to
have perfect beards.

Laocoon, the son of Priamus and Hecuba, and
Priest to Apollo, he was the first that disswaded
the Trojans from receiving the great horse into
the walls, and strook his Spear so hard against it, that
the sound of the armes was heard within; whereupon it hath
been affirmed, that for his despising the gift of
Minerva, there came immediately
two great Serpents, and first devoured
his two children, afterwards himself.

Laodamia, the daughter of
Bellerophon and Achemone,
she brought forth Sarpedon King of Lycia
to Jupiter, who was inamoured
of her; at length having displeased
Diana, the goddesse shot her with her own
arrows.

Laodicea, a City in Asia the
Lesse, which became very wealthy by the great gifts of
divers rich Citizens, as Jeronymus, (who died
worth two thousand talents) Zeno the Orator, and
his son Polemo, whom Augustus advanced
to be a King.

Laodoche, the wife of Protesilaus,
she died imbracing the dead body of her husband slain by
Hector.

Laodocus, the son of Antenor, in
his shape Minerva came into the Army of the
Trojans, and perswaded Pandarus by
shooting at Menelaus to break the league.

Laomedon, a King of the Trojans,
he was the son of Ilus, and the father of
Priamus, to
divert a great pestilence which was sent upon the City,
because he had defrauded Neptune and
Apollo of the wages he had promised them for
building the City walls, he was constrained to expose his
daughter Hesione to be devoured by a Sea-monster,
promising Hercules to give him his horses which
were of sacred race, on condition he would undertake to
free his daughter, which he having performed, and
Laomedon going back from his word,
Hercules made war against him, and took the City,
slew Laomedon, took Priamus captive, and
gave Hesione to Telamon, who was the
first man that skalled the walls.

Lapicide, (lat.) a stone-cutter, a hewer of
stones out of the quarry.

Lapidary, (lat.) one that pollisheth or
works in stones, a jeweller.

Lapidation, (lat.) a stoning or putting to
death with stones hurled or slung.

Lapidescence, (lat.) a waxing hard like
stone, or of a stony substance.

Lapithæ, a people of Thessalie,
inhabiting the mountains Pindus and Othrys, they were
governed by Pirithous, had great conflicts with
the Centaurs, and were the first that invented
bridles and saddles.

Lappewing, a kind of bird, so called from
the often clapping of its wings; it is also called a Houp,
and in French Lapouin.

Lappise, is when Greyhounds open their
mouths in their course, or Hounds in the liam or string, a
term in Hunting.

Lapse, (lat.) a slip or fall; It is also when
an original Patron departeth from the right of
presenting to a void. Benefice,



by neglecting to present within 6 moneths unto the
ordinary.


Laqueary, (lat.) the roof of a chamber
vaulted.

Lara, the name of one of the Nimphs called
Naiades, the daughter of the
River Almon: she
was delivered to Mercury to be carried to Hell
for revealing to Juno the love of
Jupiter to the Nimph Juturna the sister
of Turnus; but Mercury falling in love
with her by the way, lay with her, and begat twins called
Lares or Household-gods,
who are also named Penates.

Larboard, a term in Navigation, the left
side of a boat or ship.

Larcenie, (from the French word
Larrecin, i.
theft) a word used in Common-Law, and is either great
larcenie, namely, when the
things stollen exceed the value of 12 pence, or petit
larcenie, when the things stollen exceed not such a
value.

The Larch-tree, a tree so called from
Larissa, a City of Thessalie where it
was first known. It hath leaves like the Pine-tree, and
beareth a kind of drug called Agaricum, which is of an
exhilarating nature.

Lareow, (Sax.) a Master.

Lares, see Lara.

Largesse, (French) a free gift bestowed
upon any one; also liberality.

Largitional, an officer that oversees the
bestowing of gifts.

Larius, the greatest Lake in Italy,
vulgarly called Lago
di Como, containing 60 miles from North to
South.

Larvated, (lat.) masqued or visarded for
the representing some Gobling or dreadful Spirit.

Lascivious, (lat.) of a wanton carriage,
loose or effoeminate in behaviour.

Lask, a disease called in Greek
Diarrhæa,
causing an immoderate loosenesse of the belly, and cometh
from the Latin word Laxitas, i.
loosenesse.

Lassitude, (lat.) an extream
wearinesse.

Lastage, or Lestage, a custom
challenged in Markets or Faires for carrying of things,
also the ballast of a ship; it cometh
from the Saxon word Last, which
signifieth a certain
kind of weight, also a burthen in general.

Latebrous, (lat.) full of Latebræ,
i. dens, or hiding-holes.

Latent, (lat.) lying hid.

Lateral, (lat.) belonging to the sides of
any thing.

Lateranus, a Patrician of Rome, so
called because he used to
skulk and hide himself, for the taking of his ease and
pleasure; he being designed Consul was slain by the
command of Nero, and many Ages after his houses
being very large and stately, were given by the
Emperour Constantine
to the Pope, and ever since it hath been called the
Laterane Palace.

Latericious, (lat.) made of brick or
tile.

Latible, (lat.) a hiding or lurking
place.

Laticlave, or cloak of the broad
nail, a kind of broad purple garment, which used to be a
badge of the Senatorian Order: a cloak of the narrow nail
was of the Equestrian or Knightly Order.

Latifolious, (lat.) having broad
leaves.

Latimer, the name of a Town and
Barony in Bucchinghamshire, as also of several great
Families in this Nation. This word, according as
Cambden observes, signifying
as much as Truchman, or
Interpreter.

Latinity, (lat.) an incorrupt speaking or
pronouncing of the Latin tongue.

Latinus, an ancient King of Italy,
the son of Faunus
and Marita, he married his daughter
Lavinia whom he had by
Amata sister of Faunus King of the Rutuli, to
Aeneas when he came into Italy;
whereupon Turnus to whom she had formerly been betrothed,
waged war against his Rival, and was slain in single
combat.

Lation, (lat.) a bearing or
carrying.

Latitancy, or Latitation, (lat.) a
lurking or lying hid.

Latitat, the name of a Writ, whereby all
men in personal actions are called
originally to the Kings
Bench, because a man is supposed latitare, i. to
lie hid.

Latitude. (lat.) breadth or
widenesse, in Astronomy the latitude of a star is, the
Arch of a great Circle made by the Poles of the Ecliptick,
intercepted between the star and the Ecliptick. The
latitude of a place is the Arch of the Meridian
intercepted between the Equinoctial and the Zenith of the place given.

Latomy, (Greek) a Quarry or place whence
they hew out stones for building.

Latona, the daughter of Cæus,
one of the Titans, she was got with child by
Jupiter, which thing so incensed Juno, that



she sent the Serpent Pytho to slay her;
whereupon she fled to her sister Asteria, where
she was delivered of twins, Apollo and
Diana; but Diana being first brought
forth, she immediately served her mother instead of a
Midwife, and helped to bring her to bed of her brother
Apollo, who as soon as he was come to age,
killed the Serpent
Pytho; Apollo and Diana being
commonly taken for the
Sun and Moon, are called Latonian Lights.


Latration, (lat.) a barking.

Latrie, (Greek) Divine-worship or
service of God.

Latrocination, (lat.) a committing of
robbery, or hainous theft.

Lavacre, (lat.) a washing vessel, also a
conduit.

Lavatory, (lat.) the same.

Lavatrine, (lat.) a square stone in a
kitchin with a hole in it for the water to passe through,
a sinke.

Laudable, (lat.) worthy of praise or
commendation.

Lauds, (lat.) commendations or praises,
also certain Psalms of David, beginning with
these words Laudate dominum, which use to be
recited by the Roman Catholicks
between the Nocturns and the Howres, which are certain
other prayers or psalms so called.

Laudanum, or Ladanum, see Labdanum.

Lauden, or Lothien, a Country in
the south part of Scotland, anciently
inhabited by the Picts.

Lavedan, an iron-grey Gennet, so
called because it is bred
on Lavedon, one of the Pyrenean Mountains,
whereon the best horses of France are
bred.

Not found in OED.



Lavender, a kind of plant, otherwise called
spiknard, in Latin Lavendula.

Laver, or Ewer, a vessel to wash
in, from the Latin word Lavare, i. to
wash.

Laverd, or Loverd, (old word)
Lord.

Laverna, a certain goddesse worshipped by
the ancient Romans, accounted the Patronesse of Theeves,
who were thence called Laverniones; to her they
built a Temple called Lavernium, from whence one
of the gates of Rome near which it stood, was
called Por a Lavernalis.

Lavinia, the wife of Aeneas, from
whose name the City Lavinium had its
denomination. see more in Latinus, and Tyrrheus.

Launcelot, a Chirurgians Instrument used in
letting blood, otherwise called a Fleam, and in Italian
Lancetta; also a proper name. see Lancelot.

Launcepesado, or Lancepresado,
(French) the lowest officer in a Foot-company, or he that
commands over a maniple, which is a Band of 10
souldiers.

Laund, or Lawn in a Park,  (Ital.)
plain untilled ground.

Lavolta, (Ital.) a course held in sailing,
also a kind of dance.

Laureat, (lat.) crowned with Laurel, or the
bay-tree, which used to be worn by Conquerours in token of
Triumph, also laureated letters, were letters wrapt up in
Laurel or Bay-leaves, which the Roman Captains were wont
to send unto the Senate, to give them notice of their
Victories. This plant is said to be proof against thunder
and lightning.

Laurells, by a figure called Metonymy, is
ofttimes used for Triumph or Victory.
Cleop.

St. Laurence, the name of a famous Martyr,
who being a Deacon and Questor of the Roman church, and
being commanded by
Valerian the Prefect of the City to produce the
Treasures of the Church which Sextus committed to
his charge, he assembled together the poor, the lame, and
the sick, and told the officers
those were the Treasures of the Church; whereupon the
Prefect thinking he was
deluded, commanded he should be broiled upon a Gridiron,
and Laurence as soon as he was almost ready to
give up the ghost, said to the Prefect standing by, now
turn me on the other side, this is broiled enough. This
name is derived from the Latin word Laurus, i. a
Laurel or Bay-tree.

Acca Laurentia, the wife of Faustulus,
Shepherd of Amulius King of the
Latins, she took Romulus and
Remus (the grandchildren
of Numitor, whom his brother Amulius
had expelled the Kingdom) and nursed them up secretly as
her own, they being brought to her by her husband
Faustulus,
who found them sucking of a Wolf at the root of a
Fig-tree from thence called
Ruminalis, upon the banks of Tyber,
into which they had been cast by the command of
Amulius. Others say that the story of their
being fostered by a Wolf ariseth from hence, namely that
this woman from the gain
she made by the prostitution
of her body, was called Lupa, who dying very
rich, had divine honours



given her by the people of Rome, and
festival dayes kept,
which were called Laurentalia;
and from her other name Lupa those houses of
intertainment are called Lupanaria.


Lauriferous, (lat.) bearing Laurel, or Bays.

Lausus, the son of Numitor, and brother of Rhea
Silvia, he was slain by his Uncle Amulius,
after his father had been banisht the Kingdom, also the
son of Mezentius, King of the
Hetrurians, was so called, whom Aeneas
slew, as he went about to rescue his father, he was a
famous hunter of wilde beasts.

Law of Arms, a Law that giveth
precepts how rightly to
proclaim war, to make and observe leagues, to set upon the
enemy, to punish offenders in the camp,
&c.

Law of Marque, Mart, or reprisal, is that
whereby men take the goods of that
people of whom they have
received wrong, and cannot get ordinary Justice, when ever
they can catch them within their own Territories, or
limits.

Not found in OED.



Law Merchant, a special Law, proper to
Merchants, and differing from the
Common-law of England.

Law day, a Leet, or County-Court.

Lawing of Dogs, see Expeditate.

Lawlesse man, the same as out-law.

Lawn, see Laund.

A Lax, a kinde of fish without
bones.

Laxation, (lat.) a loosening, easing, or
setting free.

Laxity, (lat.) loosenesse.

Lay, (French) a song.

Lazaret, (Ital.) an Hospital, a spittle for
Lazers, or Lepers.

Lazarus, (Hebr.) Lords help.

Lazule, a kinde of Azure, or blewish stone,
much used in Physick.


L E

Leach, (old word) a Physitian.

A league, a certain proportion of ground in
length onely, consisting of about two, or three miles, it
is called in Latin Leuco, from the Greek word
Leucos, i. e. white, because formerly the end of
every league used to be noted with a white stone, whence
ad primum aut secundum lapidem ab urbe, at the
first, or second stone from the Citie, was as much as to
say, one, or two leagues from the Citie. League is also
derived from the Latin word Ligare, and
signifieth an agreement, Pact, or Covenant.

Leafdian, or Hleafdian, (Sax.) a
Lady.

Leam, a line to hold a Dogge in, it is also
called a Leash.

Leander, a noble youth of Abydos,
a Town in Asia, situated upon the shore of the
Hellespont, he being in love with Hero,
one of Venus Nuns, who dwelt in Sestos,
a Town of the opposite bank, used to swim over to her in
the night time, which having done several times without
danger, at length in his
passage over, he was orewhelmed by a storm, and drowned in
the Hellespont.

Learchus, the son of Athamas, King
of Thebes,
and Ino, the daughter of Cadmus, he was
slain by his father, who in a raging madnesse, took him
for a Lyons whelp, whereupon Ino fled with her
other son Melicerta, & both of them cast themselves into the Sea, and were
changed into Sea gods, and called by the Greeks
Leucothea & Paloemon,
by the Latins Matuta &
Portumnus.

Lease, a word used in Common-law, and
signifieth a demising, or letting of Lands, or Tenements,
or right of a Rent, unto another for term of years, or of
life, or for a Rent reserved, if it be in writing it is
called a Lease by indenture, if by word of mouth, a Lease
Parole, the party that letteth
the Lease, is called the Leassour, the party that
taketh it, the Leassee, being derived from the
French word Laisser, i. to leave, or
permit.

Leash, see Leam.

Leasungs, or Leasings, (Sax.)
lies.

Leaveret, (French) Diminutive, a
young Hare.

Lecanomancy, (Greek) a divining by water in
a Bason.

Lectern, a kinde of Desk used in
Churches.

Lectistern, (lat.) the setting out, and
adorning of a bed for a Compotation, or Banquet, a custome
used by the ancients at their solemne feasts, who also
used to rear the images of their Gods upon the
Pillow's.

See "lectisternium" in OED.



Lecturer, or Lectour, (lat.) a
publick Professour, a Reader of Lectures, i. e.
certain portions of an
Author, or Science read in the publick Schools.

Leda, the wife of Thestius, and
the daughter of Tyndarus, King of
Laconia, she being got with Childe by
Jupiter, (who to deceive her transformed himself
into a Swan) brought forth two Eggs, out of one of which
was born Pollux and Helena, out of the
other Castor and Clytemnestra.



Ledors, (French) reproaches, reviling Terms.


Leed, or Lide, an old word,
signifying the moneth of March, whence Cow-hides
are called Lide pilles.

Leeds, a Castle in Kent, which
Bartho­
lomew Lord Baldismer fortified against King
Edward the second, who had freely
given it him, whereupon he
lost his life; also a place in York-shire, where
Oswy King of Northumberland overthrew
Penda the Mercian.

The Leer of a Deer, a Term among Hunters,
the place wherein he lies to dry himself, after he hath
been wet by the dew.

Leero, see Lyrick.

Not found in OED.



Leet, (Sax.) a Law-day whence Court
Leet, is a Court, or Jurisdiction,
containing the third
part of a Shire, and comprehending
three, or four wapen-takes, or hundreds, the
Leets were called by the Romans Fasti,
wherein the Prætor
might lawfully keep Court, and administer
Justice, which was not
done without the speaking of these three words, Do,
Dico, Addico,
i. e. I give, viz. way to actions and suites. I
speak, viz. the Law. I Judge, viz.
matters and men.

Legality, (lat.) lawfulnesse, an
observing of the
Law.

Legatary, (lat.) one to whom a Legacy is
bequeathed.

Legation, (lat.) the sending of a
message, or embassage.

Legate, (lat.) an Oratour, or
Ambassadour to any
Prince.

Legend, or Legendary, (French) the
Title of a book, containing
the lives of the Saints; also words graven about the edge
of a piece of Coyn.

Legeolium, the ancient name of a Town in
York-shire, vulgarly called Castleford,
where in old times the Citizens of York slew many
of King Ethelreds army.

Legerdemain, (French as it were, light of
hand) cousenage, or jugling tricks.

Legion, (lat.) a Company of Souldiers,
among the ancient Romans, consisting of three, or
four thousand foot, and three, or four hundred horse,
afterwards being increased
to six thousand foot, and six hundred
horse, every ordinary foot Legion consisting of ten
Cohorts, every Cohort of three Maniples, every Maniple of
two Centuries, & each Century of a 100 men, likewise
every horse Legion contained six Turmæ, or
Troupes, every Troup ten Decuries, and every
Decury ten
men; also there are in every Legion four Orders of
Souldiers, the Triarii,
the Principes, the Hastati, or Spearmen,
the Velites, or light-armed.

Legionary, (lat.) belonging to a
Legion.

Legislative, (lat.) having authority to
make, or give Laws.

Legislatour, (lat.) a Law-giver.

Legist, (lat.) a Lawyer.

Legitimate, (lat.) lawfull, done
according to Law and right.

Leguminous, (lat.) belonging to
pulse.

Leicester, the chief Citie of
Leicestershire,
called also Legeocester, Leogora, and
Legecestria,
this Citie was besieged by King Henry the third,
(when Earle Robert rebelled
against him) and the Wall round about it utterly
demolish't.

Leinster, a Province in Ireland,
containing these
following Counties, Kilkenny, Cærbogh, Queens County,
Kings County, Kildare,
Weshford, Dublin.

Leman, a Concubine, or Catamite,
(Pullus Jovis Latin) some say it comes from the
French word Le mignon, or Leyman, as
it were ly by man.

Lemannus, the Lake Leman, upon
which stands the Citie of Geneva.

Lemnos, an Island in the Aegean
Sea, famous for the fall of
Vulcan, who by reason
of his deformity, being thrown down from heaven, as soon
as he was born, hapned to
light in this place, whence he was called the
Lemnian God, this Island was originally known by
the name of Hipsipylæa,
from a daughter of Thoas of that name, who was
Queen thereof.

Lemster, a Town of Herefordshire,
so called q. Leonminster, from a Lyon that
appeared to a certain religious man as some have fabled,
others more probably derive it from a Church of Nuns built
by Merwalck, a King of the
Mercians; for those which we call Nuns, the ancient
Brittains termed Leans, some there are
that derive it from Line, whereof the best sort
groweth there, this Town is now adayes very famous for
Wool, which is called Lemster Ore; it was defaced
by W. de Breosa, Lord of Brecknock, when
he revolted from King John.

Lemures, (lat.) certain spirits, or
apparitions, vulgarly
called Hobgoblins.

Lenity, (lat.) mildnesse, softnesse,
gentlenesse.

Lenitive, or Lenient, (lat.) softning,



of an asswaging or pacifying power.


Lenitude, (lat.) the same as
Lenity.

Lennox, a County in the south part of
Scotland, so called from the River
Levin, which Ptolomy calleth
Letanonius.

Lenonian, (lat.) belonging to a Pander or
Band.

Lentigenous, (lat.) belonging to
Lentills which are a kind
of round and flat pulse growing in hot Countries, also
full of little pimples or freckles resembling
Lentills.

Lentisk, (lat.) a kind of tree called the
Mastick-tree, from which there is taken a Gum of very
great vertue.

Lentitude, (lat.) slacknesse, slownesse, or
negligence.

Lentour, (lat.) stiffnesse, or
clammynesse.

Lent-season, (in Lat.
Quadragesima) a Fast of fourty dayes, instituted
by the Church, and first appointed to be kept in
England by Ercombert a King of
Kent. It comes from the Dutch word Lente,
i. Spring, because it ever happens to be
about the beginning of the
Spring time, or as others say, from length, because about
this time the dayes begin to lengthen.

Leo, the name of several Roman
Emperours reigning at
Constantinople; also the name of several Popes of
Rome, also one of the 12 Signes.

Leocorion, a Monument erected by the
Athenians, in honour of Leo the son of
Orpheus, who when no body else would permit their
daughters to be sacrificed to the gods to divert a great
pestilence which then raged in the City, willingly
consented to the offering up of his three daughters,
Pasithea, Theope, and Eubule.

Leodegar, or Leger, a German
proper name, signifying a gatherer of the people.

Leodium, a famous City of Germany,
anciently called Ebur num Augusta, and is said to
have been built by Ambioriges, a King of
Germany, who also called it Legia, from
the cutting off of a Roman Legion in a valley near unto
it; at this day it is named Luttich or
Leige.

Leofstan, i. most beloved, a Saxon name
Leofwin, i. Winlove.

Leoh, (Sax.) light.

Not found in OED.



Leonard, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Dutch
popular disposition as Lipsius will have it; but
as others say, Lion-like disposition, answering to the
Greek name Thymoleon.

Leonidas, a famous Captain and King of the
Lacedemonians, who defending the Streights of
Thermopylæ against the whole Army of
Xerxes, was himself slain,
together with all his men.

Leonine, (lat.) belonging to, or like a
Lion.

Leopard, or Libberd, a certain
African beast, otherwise called a
Panther: this beast is all over full of streakes
or little spots, and is begotten between a Pard and a
Lionesse.

Leopold, q. Leodpold, the proper name of a
man, signifying in Dutch Defender of the people, being in
imitation of the Greek names Demochares, i.
gracious to the people, and Demophilus, i. a
lover of the people, and Laodamus, i. tamer of
the people: the chief of this name was
Leopoldus
Arch-Duke of Austria.

Leorning cnight, (Sax.) a disciple or scholar.

Lepid, (lat.) neat, jocund, pleasant in
speech, or behaviour.

Leporine, (lat.) belonging to a
Hare.

Leprosie, (Greek) a kind of disease which
causeth a white scurfe to run all over the body; it is
also termed Elephantiasis,
from the roughnesse of an Elephants skin, which it
resembleth.

Lerna, a Lake near the City of
Argos, where the Serpent Hydra was slain
by Hercules.

Lesbos, an Island in the Aegæan
Sea, which in old time obtained the Empire of all
Troas. It is now called Metelin, from
the chief City thereof Mitylene, the rest were
Eressos, Antissa, Portus, Methymna.

Lesinage, (Ital) thriftinesse,
sparingnesse, good husbandry, from Lesina which signifieth a Coblers
aule.

Not found in OED.



Lesion, or Læsion, (lat.) a
hurting or endamaging.

Lessee and Lessor, see Lease.

Lesses, the dung of a Boare.

Lessian diet, a moderate temperate diet,
from Lessius a famous modern Physitian, who wrote
divers rules for the keeping of an exact and temperate diet.

Lestage, see Lastage.

Lestrigones, or Læstrigones,
a certain barbarous people, and of a vast Giant-like
stature, that anciently inhabited
Formiæ a City
of Campania, and were said to live upon Human
flesh, their King Antiphates
oppos'd Vlisses with all his might when he
landed on that coast, and tore



one of his companions in pieces with his teeth.


Letanie, (Greek) the Book of Divine-service
used in Churches, from Liteuo, or Lissomai,
i. to pray and supplicate.

Lethality, (lat.) deadlinesse or
mortality.

Lethargick, (Greek) sick of a Lethargy,
i. e. a disease which causeth an excessive
drousinesse and sleepinesse.

Lethean, (lat.) forgetful, from
Lethe a River of Hell, which the Poets feign to
be of that nature that the water of it being drunk,
causeth oblivion or forgetfulnesse.

Lethiferous, (lat.) bringing death,
deadly.

Letifical, or Lætifical, (lat.)
making glad or joyful.

Not found in OED.



Letter missive, (lat.) an Epistle or
Letter sent from one party
to another, from the Latin word Mittere, i. to
send.

Letters of Atturney, writings whereby an
Atturney or any friend made choice of for that purpose, is
appointed to do a lawful act in anothers stead, from which
warrants of Atturny
differ in this, that besides being sealed and delivered
before sufficient witnesse, they must also be acknowledged
before a Justice or Serjeant.

Letters of Mart, or Marque, are
Letters which authorize any one to take by force of armes
those goods which are due by the Law of Marque. see Law of
Marque.

Letters Patents, are writings sealed open
with the Broad-Seal of England, whereby a man is
authorized to do or injoy any thing which of himself he
could not, from the Latin word patere, i. to lie
open.

Lettice, a Christian name of severall
women, from the Latin Lætitia, i.
joyfulnesse,
mirth.

Lettice, a kind of plant called in Latin Lactuca, because in women that eat of it, it
breedeth milk.

Levament, or Levation, (lat.) an
enlightning, easing,
comforting, also a lifting
up or causing to rise.

Levant and Couchant, (French)
terms used in Common Law, when the beasts or cattel of a
stranger come into another mans ground, and there have
remained a good space, i. rising and lying down.
Levant is also taken for the Eastern
Countries.

Levari facias, the name of a Writ
directed to the Sheriff,
for the levying of a sum of money upon the lands of him
that hath forfeited his Recognisance.

Leucophlegmatick, (Greek) troubled with a
disease called Leucophlegmaty, i. a Dropsie
caused by the abounding of white flegme.

Leucothea, see Ino.

Leucothoe, the daughter of
Orchamus King of the Babylonians, with whom
Apollo being in
love, transformed himself into the shape of
Eurynome her mother, & pretending private
businesse with her, he re-assumed his former shape, and
won her by fair speeches to consent to his desires;
whereupon Clytia, who was in love with
Apollo, growing extreamly envious,
declared the whole
businesse to Orchamus, who in a great fury caused
his daughter to be buried alive, whose death
Apollo grieving
at, transformed her into the Frankincense-tree,
and Clytia seeing her self contemned of
Apollo, pined her self away, and was turned into
a Marygold.

Leuctra, a Town in Boeotia, where
the Thebans under Epaminondas gave the
Lacedemonians
so total an overthrow, that they could never after recover
themselves.

Level-Coil, (French) is, when he that hath
lost the game sits out, and gives
another his place, as it
were lever le cul, i. to lift up or remove the
buttock; it is also called Hitchbuttock.

Levie, (French) signifieth in Common Law,
to erect or sit up, also to tax or
gather money.

Leviathan, an Hebrew word,
signifying a Whale, or
as some think a water-serpent of a vast bignesse.

Levigation, or Lævigation, (lat.)
a making plain or
smooth.

Levitical, belonging to the Tribe of
Levi, or to the Priestly office, which in the
time of the Law, was the peculiar
inheritance of that Tribe.

Levity, (lat.) lightnesse.

Lewis, the chief Town of Sussex,
famous for the great pitcht battle fought between King
Henry the third, and the Barons of
England.

Lewis, the proper name of a man,
contracted from Lodowic.

Lewlin, or Lewellin, the proper
name of a man, signifying in the old Brittish tongue
Lion-like, and is
equivalent to the Latin name Leontius, and
Leoninus.



Lexicon, (Greek) a Vocabulary, or Dictionary.


Lex talionis, (lat.) a law which
recompenceth exactly
one good or ill turn for another.

Leyerwit, Lotherwit, (Sax.) a liberty to
take amends of him that defileth ones bondwoman without
licence.


L H

Lhan, in the Brittish tongue, signifieth a
Church, as Lhan Badern Vaur, the Church of great
Patern; Lhan Stuphadon, the Church of St.
Stephens.


L I

Libation, or Libament, (lat.) an
offering up or sacrificing to God the first taste of any
thing that is eat or drunk.

Libb, (old word) to geld, from the Greek
word thlibein, i. to presse.

Libell, (lat.) a little book, also a
scandalous or invective
writing, secretly cast abroad or published by stealth;
also an original declaration of any action in the Civil
Law.

Liberate, the name of a warrant issuing out
of the Chancery, to the Treasurer, Chamberlaines, and
Barons of the Exchequer,
for the payment of any annual pension, or other sums
granted under the Broad-Seal.

Liberation, (lat.) a freeing, or
delivering.

Liber Pater, a name attributed to
Bacchus the god
of wine.

Libertas, (lat.) a priviledge held by grant
or prescription, whereby men injoy
some benefit or favour beyond the
ordinary subject, also the name of a goddesse
among the ancient Romans, who had a Temple built unto her
upon the hill Aventinus.

Libertatibus allocandis, a Writ that lieth
for a Citizen or Burgesse of a City, who refusing or
deferring to allow his priviledge,
is impleaded before the Kings Justices.

Libertinism (lat.) the state and
condition of a
Libertine, i. e. one born or made free, a
freeman; also Libertinism, or
Libertinage, is taken for sensuality,
licentiousnesse,
a dissolute life and conversation.

Libethra, a Town seated upon the mountain
Olympus, of which it was
foretold by the Oracle, that all the inhabitants
should be destroyed by a Sow, when the Sun should behold
Orpheus his bones, which was thus verified; A
great multitude of
people being gathered together to hear a Shepherd sing in
the way which leadeth from Dion to
Olympus, a large Urn containing Orpheus
his bones, which stood in that place, was overturned and
his bones laid open to view, and the very same day, a
great violent stream called Sys (which in Greek
signifieth a Sow) overflowing, destroyed the whole Town
with all the people in it. Libethra is also the
name of a Fountain of Magnesia, sacred to the
Muses who are thence called Libethrides.

Libidinous, (lat.) sensual, incontinent,
full of lustful desires.

Libitina, an ancient goddesse worshipt by
the Romans, who was the Patronesse of Funerals,
Sepulchres, and all things belonging to the dead.

Libral, (lat.) belonging to a weight or
measure called Libra, which is also the name of one of the
12 Signs of the Zodiack
into which the Sun entring, causeth the autumnal 
Equinoctial.

Library, (lat.) a studdy, or place where
Books are kept.

Libration, (lat.) a weighing, or
ballancing.

Librata terræ, see Farding deale of
land.

Libya, the fourth part of the World,
commonly called Africa.

Licence to arise, in Common Law, is a
liberty given by the Court to a tenant that is essoynd
de malo lecti in a reall action, after he hath
been viewed by Knights thereunto appointed, until which
time, if the Demandant can prove that he hath been seen
out of his chamber, or walking up and down his grounds, he
shall be adjudged to be deceitfully
essoyned.

Licentiate, (lat.) one that hath full
licence or authority to practice in any Art; the same with
him that we commonly call Bachelour of Divinity, or of
Physick, or of Civil Law, and in Common Law a
Barrister.

Licentious, (lat.) loose, disorderly,
unruly.

Lichas, a boy that waited upon
Hercules, by him Deianira sent the
shirt that was dipt in the Centaurs blood, which
Hercules
having put on, and perceiving the



venome to seize upon his body, he in a
fury took Lichas
by the hair of the head and flung him into the Sea,
where he was immediately
changed into a Rock.


Lichfield, a Town in
Staffordshire, by Bede called
Licidfield, i. the field of dead bodies, from a
great number of people, who as some say were martyred here
in the time of Dioclesian.

Lich-fowles, ominous, or ill-boding birds,
as the Night-raven, and Lich-owle, commonly
called the Scritch-owle, the word Lich,
signifying in the Saxon
language a Carcase, or dead body.

Licitation, (lat.) a cheapning, a setting
out to sale, also an enhauncing of a price.

Licite, (lat.) lawfull, allowable.

Lictorian, (lat.) belonging to the
Lictors, who were certain
Officers among the ancient Romans twelve in number, who
carried the Axes and bundles of rods before the
Magistrate, they are now taken for the same as we commonly
call Sergeants.

Liddesdale, a Countrey in the South part of
Scotland, so called as it were a dale by the
River Lidde.

Lide, see Leed.

Lieftenant, (French) as it were
holding the place, one
that executeth any place, Office, or imployment in
anothers stead, or absence.

Lief, or Leof, (Sax.)
rather.

Lief-hebber, (Sax.) a Lover.

Liege, (French) in Common-law is
taken either for the
Liegelord, or he that acknowledgeth
Liegeancie, or Fealty to his Liege
Lord.

Liegeancie, or Ligeance, (French)
such a duty, or fealty as no man may owe, or bear to more
then one Lord, also Ligeance is used for the
Territory, or Dominions of the Liege Lord.

Lierwit, see Leyerwit.

Not found in OED.



Lifts, in Navigation, are certain ropes,
which serve to top the yard arms of all yards to make the
ends of them hang higher, or lower, or even as we
lift.

Ligament, or Ligature, (lat.) a
band, or string to tie with; in Anatomy it is taken for
the string wherewith the joynts of bones and gristles are
fastned and knit together.

Ligation, (lat.) the act it self of tying,
or binding.

Ligne, (French) to couple as Dogs with
bitches.

Not found in OED.



Lignation, (lat.) a providing for, or going
to fetch wood.

Lignean, or Ligneous, (lat.)
woodden, made of wood.

Lignum vitæ, the wood, commonly
called Aloes, by the
Arabians Calambuco.

Liguria, a hilly Countrey of
Italy, reaching from the
Apennine
to the Tuscan Sea.

Ligurion, (lat.) a glutton, or
devourer.

Liguration, (lat.) a ravenous
devouring.

Lilie, (lat.) a kinde of specious flowr,
otherwise the rose of Juno.

Lilith, the name of a certain she Devil
which the Jews imagined to be a
destroyer of children.

Lilybæum, a Promontory in Sicily,
having a Town of the same name upon it.

Limaceous, (lat.) belonging unto, or like a
Snail, slimy.

Limation, (lat.) a filing, or
pollishing.

Limbers, or Limber-holes, (a Term
in Navigation) certain little square holes cut in the
bottome of the ground Timbers,
and hooks next to the Keel to let water passe to the well
of the Pump.

Limbus Patrum, (lat.) a place where the
Saints deceased are said to reside untill the day of
Judgement, being as it were the skirts, or confines of
Hell.

Limenarch, (Greek) the Governour of a Port.

Limitation, (lat.) a stinting, or setting
of bounds.

Limitation of Assise, is a certain time set
down by Statute, within which a man must alleage himself,
or his Ancestours to have been seised of Lands sued for by
a Writ of Assize.

Limning, a kinde of Painting, which is done
in water colours, and also differs from the other sort of
painting in the preparing
of the colours.

Limosity, (lat.) muddinesse, fulnesse of mud.

Limpid, (lat.) pure, clear,
transparent.

A Limpin, a kinde of fish, otherwise
called a muscle.

Linament, (lat.) linnen thread, also a
tent, or lint for a wound.

Lincoln, the chief Citie of
Lincolnshire, anciently called Lindum,
and by the Brittains Lindecoit, by Bede Lindecollina
civitas, from the old Brittish Lhin,
as Cambden is of opinion, which signifieth a Lake, it



being situate near a Lake, and upon a hill, in this
Citie Vortimer, the scourge of the
Saxons ended his dayes.


Lincoln Colledge, a Colledge in
Oxford, founded by Richard Fleming,
Bishop of Lincoln.

Lindsey, see Holland.

Lincolns Inne, one of the Inns of Court,
heretofore the house of Sir Henry Lacy Earle of
Lincoln, now a place for Students of the Law.

Lineament, (lat.) the feature, or
proportion of any thing drawn out onely in lines.

Linear, (lat.) belonging to a line.

Ling, a kinde of small shrub, otherwise
called Heath, in Latin Erix.

Lingel, a little tongue, or thong.

Lingot, see Ingot.

Linguacity, (lat.) a being full of tongue,
or much given to talk.

Linguist, one that is skilfull in tongues,
or languages.

Linigerous, (lat.) bearing Flax, or
Hemp.

Liniment, (lat.) an oynting, or
daubbing over.

Linsie-woolsey, a kinde of mixt cloath,
part linnen, part woollen.

Lintels, (French) the head pieces over a
door, also the same as Lentils, i. a kinde of
pulse.

Linus, the son of Apollo, and
Psammas, the daughter of Crotopus, King
of Argos, by whom Apollo being
intertained as he came from slaying the Serpent
Pytho, lay privately with Psammas, who
proving with Childe brought forth Linus, who
having committed some offence, and hiding
himself among certain
bushes, was found out and torn in pieces by the Dogs, also
the son of Apollo and Terpsichore,
one of the nine Muses, he proved a very famous
Musitian, taught Thamyras, Orpheus, and
Hercules, by
whom, as some say, he was knockt on the head, because he
laught at him for playing unhandsomely.

Linx, (lat.) a kinde of spotted beast,
otherwise called an Ounce.

Lionel, the proper name of a man, in
Latin Leonellus, i. little Lyon.

Lions paw, a kinde of Herb, called in Greek
Leontopodium.

Lipothymie, (Greek) a distemper, which
causeth a fainting, or swouning by reason of sudden decay,
or oppression of the vital spirits.

Lippitude, (lat.) a waterishnesse of the
eyes, a looking bloud-shot, or blear-eyed.

Liptote, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure,
wherein more is understood then is
express't.

Liquation, or Liquefaction, (lat.)
a melting, dissolving, or
making Liquid, i. moist or of a watery
substance.

Liquids, (lat.) are those four
Consonants, which do
as it were melt in the pronunciation, namely
L.M.N.R. the rest are called mutes.

Liquidation, (lat.) a making moist.

Lisard, or Lizard, (French, from
the Latin Lacerta)
a certain beast, so called because
it hath feet like the brawne, or
sinews of a mans arms, or
thighs, also the Lizard point, the utmost
Southwest point of Cornwall.

Litanie, see Letanie.

Litation, (lat.) a sacrificing.

Literature, (lat.) knowledge in letters,
learning.

Lithargie, or Litargie, (Greek)
the foam that riseth from silver, or lead, when they are tried.

Lither, (old word) lazy, or
sluggish.

Lithoglyphick, (Greek) a graver, or
cutter in stones.

Lithomancie, (lat.) a Divination, the
casting of pebble stones.

Lithotomie, (Greek) a cutting of stones, a
quarry whence stones are digged.

Litigation, (lat.) a contending, or
wrangling.

Litigious, (lat.) full of strife,
contentious.

Litispendence, (lat.) the hanging of a
suit, till it be decided.

Litmose blue, a kinde of blue colour, used in painting and
limning.

Litoral, or Litorean, (lat.)
belonging to the shore, 
sea-side, or side of a river.

Liturgie, (Greek) signifieth in general any
publick Office, but particularly
Divine service, or the
function of a Minister.

Liverie, (French) the Cognizance,
device, or badge, which a
Noble-man, or Gentleman gives to his servants and
followers, also Livery of seisin is a Ceremony used in
Common-law, being a delivery of possession of Lands, or
Tenements, or other things unto another, also a Writ,
which lieth for the Heir to obtain the possession, and
seizin of his Lands at the Kings hands.

Lividity, or Livor, (lat.) a kinde of



leaden or dead blewish colour in the body, caused by a
stroke ar blow given; also metaphorically taken for
spite or envy.


Lixiviated, (lat.) washed with lye made of
ashes.

Lizard, see Lisard.


L O

Loach, or Lohoch, (French) a kind
of Confection or Electuary that is to be licked, or
suffered to melt in the mouth without chewing; it is an
Arabick word, and signifieth in the Latin
Linctus, i. a licking.

Lobbe, or Lobling, a kind of great
north Sea-fish.

"lobling" not found in OED.



Local, in Common Law, is as much as tied or
annexed to a place.

Location, (lat.) a placing, or setting in
place, also a letting out to hire.

Lockers, little cupbords which are made by
the ships sides, to put in shot, by the pieces.

Lococession, (lat.) a yeilding or giving place.

Locomotion, (lat.) a moving out of a place,
or from place to place.

Locrians, or Locri, a people of
Locris in Greece inhabiting on either side of the
Hill Parnassus. Locris is also a City of that
part of Italy called Magna Græcia,
built by those Locrians that followed Ajax
Oileus to Troy.

Loculament, (lat.) a little place distinct,
or apart by it self.

Locuplete, (lat.) abounding with riches,
wealthy.

Locust, (lat.) a kind of winged Insect,
commonly taken for a Grasshopper; but others think it to
be the same with that which the Frenchmen call
Cigale.

Locution, (lat.) a speaking or
saying.

Lodemanage, the hire of a Pilot for
conducting of a ship from one place to another, from the
Dutch word loot, i. lead.

Lodesman, a Guide or Pilot, from the same
word loot; whence he is also called
Lootsman.

Lodestar, the Cynosure or North-Star which
guideth Mariners.

Lodestone, as it were a leading-stone,
because by it Mariners are guided and
directed in their
voyages: It is of a rusty-iron colour, and hath the vertue
to attract or draw iron to
it, whereby many admirable secrets are performed.

Lodeworkes and Stremeworks, certain workes
in the Stannery in Cornwall; these are performed
in the higher grounds by making deep wells which
they call shafts, those in the lower grounds by digging of
trenches and diverting the course of the Rivers.

Not found in OED.



Lodge, a Buck is by the Forresters said to
lodge, when he goes to his rest.

Log, the name of an Hebrew measure, and
thought by some to be of the same quantity with
Sextarius Atticus.

Logarithmes, (Greek) are certain
borrowed numbers which
differ among themselves
by Arithmetical proportion as the numbers which borrow
them differ by Geometrical proportion.

Log-line, a term in Navigation, being a
small line with a little piece of board at the end, with a
little lead to it, to keep it edge-long in the water, the
use of which is, by seeing how many fathom this runs in a
minute, to give a judgement how many leagues the ship will
run in a watch.

Logician, (Greek) one that hath skill in
Logick, i. the art of disputing
probably in any argument.

Logist, (Greek) one skilled in the
Logistick Art, i. the Art of reckoning or casting account; also
Logists were certain Officers among the Athenians
ten in number, to whom all
such as had ended their Magistracy gave an account within
30 dayes of all those affairs whereof they had had the
administration, they also kept an account of the monies,
and of all matters belonging to the publick
Revenue.

Logographers, (Greek) those that write
pleas in the Law, or books of account, Lawyers Clerks.

Logomachy, (Greek) a verbal strife, a
contention in words.

Lohoch, see Loach.

Lollards, a Sect of Hereticks that
abounded here in
England in the dayes of
Edward the third,
and Henry the fifth; so called from one
Gualter Lollard a German the first Author of
them: or as others say, from lolium, because they
were accounted as darnel
or cockle growing among
wheat.

Lombard, or Lombar, a Bank for usury
or pawns, from the Longobardi, or
Lombards, a
people inhabiting the hithermost part of Italy,
formerly called Insubria,



much addicted to usury, whence ofttimes Usurers are
called Lombardeers.


Lome, (old word) clay or mortar.

London, the chief City of England,
situate in Middlesex, so called as Cambden
conjectureth, either from Lhun (which in the
Brittish tongue signifieth a Grove) or Lhong,
(i. a ship) and Dinas, i. a City, so
that it may seem to have been anciently termed
Lhundinas, i. a City thick of trees, or
Lhongdinas, i. a City of Ships, from whence the
Latins derive the word Londinum.
It was called Augusta, and Troja Nova,
being first founded by Brutus, who sprang of the
Trojan race, and repaired by King Lud,
and thence called Cærlud, or
Luds-town.

Longævity, (lat) length of age, long
life.

Longanimity, (lat.) as it were length of
mind, long-suffering, patience,
forbearance.

Longinquity, (lat) far distance, or length
of place.

Longitude, (lat.) the length of any thing,
also the Longitude of a Region, City, or Cape, is the
distance of it East, numbred in the Equinoctial by
Meridians, from the first general and fixed Meridian. The
Longitude of a star, is the arch of the
Ecliptick intercepted
between the beginning of
Aries, and the circle of the stars
Latitude.

Long-Meg, the name of a stone 15 foot high,
erected near Salkeld in Cumberland, next
which are 77 more erected in a circular
manner, which the country people call the Daughters of
Long-Meg.

Long-primer, one of the sorts of
Characters used by
Printers.

The Loof, of a Ship, is that part aloft of
a Ship, that lies before the ches-trees, as far as the
bulk-head of the castle.

A Ship Loomes a great or a small sail, a
term used in Navigation, and signifieth as much as a Ship
seems a great or a little Ship.

Lootsman, see Lodesman.

Loover, a place made open (to let out the
smoak) on the top of a house, from the French word
l'overt, open.

Lopum, a great Desart in the Country of
Bactria, in which it is reported that certain
evil spirits do abide, by which strangers that passe that
way being called by their names, and following the voice,
perish miserably.

Loquacity, (lat.) talkativenesse, or a
being given to much
babling.

Loquabre, a Country in the North part of
Scotland, so called, q. the mouth of the
Lake.

Lorament, (lat.) that which is
composed of thongs of
leather.

Loray-law, an article found in the
memorials of the chamber
of account in France, which ordaineth, that if a
combat be once accepted, and afterwards taken up, by
consent of the Lord of the Fee, each of the parties is to
pay two shillings six pence, but if it be performed, the
party vanquisht forfeits 112 shillings.

Not found in OED.



Lordane, or Lourdane, a dull heavy
fellow, a lazy lubber, it
being a proverbial word taken from the tyranny of the
Danes over the English, who were forced to
labour and till the ground
for them, while they sate idle and ate the fruits of their
labours.

Lore, (Sax.) learning or skill.

Loricated, (lat) armed with mail.

Lorimers, (French) the name of a Trade and
Company in London, that makes bits, spurs, and
all kind of small iron-work, and is by some derived from
the Latin word Lorum.

Loriot, (French) a Bird called a
Witwall, Woodpecker, or
Greenfinch.

Lorn, the name of a County in the south
part of Scotland.

Lorty's, a great and ancient Family of
Sommersetshire, stiled in Latin records, de
Vrtiaco.

Losenger, a flatterer, a word used by
Chaucer.

Lotharius, the son of Ludovicus
Pius, Emperour of Germany, and King of
France, he succeeded his father in the Empire;
but his brothers Charles and Lodowic,
not contented with their portions, and raising an army
against their brother, a great battle
was fought at Fontenay, in the borders of
France, where Lotharius was put to
flight, but at last they came to an
agreement, and
Lotharius after he had reigned about 15 years
betook himself to the Prumiensian
Monastery. There were also several
Kings of France and Dukes of
Lorrain of his
name.

Lothbrook, (i. Leatherbreech) a
certain Dane, whose daughters were so skilful at
needle-work, that the Danes bare in their Ensign a Raven
of their working, with such an opinion of good successe,
that they imagined it would never be won.

Lotherwit, see Leyerwit.



Lotion, (lat.) a washing or cleansing with
water, also in Physick it is used for the taking away of
any superfluous quality
out of any medicament, or the bringing on of a new one.


Lotis, or Lotus, the daughter of
Neptune, she fleeing from Priapus (who
made an attempt upon her
chastity) and invoking the help of the gods, was turned
into the Lote-tree.

Lotophagi, a certain people of
Africa, dwelling near the Syrtes, so
called because they feed much upon the Lote-tree, which is
a tree of that nature, that when the companions of
Vlisses being cast upon the coast of
Africa had tasted of the fruit of it, they could
hardly be got from thence to return into their own
Country, whence the word is proverbially used for those
that are forgetful of their Parents,
Country and
Kindred.

Lovell's, an ancient Family in
Northamptonshire,
stiled in Latin records, de
Lupello.

Loverd, or Laverd, (old word) a
Lord.

Lourdain, see Lordane.

Louvre, a stately Palace in Paris,
and the chief seat of the Kings of France, built
by Francis the first, and augmented with a long
stately Gallery by Henry the fourth.

Lowbell, as it were loud bell, a certain
bell hung about the neck of a weather.

Lozenge, a little square cake made of
preserved herbs, in the form of a Rhomb or a quarrel of
Glasse.


L U

Lua, a certain goddesse among the
ancient Romans, she was
the goddesse of all lustrations and purging from
sin.

Lubricity, (lat.) slipperinesse.

Lucernes, a kind of rich Fur, taken from a
beast of the same name, breeding in Russia and
those Northerly Countries.

Lucia, a Christian name of divers
women, signifying in Latin Lightsome.

Lucida Lancis, a Star in 9 degrees 45
minutes of Scorpio.

Lucidity, (lat.) brightnesse,
shiningnesse.

Lucifer, (lat.) as it were lightbearing,
the morning Star called in Greek
Phosphorus.

Lucina, a name attributed to Juno,
as she is the Patronesse of Childbirth, or as some say to
Diana or the Moon.

Lucius, the prænomen of divers famous men
among the Romans; as Lucius Sylla, Lucius Antonius
Commodus the Emperour, Lucius Septimius
Severus, and many others. The first of this name is
likely to have been so called from being born in the dawn
or first shining of the day.

Lucre, (lat.) gain or profit, whence
Lucration a gaining or winning.

Lucretia, the daughter of Lucretius
Tricipitinus Prefect of Rome, and the wife
of Tarquinius Collatinus, she being ravisht by
Sextus the son of Tarquinius
Superbus King of the
Romans, slew her self, which was the cause of banishing
both Tarquin and Kingly Government from
Rome which was afterwards ruled by Consuls chosen
anew every year, and this act of Lucretia hath
ever since been so famed, that every chast woman is
proverbially called a
Lucrece.

Luctation, (lat.) a striving or
wrestling.

Luctatius Catulus, a famous Captain of the
Romans, who with 300 ships overcame
600 of the Carthaginians, and made an end of the
war.

Lucubration, (lat.) a studying or
working by
candle-light.

Luculency, (lat.) clearnesse, brightness,
fulnesse of light.

Lucullus, a famous Roman, being a man of
great eloquence, and ingenuity, he
having been successeful in
the wars against Mithridates, heaped up a mighty
masse of riches, after the war was ended, gave himself up
wholy to ease and delicacy, living
in more state and splendor than any of that Age besides, 
afterwards beginning to grow mad, he was given in charge
to his brother Marcus.

Ludibrious, (lat.) shameful, or
reproachful.

Ludicrous, (lat.) belonging to sport,
recreation, or
mockery.

Ludification, (lat.) a mocking or
deceiving.

Ludlow, a Town in Shropshire, in
Old times called Dinan, afterwards Lystwysoc,
i. the Princes Palace, it hath a fair Castle built by
Roger Montgomery, which was besieged by King
Stephen, who valiantly rescued Henry son
to the King of Scots, who was about to have been pulled
into the Castle with an iron hook.

Ludovicus Pius, the son of Charles the
Great (who was created Emperour by



Pope Leo) he succeeded his father in the Empire
and Kingdom of France, also
Ludovicus
hath been the name of several other Emperours and Kings
of France, this name according to Helmoldus
Nigellus is deriv'd from the Dutch words Hludo
Wiggh, i. e. famous Warrier.


Lugdunum, the chief Citie of Gallia
Celtica, vulgarly called Lyons, built by
Munatius Plancus, a Roman

Governour.

Lugubrous, (lat.) mournfull, heavy,
sorrowfull.

Luition, (lat.) a making satisfaction for
any offence, also a paying a ransome.

Luke, (Hebr.) rising, or lifting up.

Lumbar, see Lombar.

Luminaries, (in Lat. Luminaria)
lights, lamps, also conspicuous stars, as the sun and
moon, also the feast of Christs Nativity, commonly called
Christmas, was by the ancient Western Church, called
Luminaria.

Luminous, (lat.) full of light.

Lunæburgum, a great Citie of
Germany, built by Julius Cæsar,
vulgarly called Lunemburgh.

Lunar, belonging to the Planet of the Moon,
called in Latin Luna.

Lunatick, (lat.) troubled with a
Lunacy, i. a kinde
of madnesse, which happens
at certain times of the Moon.

Lunes for Hawks, leashes, or long lines to
call them.

Lungis, (French) a tall slim man that hath
no making to his heighth.

Lupercal, a place about Rome,
where anciently certain
feasts were celebrated to Pan, which were called
Lupercalia, from Lupa a she-wolf, which
gave Romulus suck, or as some say, a Harlot of
that name which nursed him.

Lupines, (lat.) a kind of little flat round
pulse, almost like a small bean.

Lurcation, (lat.) a greedy eating, or
playing the glutton, derived originally from
Lura, a great leathern bottle.

Lure for Hawks, a certain leathern
device, whereby with a
little piece of flesh, they call a Hawk from a good
distance off, it comes from the Dutch word
Læden, i. e. to invite.

Lurid, (lat.) pale, wan, of a sallow
colour.

Luscitation, (lat.) a being dim-sighted, or
pore-blind.

Lushborough, a base Coyn brought over from
beyond Sea, in the dayes of King Edward the
third.

† Lusion, (lat.) a playing, or
gaming.

Lusitania, the third part of
Spain, according
to the ancient division; it is now called
Portugal, and is a Kingdom by it self.

A Lusk, a slug, or sloathfull fellow, from
the French word lasche.

Lust of a ship, a Term in Navigation, when
a ship out of her own mold, and
making hath an inclination
more to one side then another.

Lustration, (lat.) a going about, also a
purging by sacrifice.

Lustre, (French) a shining, also from the
Latin word lustrum, it signifieth a Den of wilde
beasts, also the space of five years, by which space the
Romans were wont to compute the time.

Lutheranisme, the doctrine and
judgement of Martin
Luther, who being first a Monk of the Order of St.
Augustin forsook
the Church of Rome, and writ against the errors
of it.

Luteous, (lat.) muddy, or of a muddy
colour.

Lutulent, (lat.) miry, or dirty.

Lutzenburgum, or Lutzenburgh, a
Dutchy in the low Countreys, adjoining to Leige
and Namur, being one of the 17
Provinces, and having a
chief Citie of the same name.

Luxation, (lat.) a putting out of joynt, a
making loose.

Luxuriant, or Luxurious (lat.)
riotous, given to excesse, or debauchery.


L Y

Lycanthropy, (Greek) a kinde of
melancoly, or phrenzy,
which causeth those that are possest
therewith to think themselves
turned into Wolves, and to fly the company of men.

Lycaon, the son of Pelasgus, and King of
Arcadia, who when Jupiter came into
Arcadia in the likenesse of a mortal man,
resolved to try whether he were a God, or no, as men
reported him to be, and killing one of those, whom the
King of the Molossi
had left with him for pledges, he
caused him to be dressed,
and part rosted, to be set before Jupiter,
whereat he being highly provoked turned Lycaon
into a Wolf, and burnt his Pallace with
Thunder, others say it
was for sprinkling with the bloud of an Infant, an Altar
which he had erected to Jupiter upon the Mountain
Lycæus, a hill of Arcadia.



Lycaonia, a Countrey of Asia the
lesse, near Phrygia, and reaching as far as the
Mountain Taurus; also Arcadia was
heretofore so called
from Lycaon, the King thereof.


Lyceum, the name of a School, which
Cicero erected at his Mannor of
Tusculum, calling it so after the name of
Aristotles School, near Athens.

Lycomedes, a King of the Island
Scyrus, by whom Achilles being
intertained before he went to the Trojan War, and
conversing with his
daughters in womans apparel,
he got one of them called Deidamia with Childe,
and begat Pyrrhus.

Lycurgus, the son of Polydectes,
and King of Sparta, after the death of his
brother Eunomus, but he soon resigned up the
Crown to Charilaus his brothers son, and having
made wholesome laws for the good of the Common-wealth,
which were confirmed by
the approbation of the Delphic Oracle, he
afterwards retired himself to Cyrrha, where at
length he slew himself, and had a Temple built him, and
Divine honours given bim by the Lacedæmonians:
also the name of a King of Thrace, who proceeded
so violently against Bacchus, that he forced him
to retire himself to Naxus, and would have caused
all the Vines in his Kingdom to be rooted up, that no
sacrifice might be made to him, but ere he had effected
his design he fell mad, and cut off his own legs.

Lycus, a King of Boeotia, who
married Antiope, the daughter of
Nycteus, but she being got with Childe by
Jupiter in the form of a Satyr, he put her away
and married Dirce. see more in Dirce,
and Amphyon; also a King of Lybia, who
using to sacrifice his Guests, had intended the same thing
towards Diomede, but Callirroe the
daughter of Lycus, falling in love with him
delivered him out of Chains, and
being afterwards neglected
by him, hanged her self for grief.

Lydia, a Christian name of divers
women, from the Countrey so
called.

Lydia, a Kingdom of Asia the
lesse, so called from Lydus, the son of
Atys, who perceiving the people grow too numerous
for the Countrey, resolved to send out one of his sons, to
whose lot it should fall, to plant a Colony in some other
place, so that it falling to Tyrrenus his lot, he
went out with a great multitude of Lydians, and
choosing out a part of Italie, which lieth upon
the Sea-side, he called it from his own name
Tyrrhenum, his brother Lydus tarrying at
home succeeded his father Atys
in the Kingdom, and called it from his own name
Lydia, whereas before it was called
Mæonia.

Lydford Law, a certain Law, whereby they
first hang a man, and afterwards
indite him.

See OED "law", n. 8c.




Lymphatick, (lat.) mad, distracted, as it
were by seeing the likenesse of a Nymph in the water, from
Lympha, i. water.

Lynceus, the son of Apareus, and
one of the Argonauts, he was reported to be so
quick-sighted, that he could see through stone walls even
to the very deep it self, and that he could discern the
Moon in her last quarter, and the first, the very same
day, in the signe of Aries; whence a
sharp-sighted man is proverbially called a
Lynceus, also Lynceus and Idas
were two brothers, who fought with Castor and
Pollux, about the
two daughters of Leucippus, Castor fell by the
hand of Lynceus, Lynceus by the hand of
Pollux, Idas going about to slay Pollux,
was strook with Thunder from Heaven.

Lyncus, a King of Scythia, who
going about to kill Triptolemus his Guest as he
lay asleep, that he might gain to himself the glory of
inventing the use of Corn, was changed by Ceres
into a beast, called Lynx, or
Ounce.

Lyndus, a Citie of Rhodes, famous
for the solemne sacrifices, which in old time were
performed there to Hercules.

Lyra, one of the celestial
Asterism's, which
the Poets feigned to be Arions Harp.

Lyrick, verses, or songs, songs
composed to the Lyre, or
Harp, whence we say vulgarly, playing Leero-way on the
Viol, which is corruptly used for Lyra-way, i. e.
Harp-way.

Lysander, a Captain of the
Lecedæmonians,
who overcame the Athenians under the command of
Conon in a very great battel.

Lysidice, the daughter of Pelops,
she was married to Electryon, and brought forth
Alckmena the mother of Hercules.

Lysimachus, the son of Agathocles, and
one of the chief Captains of Alexander the
Great, he was thrown to a Lyon to be devoured by
Alexanders command, for hearing
Callisthenes
the Philosopher after he was in Chains, but he wrapping
his Garment about his
hands, thrust them into the Lyons mouth, and pulling out his



tongue killed him; after Alexanders death he
had the Government of Thrace.


Lysippe, see Iphianassa.

Lysius, one of the sirnames of
Bacchus, to whom under that name the
Boeotians consecrated a Temple, because by his
help they overcame the Thracians, by whom they
had been set upon before and beaten.


M A

MAbel, the Christian name of divers women,
in Latin Mabilia, from
Amabilis, i.
lovely.

Mac, an Irish word, signifying as much as
son in English, or fitz in Welsh.

Macareus, the son of Aeolus, who
got his sister Canace with child, which
Aeolus coming to discover by hearing the child
cry, sent Canace a sword privately,
bidding her do with it as
she deserved best, whereupon she killed her self, and
Macareus fleeing
to Delphos, was made a Priest of
Apollo.

Macaleb, a kind of Pomander or
bastard Coral whose
berries are black and shining and serve for
Bracelets.

Macaronique, (French) a confused huddle of
divers things jumbled together.

Macarons, (Ital.) lumps of boiled paste,
strewed over with sugar or spice, a dish much used by the
Italians; but here they are commonly compounded
of Almonds, Sugar, Rose-water, and Musk.

Macedonia, a large Country of
Europe, heretofore famous for being governed by
two great Kings, Philip of Macedon, and
Alexander the Great, it was anciently called
Aemathia and Aemonia, now
Romelli.

Macegrefs, those that buy and sell
stollen flesh.

Macellarious, (lat) belonging to a
shambles.

Maceration, (lat.) a mortifying, or
bringing low, also a steeping in
liquor.

Machaon, a famous Physitian, the son of
Aesculapius and Arsinoe,
he was slain at the wars of Troy by
Euripilus.

Machiavilian, belonging unto
Machiavill, a
famous Historian and Polititian of Florence,
whence it is commonly used for subtile or well verst in
State-policy.

Machination, (lat.) a plotting,
contriving, or devising, from Machina, an Engin or Instrument of
war, but used also for a device or invention.

Macilent, (lat.) thin, lean, fallen of ones
flesh.

Mackerell, or Maquerell, (French)
a kind of fish, so called from the great
company of spots it hath,
in Latin Scombrus; it is also used for a pander
or procurer.

Macritude, (lat.) leannesse.

Macrobii, a certain people of
Aethiopia, so called from the long life they live.

Macrocosme, (Greek) the greater, being
taken contradistinct to the Microcosme or lesser,
world, which is man.

Macrology, (lat.) a figure among
Rhetoricians, being
a speech containing more words than are just
necessary.

Mactation, (lat.) a killing or
committing
slaughter.

Maculation, (lat.) a staining or defiling
with spots.

Madefaction, (lat.) a moistning or
wetting.

Madidity, or Madour, (lat.)
moistness or wetness.

Madder, a kind of plant, with whose root
being of a red colour, they use to dye wool.

Madoc, an ancient Brittish name, from
Mad, i. good.

Madrigal, (Ital.) a kind of Song.

Mæonia, see Lydia.

Mæotis, a Lake in the North part of
Scythia, near the mouth of the River
Phasis. It is called by the Italians Mar
della Tana, and Mar Bianco, by the
Scythians, Garpaluc.

Magazine, (French) a Store-house where
Armes and Ammunition of War are put, as it were Mansio
Gazæ.

Magdalen, (Hebr.) Majestical, the Christian
name of divers women.

Magdalen Colledge, a Colledge in
Oxford, built,
together with a Hall near adjoyning
to it, by William Wainflet
Bishop of Winchester.

Magdaleon, (lat.) a kind of long
plaister like a rowler,
called also a Langate.

Magdeburgum, or Magdeburg, as it
were Maidenburg, from the Dutch word Magd,
i. a Maid, the chief City of Saxony, in
Germany, heretofore called
Parthenopolis, from Venus Parthenia, who
was there worshipped.

Magician, (lat.) one that professeth the



Art Magick, which was the same among the
Persians, as Philosophy among the
Grecians, i.
e. the study of the more occult and mysterious Arts;
whence the 3 Wisemen of
the East were called Magi, but
among the vulgar, the word
simply taken, is used in the same signification as
Diabolical Magick,
i. e. Sorcery or Witchcraft.


Magisterial, (lat.) pertaining to
Magistery, or
Mastership, done by or like a Master; in Physick a pill or
plaister, &c. prepared after the best manner
is called Magisterial.

Magistracy, (lat.) the office of a
Magistrate or chief Ruler.

Magna charta, the great Charter
containing a number of
Laws ordained in the nineth year of Henry the
third, and confirmed by
Edward the first, containing the sum of all the
written Laws of England.

† Magnality, a greatnesse to be
admired at, being a made
word, from the Lat. Magnalia, i. e. great and
wonderfull things.

Magnanimity, (lat.) greatnesse of mind,
courage, stoutnesse.

Magnes, a youth of Smyrna, the
most beautiful of his age, and excellent in
musick and poetry, for
which he was in high esteem with Gyges King of
Lydia, who because the Parents of Magnes
spoiled his cloths, and cut off his hair, made war
upon the Country, overcame
them, and brought away Magnes in Triumph to
Sardes.

Magnetick, (lat.) belonging to the
Magnete or Lodestone. see Lodestone.

Magnificence, (lat.) as it were a
making great,
sumptuousnesse, statelinesse, a carrying things on at a
great heighth.

Magnificat, the Song of the Virgin
Mary, so called because it beginneth with these
words, Magnificat anima mea, &c.

Magnifico, (Ital.) the title of a Noble man
of Venus, also the Governours of
Academies in
Germany, are called Magnifici.

Magniloquence, (lat.) a lofty speaking, a
talking of high things.

Magnitude, (lat.) greatness, ampleness,
largeness.

Mago, the first that increased the wealth
of Carthage, before the first Punick war he aided
the Romans in the war of Tarentum
with 120 ships.

Magog, see Gog and
Magog.

Magonel, according to Chaucer, is
an instrument to cast
stones with.

Mahim, or Maim, (in Latin Mahemium) is the hurting or taking away of any
member by the wrongful act of another, whereby the party
so hurt is made unable to fight, it comes from the old
French word Mehaighn, and is called by the
Canonists, Mutilatio membri.

Mahumetanisme, the Religion and Law of the
Turks, founded by Mahomet the first
Emperour of the Saracens, there was also of this
name a great Emperour of the Turks, who overthrew
the Greek Empire, took twelve Kingdomes, and two
hundred Cities from the Christians, whereof the chief were
Constantinople, the Island
Chalcis, Scodra, Trapezuntium, and Hydruntum,
in Italie, but at the siedge of
Belgrade, or as
some say of Taurinum, he was overthrown, and put
to flight.

Maia, one of the seven Pleiades,
on whom Jupiter begat Mercury, she was
the daughter of Atlas and
Pleione.

Maid Marrian, or Morion, a boy
dressed in womans apparel to dance the Morisco,
or Morrisdance.

Maiden-hair, a kinde of plant, called in
Latin Adiantum, or Capillus
veneris.

Maidenhead, a Town in Bark-shire,
so called from a Maids head that was had in great
reverence, being one of those 11000. who returning from
Rome with their Leader
Vrsula, were taken by Attila, and
martyred at Colein in Germany.

Maidstone, a pleasant Town in
Kent, situate
upon the River Medway, and
therefore anciently
called Medweg-ston, and thought to be the same
with the old Town Vagniacæ.

Maim, see Mahim.

Mainour, Manour, or Meinour, (from
the French word Maniere) signifieth in
Common-law, an apprehending of one that hath stollen any
thing, and is followed with Hue and Cry,
with the manner, that is, having the thing.

Mainprise, (from the French words
main, i. a hand, and prins, i. taken)
signifieth in Common
Law, the receiving a man into friendly custody, that
otherwise might be committed to prison, giving
security for his forth comming at a day assigned; those that do thus undertake
for any, are called Mainpernours, he that is
taken into custody Mainpernable.

Maint, (Saxon) mingled.

Maintenance, in Common Law, is,
up­



holding of a cause depending in suite between
others, either by lending of money, or making of friends
for either party.


Majo, a County of Ireland, in the
Province of
Conaught.

Major, signifieth in Latin greater, but
with us it is commonly taken sometimes for a Prætor or
Governour of a City, sometimes for a Military officer;
also in Logick the first part of a Syllogisme is
called the Major
or the proposition, the second
the Minor or the assumption.

Majoration, (lat.) a making greater.

Maisnilwarings, and by contraction
Manwarings, the name of a great and ancient Family in
Cheshire.

Master of the Rolles, is an assistant unto
the Lord Chancelour of England in the high Court
of Chancery, and in his absence heareth causes and giveth orders.

Maisters of the Chancery, are assistants to
the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal in
matters of judgement; of
these there are 12 in number, whereof the chief is the
Master of the Rolles.

Masters of the Court of Wards and
Liveries, the
principal officer of that Court, named and assigned by the
King to whose custody the Seal of the Court is
committed.

Master of the Horse, is he that hath the
rule and charge of the Kings stable.

Make, in Common Law, signifieth, to perform
or execute, as, to make his Law, is to perform that Law
which he hath formerly bound himself unto, that is, to
clear himself of an action, commenced against him by his
Oath, and the Oaths of his Neighbours; also to make ones
beard, (an old phrase) to deceive.

Malachias, (Hebr.) my messenger.

Malachite, (Greek) a kinde of precious
stone, so called.

Malacissation, a kneading, a making
soft.

Malacy, (Greek) a calm on the Sea, also a
longing of women with childe.

Maladie, (French) a disease, sicknesse, or
infirmity.

Malaga, a Citie and Port-Town of
Andalusia,
whence we have that sort of wine, which is called
Malago Sack; it is said to have been so called,
because Cava the daughter of Count
Julian, after that, her being ravish't by King
Roderigo had been the occasion of the losse of
Spain to the Moors, threw her self from
a high Tower, crying out, Malacà, i.
here's the evil.

Malanders, a certain disease in a horse,
from the Italians Mal andare, i. to go
ill.

Malapert, saucy, impudent, as it were
Male partus, i. ill brought forth.

Maldisant, (French) a backbiter, an evil
speaker.

Maldon, a Town in Essex, anciently
called Camalodunum
from Camulus, whom the old Brittains
worship't here for Mars, the God of war; this
Town being made a Colony of the Romans, was
sacked by Queen Bunduca, or
Boadicia.

A Male, a kinde of sack, or budget from the
Greek word Malloi fleece, because they used to be
made of sheepskins.

Malecontent, (lat.) discontented, evil
content.

Malediction, (lat.) an evil speaking, or
cursing.

Malefactour, (lat.) an evil doer, an
offender.

Malefice, (lat.) an evil act, a shrewd
turn.

Maletent, a Toll of fourty shillings for
every sack of Wool, Anno 29. Edw. 1.  it is
also called Maletot, from the French
Maletoste.

Malevolence, (lat.) ill will.

Malignity, (lat.) spite, malice,
grudge.

Malevolent Planets, Saturn and
Sagitarius.

Malison, (French) a curse.

Mallard, (French) a wilde Drake.

Malleable, (lat.) to be wrought, or beaten
out with a Mallet, or Hammer.

Malkin, or Maukin, a Beesom to make clean an Oven with, it is also called a
Scovel.

Malliverie's, the name of an ancient
family in
York-shire, stiled in Latin Records Mali
Leporarii.

Mallow's, a kinde of plant of a
softning, or loosening
quality, called in Latin Malva.

Malmesie, a sort of wine, which is brought
out of Arvisium, in the Island of Chio,
vulgarly called Marvisia, or
Malvisia.

Malmesbury, a Town in Wiltshire,
first built by Mulmutius, a King of the
Brittains, and
by him named Cær Baldon,
afterwards from one
Maidulph an Irish-Scot, who here led a
Hermites life, it was called
Maidulphsburgh, and so by contraction
Malmsbury.

Malta, a rocky and barren Island, sixty



miles distant from Sicilie, called in the New
Testament Melita, this Island was given by
Charls the fifth, to the Knights of
Rhodes, who have ever since been called Knights
of Malta.


Mamalukes, a certain Order of
Souldiers, who fought lightly armed on horsback,
and were the chief military support of the last Empire of
Aegypt.

Mamitus, the thirteenth King of the
Assyrians, he trained up his subjects in military
discipline, and was a terrour to the Aegyptians,
and many other Nations.

Mammeated, (lat.) having paps, or
teates.

Mammet, a puppet, from the Greek word
Mamme, as it were a little Mother, or
Nurse.

Mammillary Processes, (lat.) a Term in
Anatomy, certain bones in the temples, representing the
teates in a Cows Udder.

Mammocks, fragments, or pieces.

Mammon, the God of wealth, the word
signifying in the Syriack tongue riches, or
wealth, and is derived from the Hebrew word
Hamon, i. plenty, having M.
Hemantick added
at the beginning.

Mammooda, a kinde of East-Indian Coyn,
valuing about a shilling.

Manation, (lat.) a passing away, a
flowing.

Manage, in Italian Maneggiare, to
govern, to rule, to handle.

Manasses, (Hebr.) not forgotten.

Manbote, (Sax.) a pecuniary
compensation for killing of a man.

Manchester, a pleasant Town in
Lancashire,
which anciently belonging to the Kings of
Northumberland, and having been destroyed in the
Danish war, King Edw. the Elder, sent an
Army of Mercians into Northumberland, to
re-edifie this Citie; some say, because the inhabitants
behaved themselves valiantly against the Danes,
it was called Manchester, as it were the Citie of
men, others derive it from Main, i. a stone,
because it standeth upon a stony Hill; it was anciently
called Mancunium.

Manchet, (from the French word Main, i.
e. the hand) the finest, and the smallest sort of
wheaten bread, called in Latin panis
Capituli, in Greek Collyris.

Manch present, (old word) a bribe.

Mancipation, (lat.) an ancient manner of
selling before witnesses, wherein divers Ceremonies were
used; it is also used in the same sence as
Emancipation.

Manciple, (lat.) a Steward, or Caterer, but
chiefly one that buyes the common provisions in a
Colledge, or Hospital.

Mancuse, a kinde of Coyn, valuing about
thirty of the ancient pence, each of which contains three
pence of our money, some hold a Manca, or
Mancus of Gold, to be as much as a Mark of
silver.

Mandatarie, (lat.) one that comes in to a
Benefice by a Mandamus.

A Mandate, (lat.) a Commandment, or charge,
also in Common-law, it is a Judicial
Command of the King, or his Justices,
to have any thing done for the dispatch
of Justice.

Mandevils, an ancient family in
Essex, stiled in Latin Records de Magna
Villa.

Mandible, (lat.) from
Mandibulum)
a jaw, (from the participiate Mandibilis)
eatable.

Mandilion, or Mandilian, (French)
a kinde of military garment, a loose Cassock.

Mandonius and Indibilis, two
famous Spanish Captains, who having assisted
Scipio, and the
Romans against the Carthaginians
began afterwards to revolt, but
because of the memory of
their former good service they were dismissed.

Mandrake, a kinde of plant, so called from
the Greek word Mandra, i. a Cave, because it
groweth near unto Den's and in shady places, it
beareth a fruit called Mandrake, Apples of a cold
and soporiferous quality, it is also called by some
Anthropomorphos,
because its root being divaricated,
something resembleth the shape of a man.

Manducation, (lat.) a chewing.

Mandy thursday, as it were dies
Mandati, the day of Commandment, because of that
great charge which our Saviour gave to his Disciples,
concerning the observation of his Supper, being the
Thursday next before Easter day.

Mangonels, the same as
Magonells.

Mangonization, (lat.) a trimming, or
setting out things to the best advantage for sale.

Manichees, a sort of Hereticks that
maintained that there was a fatal necessity of sin, which
Doctrine was first broached by one Manes a
Persian.

Manicles, (French) fetters wherewith the
hands of prisoners are bound, being derived originally
from the Latin word Manus, a hand.

Manifesto, (Ital.) a Declaration of some
Prince, or Common-wealth, about publick affairs.



Maniple, (lat.) a handful, in physick more
especialy it is taken for such a bundle of herbs or
other things as may be griped with the hand; also a
company consisting of 10 souldiers; some also take it
for a fannel or such a kind of ornament as Priests used
to wear about their wrists when they went to sacrifice.


Manipular, (lat.) belonging to a
maniple.

Manlius, the name of divers famous
Romans, whereof the chief
were Marcus Manlius Capitolinus, and Titus
Manlius Torquatus. see Capitolinus and
Torquatus.

Manna, a certain delicious food
wherewith God fed the
children of Isræl in their journey to Canaan,
being a congealed dew
which fell from Heaven, it comes from the Hebrew word
Manah, i. to distribute
or Mahna, i. what is it, because they admired
what it was: there is also at this day a certain sweet
dew, which falling early in the morning upon trees and
herbs, is called Manna, which congealing into a
whitish substance, is of a pleasant taste, and is much
used in physick.

Mannour, (in Latin Manerium a
manendo, i. remaining
to the heir, or else from the Lords remaining there
himself) it signifieth
in common Law, a rule or government
which a man hath over such as hold land within his
fee.

Man of War, in Navigation, is taken for a
ship of War, by the figure Metonymia.

Manqueller, (old word) a murderer.

Mansion, (lat.) a remaining, an abiding,
also a Manor-house, or the Lords chief dwelling house
within his fee.

Manslaughter, in Common Law, is the
unlawful killing of a man upon some
sudden occasion, or falling
out, without premeditated
malice.

Mansuetude, (lat.) gentlenesse,
tractablenesse,
meeknesse.

Manteleth, a term in Faulconry, for when
the Hawk stretcheth one of her wings along after her legs,
and so the other: It is
said she Manteleth.

Mathematicks, Arts taught by
demonstration which
comprehend four of the liberal Arts, Astronomy,
Arithmetick, Musick, and Geometry.

Manticore, (Ital.) a kind of
Indian beast, faced like a Man, and bodied like a
Lion, and having three rows of sharp teeth.

Manticulation, (lat.) a doing a thing
slily, a carrying on a businesse closely.

Mantle, or Mantile, (lat.) a kind
of long robe, also in Heraldry it is that flourish which
proceeds from the wreath and helm, and descends on each
side the Escutcheon.

Mantua, a City of Italy, situate
upon the River Po, and built by Ocnus,
who called it so from his
mothers name Manto a Theban Prophetesse,
the daughter of Tiresias,
she after the death of her father
fleeing from the tyranny
of Creon King of Thebes, went first into
Asia and built the Temple of Apollo
Clarius, afterwards she came into Italy,
where being got with child by Tiberinus, she
brought forth Ocnus.

Manual, (lat.) belonging to the hand,
filling the hand; it is also used
substantively, for
a book of a small volume which may easily be carried in
ones hand.

Manubiary, (lat.) belonging to the spoil or
prey.

Manucaption, (lat.) a taking by the
hand.

Manucaptors, (lat.) Sureties or
Bailes.

Manuduction, (lat.) a leading by the hand,
a guiding.

Manuel, in Common Law, signifieth that
whereof present profit may be made.

Manufacture, (lat.) handy-work.

Manumission, (lat.) an Enfranchising, a
making free a slave or bondman, which in former time was
performed with divers ceremonies before a
Magistrate.

Manure, from the French word
Manouurier, to
work and labour the earth with the hand.

Manuscript, (lat.) a thing onely written
with the hand.

Manutenentia, a Writ used in the case of
maintenance.

† Manutention, (lat.) a holding by
the hand.

Marria or Mar, the name of a
Country in the North part of Scotland.

Marathon, a Town of Greece, about
ten miles distant from Athens, famous for the
Victory of Theseus over the Marathonian
Bull, and of Miltiades over Darius his
Army consisting of above 100000. men.

Maravedis, a kind of Spanish coin of very small
value, 34 of them amounting



but to a Royal, which is about 6 pence of our money.


Marcellus, a great General of the
Romans, who overcame the
Captain of the Gaules in a single Duel; vanqvisht
Hannibal after
he had given the Romans several
great overthrows, took Syracuse, and at last was
circumvented by Hannibal and slain.

Marcessible, (lat.) apt to putrifie or
corrupt.

Marcgrave, (Dutch) a Count or Earl of the
Marches, i. e. the Frontier of a Country, whence
the title of Marquesse seemeth to be derived; also those
Noblemen which from the
Marches, i. the limits between England
and Wales, or between England and
Scotland, were heretofore called Marchers, and
injoyed private Laws to themselves which now are worn
out.

March, so called because it was
dedicated to Mars by his son Romulus.

Marchesite, or Marquesite, (Span.)
a certain kind of stone
intermingled among mettal, and partaking of the nature and
colour of the mettal it is mixt with: it is by some
called a firestone.

Marcheta, a certain Law made by
Eugenius King of
Scotland, which was that the Lord of the land
should have the first nights lodging with every married
woman within his jurisdiction, (the word
signifying, as some think, the first carnal copulation
with a woman) but this law was abrogated by
Malcolm the third.

Marchpane, (French) a kind of Sugered paste
made into little cakes, it is called in Greek
Saccharites, in Latin Panis
dulciarius, also Sagunculus, from Saguntum a Town in
Spain where the best are made, or Panis
Martius, because it had wont to be consecrated to
Mars, having towers, castles, and such like on
it.

Marcidity, or Marcour, (lat.) a
withering away,
rottennesse.

Marcionists, a sort of ancient Hereticks,
so called from one Marcion a Stoick, they denied
Christ to be the Son of God.

Marcus, the prænomen of divers
eminent Romans, as
Marcus Curtius, (who for the publick good,
devoted himself to the infernal powers, and rid compleatly
arm'd into a monstrous gap with which the earth opened)
and others. see Regulus Salinator,
&c.

Maremaid, see Syren.

Mareotis, a great Lake in Aegypt,
on the south side of Alexandria, having a large
and commodious Port.

Margaret, (Greek) pearl, the Christian name
of divers women, contracted Marget.

Margaritiferous, (lat.) bringing forth,
Margarites, i. pearles which are found in Oysters
and other kind of shell-fish.

Margery, a Christian name of divers women;
some think it to be the same with Margaret,
others derive it from Marjora, a kind of
flower.

Marginal, (lat) belonging to the
margin or margent,
i. the brink or brim of any thing, also written
in the margin of a book, which is, the extream or
uttermost part of a page, which terminates the
lines.

Mariandunum, a Country of Asia,
famous for the
Acherusian Den, through which the Poets feign
that Hercules went down into Hell.

Mariets, (French) a sort of violets,
called also Marian
violets; some think from Maria the name of a
woman who first discovered
them.

Marigold, a kind of flower of a yellow or
golden colour, called in Latin herba solaris, in
Greek Heliotropium, because at night it contracts
it self, and at sun-rising opens and dilates it self.

Marine, (lat.) belonging to the Sea, whence
Mariner, a Sailour, a Seafaringman.

Marital, (lat.) belonging to Wedlock or
Mariage.

Maritime, (lat.) belonging to the Sea, or
being along the Sea side.

Marius, a stout Roman born at
Arpinas, he overcame Jugurth King of
Numidia, and led him in Triumph before his
Chariot, after he had had five Consulships together
conferred on him by the Romans, being the sixth time
Consul with Catulus, he overthrew the
Cimbrians in Gallia, and the
Teutones in Italy, at length being
overcome by Sylla, he hid himself by the Lake
Minturna, from whence he fled into
Africa, but was
recalled by Cinna, and made Consul the seventh
time.

Mark, (Hebr.) high, or from the Latin
Marcus, which name according to Varrow,
was given to those that were born in the moneth of
March, but according to Festus, it
signifies a hammer or mallet.

Mark, a sort of coin, or money valueing with us
about thirteen shillings and four pence, but a Mark of
Gold is counted a­



bout eight ounces, or thirty three shillings
and four pence.


Marcab, the pinion of the wing of
Pegasus.

Marleborough, a Town in Wiltshire,
seated upon the River
Cunetio or Kenet, so called from
Marga or Marle, because it standeth upon
a chalky ground. Alexander
Necham calleth it Merlebrigia, from the Tomb
of Merlin the Prophet; this Town is famous for a
Parliament in old times, assembled here, who made a Law
for appeasing tumults, called the Statute of
Marleborow.

Marlin, a kind of Hawk called in French
Esmerillion.

Marling, a term in Navigation, being a
small line made of untwisted hemp, to sease the ends of
ropes from farsing out.

Marmaduke, the proper name of a man, from
the Dutch Mermachtig, i. more mighty.

Marmalade, (Ital.) a kind of conserve made
of quince, which is called by the Italians
Marmelo.

Marmorean, (lat.) like Marble, or made of
Marble.

Marmoset, a Monky, from the French word
Marmotter, i. to mutter.

Maronean wine, a sort of wine made at the
City Maronea, of great vertue and
strength.

Maronites, were a sort of Christians
dwelling in Mount Libanus, they received the
Catholik religion from Pope Clement the eighth,
and were a branch of the Jacobites
having a Patriarch of their own, who was alwayes called
Peter.

Marpessa, called also Alcyone, the
daughter of Euenus, and wife of Idæus,
the comliest man of his time, she was so loved of her
husband, that when Apollo carried her away he
pursued the god with his bow and arrows; he had by her a
very fair daughter called Cleopatra, who was
married to Meleager.

Marque, see Letters of Mart, or
Marque.

Marquesite, see Marchesite.

Marquetry, a kind of chequer'd or
inlaid work, made with wood
of divers sorts or colours, into the shape of knots,
flowers, or other things.

Marquisate, (French) the title and
jurisdiction of a
Marquesse who is a Noble man, next in Dignity and account
unto a Duke, from the Dutch word March, i. a
bound, because originally they were the Prefects of the
borders of some Countrey.

A Marrow, (French) a companion or fellow,
also a beggarly rascal.

Mars, the son of Juno, who without
the help of Jupiter, proved with child by eating
of a flower which grew in the Olenian
fields, according to the advice of Flora and
brought forth Mars, who was called the god of
War; he being in bed with Venus, was discovered
by Vulcan her husband, who throwing an iron net
over them exposed them to the view and laughter of all the gods;
but at the suite of Neptune they were set free.
Also the name of one of the 7 Planets.

Marshal, (in Latin Mariscallus)
was anciently no other than a Master of Horse, from the
Dutch words Mar, i. a horse, and Scalc,
i. a servant, but of late there are several officers of
that name, as the Marshals belonging to the several Courts
of Law, the Marshals of each Regiment in an Army, but the
highest officers that bore this name among us, were the
Lord Marshal of England, whose power consisted chiefly in matters
of war and armes, and Marshals of the Kings House, whose
office was to hear pleas of the Crown, and to punish
faults committed within the verge.

Marshalsee, as it were Marshals
seat, the Court of the Marshal.

Marsyas, a certain Musitian of
Phrygia, instructed by Minerva, he
provoking Apollo
to a contest in Musick, was overcome and flead for his
presumption, and from his name the River Marsyas
whose streams were augmented by the tears of the Nimphs
that bewailed him, took its denomination.

Marternes, or Sables, a kind of
rich Fur, being the skin of a little beast called a
Marten.

Martia, the wife of Cato
Vticensis, whom he gave to his friend
Hortensius, and after he was dead, about the
beginning of the civil wars, took her again.

Martial, (lat.) born under the Planet of
Mars, also warlike or valiant, whence the Law of
Armes is called Martial Law.

Martichore, see Manticore.

Martin, the proper name of a man, from the
Latin Martius. The first of this name was St.
Martin the Military Saint, Bishop of
Tours.



Martinet, or Martelet, a kind of bird,
called in Greek Apus, because it wanteth the use of its feet.


Martingale, see Cavechin.

Martnets, a Term in Navigation, the small
lines which being fastned to the legs on the leetch of a
sayl, come down by the mast to the deck.

Martyrologie, (Greek) a discourse,
treating of the lives,
and sufferings of Martyres.

Marullus Pomponius, the greatest
Grammarian and Critick of his age, who reprehended
Tiberius for speaking improper Latin, and gave
Ateius Capito, the lie for vindicating it.

Mary, (Hebr.) exalted.

Mascarade, (French) a mask, or
pompous
representation.

Mascle, in blazon, is a short
lozenge, having a square
hole in the midst, from the French word Macle, i.
e. a spot, also the mash, or hole of a Net.

Masculine, (lat.) manly, or of the male
kinde.

Massagetæ, see Scythia.

Masse, (in latin Missa) the
Liturgy, or Divine service performed by the Roman
Catholicks, is also called from the Hebrew Missah,
l. sacrifice, or oblation.

Massicot, a kinde of Oaker, made of Ceruse,
or white Lead.

Massilia, a Town of Gallia
Narbonensis, which after it had been destroyed, was
rebuilt by the Phocences, who flying from the Tyranny of
Cyrus, seated themselves in this place; the Arts
and Sciences flowrish't
here at that heighth, that it was accounted a second
Athens, it is vulgarly called
Marseilles.

Massinissa, a King of Numidia, who
from an inveterate enemy of the Roman name, became a
faithfull friend and allie, he was a man of that strength,
and vigour of body, that at
90 years of age, he begat a son.

Massorets, a sort of Jews, which
corrected the false
written words of the Scripture,
noting them wit a little o. (for they made a scruple to
blot them out) and setting
down their corrections in the Margin.

Mastication, (lat.) a chewing between
the teeth.

Mastick, a kinde of sweet Gum, distilling out of the
Mastich, or Lentiske Tree.

Masticot, a kinde of yellow colour used in
painting.

Mastigophore, (Greek) an Usher that with
stripes makes way in a croud.

Mastruke, (French) a kinde of winter
Garment made of Wolves and Deers skins together.

Mastupration, (lat.) lascivious violence
offered to a man.

Matachin, (French) a kinde of French
dance.

Matagot, (French) a kinde of Ape, or Monky,
also a Hypocrite.

Match, a Term in Hunting, when a Wolf
desires copulation, he is said to go to his match, or to
his mate.

Mateotechny, or Matæotechny,
(Greek) the vanity of any Art, a vain Science.

Mate, (Saxon) daunted, also
consum'd.

A Mate, or Checkmate, (a Term used
in the Game at Chess) is when the Game is brought to that
passe, that there is no way left for the King to escape,
from the Italian word Matto, i. foolish and
inconsiderate, or
the Spanish Matar, i. to kill.

Matelotage, the Hire of a Boat, or ship,
from the French word Matelot, a Saylour, or
Shipman.

Material, (lat.) consisting of matter, or
substance; also being of some weight, or
importance.

Materiation, (lat.) a
felling of Timber
for building.

Maternal, (lat.) motherly, on the
mothers side, whence
maternity, motherhood.

Mathematician, (lat.) one that is
skilfull in the
Mathematicks, that is, those Sciences which are understood
by demonstration,
of these there are four in all, Arithmetick,
Geometry, Astronomy, and Musick.

Matthew, (Hebr.) Gods gift.

Mathurins, certain Fryars of the Order of
the holy Trinity, whose Office is to
redeem Christian Captives out of Turkish slavery.

Matricide, (lat.) a killing of ones
mother, or one that kill's
his mother.

Matrice, (lat.) that part of the Womb,
where the Child is conceived, also a mould for letters.

Matriculation, (lat.) a Registring of young
Schollars, into the society of their Foster-mother of
learning the University.

Matrimonial, (lat.) belonging to
matrimony, i. marriage, or wedlock.

Mattins, (French) Morning-prayer.

Mattock, a kinde of Pick-axe, from the
Dutch word, Met hæck, i. with hook.



Mattresse, (French) a quilt, or flock-bed.


Matura, a certain goddesse among the
ancient Romans, who was said to be the Patronnesse of
Corn, when the eares began
to ripen, as Patalena took charge of them when
the cups began to open, and Lactucina, when the
juyce, or milky substance
began to abound.

Maturity, (lat.) ripenesse, whence
maturation, a ripening.

Matuta, see Ino.

Matutine, (lat.) belonging to the
morning.

Maud, (Germ.) a Christian name of
divers women from
Matilda, or Mathildis, i. Honourable
Lady of maids.

Maugre, or Maulgre, (French)
whither one will, or no, or as we commonly say in despite
of his teeth; also a proper name, in Latin Malgerius.

Mavis, in Latin Malviccium, a bird
called a Thrush, or
Thrussel.

Maund, (French) a hand-basket, from
Manus, i. a hand, or from Mandere, i. to
eat, because they use to carry meat in it.

Maundy-Thursday, see Mandy-Thursday.

Mavors, the same as Mars.

Mauritania, the utmost Region of
Africa, toward the Gaditan Bay, now called the Streights of
Gibraltar, where the Gyant
Antæus is said to have raign'd, who was overcome
by Hercules, it is divided into Tingitana and Cæsariensis, which
Strabo call's Massilia and
Massæsylia.

Mausolus, a King of Caria, the
husband of Artemisia, by whom he was so intirely
loved, that after he was dead, she is said to have drunk
up his ashes in wine, and built him a very stately
Sepulcher, which from his name she called
Mousoleum, being one of the seven wonders of the
world, and from which every rich Monument is figuratively
called a Mausoleum.

Maxillar, or Maxillary, (lat.)
belonging to the jawbone.

A Maxime in Phylosophy, or Law, is a
proposition, or principle generally received, grounded upon
reason, and not to be denied, called also an axiome.

Maximilian, a name, first given to one of
the German Emperours, by his father Frederick the
third, composing it of the names of two famous Romans,
Quintus Fabius, Maximus, and Scipio Aemelianus, with hope
that his son would imitate their vertues.

May, so called, because Romulus
dedicated it to Maya, the mother of Mercury.

Maze, an astonishment, also the same as
Labyrinth.

Mazer, a Beker, or standing Cup to drink
in, from the Dutch word Mæser, i.
Maple, of which sort of wood those Cups are
commonly made.


M E

Mead, the same Hydromel.

Meagre, (French) scraggy, or lean.

The Mean, in Musick the Tenor, or
middle part, also in Law,
it is used for the interim, or middle time, as, the action
was mean, &c.

Meander, or Mæander, a River of
Phrygia, which
hath many oblique diversions, whence a thing that is full
of intricate turnings and windings, is called a
Mæander, by way
of Metaphor.

Mearstones, (in Latin Lapides
terminales)
certain stones, which are put as bounds and limits between
one mans land and anothers.

Mease, (in Latin Mansus) a Mansion
house, from the French word Maison, i. e. a
house, or as some say from Meix, i. e. a Mansion,
also Mease, or Mese, is used for a measure of Herrings,
consisting of 500.

Measandue, an Hospital, from the French
Maison de Dieu.

Meath, a Province of Ireland,
containing these
following Counties, Eastmeath, Westmeath, and
Longford.

Mecænus, a learned Noble-man of Rome, who lived in the
time of Augustus, he was a great favourer of
Virgil and Horace, whence every favourer
of learning, and learned men hath been ever since saluted
with the Title of Mecænas.

Mecha, a Citie in Arabia Foelix,
which is had in great reverence by the Turks, as
being the place where Mahomet was
buried.

Mechanick Arts, or Handycrafts those Arts,
which require the labour of the hand, of which these seven
are esteemed the chief; Agriculture, Clothing,
Navigation, Hunting,
Architecture, Medecine, Military
Discipline: the word comes from the Greek,
Mechane,
an artifice, or invention.

Mechation, (lat.) a committing
fornication, or
whoredom.

A Medal, (French) a kinde of ancient coyn, or
piece of plate, having stampt up­



on it the effigies of some Prince, or other eminent man.


Medea, see Jason.

Medewife, (Sax.) a woman of merit.

Media, a large Countrey in Asia,
so called from Madai the son of Japheth,
or Medus the son of Aegeus and
Medea, it is divided into the greater
Media, whose chief Citie is Ecbatana,
and the lesser called also Atropatia.

Mediastine, from the Latin
Mediastinus, is a drudge, or Kitchin slave, from
Mediastinum
it signifies that partition made by certain thin skins,
dividing the whole breast into two hollow bosomes.

Mediation, (lat.) a dividing into two, also
a making suit, or means for any one, whence Mediatour, an
intercessour.

Medicable, (lat.) able to heal, also easie
to be heal'd, or cur'd.

Medicament, (lat.) a Medecine, or
Physical drugge.

Medication, (lat.) a curing, or
healing.

Medietas linguæ, an inquest empanell'd
upon any cause, whereof one part
consisteth of Denizens, the other of strangers.

Mediety, (lat.) the half, or middle.

Medimne, (lat.) a certain measure,
containing six bushels.

Mediocrity, (lat.) a mean, a middle temper,
and indifferency.

Mediolanum, the chief Citie of that part of
Italie, formerly called Gallia
Cisalpina, it was
first built by the Gauls, who as they were
digging in the earth, finding a sow half covered with wool
like a sheep, called the Citie Mediolanum,
vulgarly Millain, and the whole Countrey
afterwards being Conquered by the Lombards, was thence named
Lombardy.

Medisance, (French) evil speaking, obloquy,
or reproach.

Meditation, (lat.) a studying, or
devising.

Mediterranean, (lat.) being in the middle
of the earth, or land, whence the Mediterranean Sea is
that Sea, which hath its course in the midst of the
earth.

Medrinacles, a kinde of course
Canvas, called also
Pouledavies.

Medullar, (lat.) belonging to the
marrow.

Medusa, the daughter of Phorcys,
with whose golden hair Neptune was so much in love, that
he lay with her in the Temple
of Minerva, and begat Pegasus, at which
the goddesse being incenced, turned her hairs into
Serpents, whose sight converted all that look't on them
into stone, but at length Perseus finding the
Serpents asleep, killed them, and cut off
Medusa's head.

Meed, (old word) merit, or reward.

Meen, (French) the countenance, or
posture of the face, also
the outward Garb.

Meer, in Common-law, hath been used for
meer right.

Mees, (Saxon) Meadows.

Megabysus, one of the Persian
Nobles, who in the behalf of Darius overthrew the
Tyranny of the Magi, in Europe he took
Perinthus, overcame the Pæones, and
attempted Macedonia.

Megaclo, the daughter of Macares,
King of the Lesbians, who being of a froward
disposition, and alwayes contending with his wife,
Megaclo was so grieved at her mothers calamity,
that she hired the Muses to
be her maids, and teaching them to sing, they by the
sweetnesse of their Musick,
so allayed the spirit of Megares, that his wife
ever after lived a better life with him, for which
benefite to her, she in thankfulnesse built pillars of
brasse to their glory, and caused them to be
honoured in all the
Temples thereabout.

Megacosme, (Greek) the great world.

Megæra, the name of one of the three
Furies, the other two being Alecto, and
Tisiphone.

Megalesian games, were certain games
celebrated in ancient times at Rome, in
honour of Cybele,
or the great goddesse.

Megalopsychie, (Greek) Magnanimity, or
greatnesse of minde.

Megara, the daughter of Creon,
King of Thebes, she was given in marriage to
Hercules, upon
condition that he should free the Thebans from
the oppression of Erginus,
King of the Orchomenii, which he
performed, but Juno being highly incenc't against him for
killing Lycus, possest him with such a madnesse
that he slew his wife Megara, and all the
Children he had by her.

Megrim, a distemper which causeth a great
pain in the temples and fore part of the head; the word
seems to be contracted
from the Greek word Hemicrania.

Meire, a term in Blazon. see Varry
Cuppy.

Melampod, (in Greek Melampodium) a
certain kind of herb, otherwise called
Hellebore.



Melampus, the son of Amythaon and
Dorippe, who
laying him abroad in the Sun and covering all his body
except his feet, they were so scorched by the Sun, that
they became black, whence he was called
Melampus, i. Blackfoot. He was a famous
Physitian and understood the voices of birds and beasts,
he cured the daughters of Prætus of their
madnesse, one of whom named Iphianassa he
married.


Melancholick, (Greek) sad, pensive,
troubled with melancholy, i. e. black
choler, one of the 4
humours of the body, also a distemper caused by the
abounding of that humour.

Melantho, the daughter of Proteus,
who had a humour to ride upon a Dolphins back up and down
the Sea, which Neptune observing turned himself
into a Dolphin, and carrying her to shore upon his back,
ravisht her and begot Amycus.

Melanthus, the son of Andropompis,
he being a Messenian was driven out of his
Country by the Heraclidæ; he went and helpt the
Athenians against the Boeotians, and
killed their Captain Xanthus; for which he was
chosen King of the Athenians in the place of
Thymoetes.

Melborn, a Castle in Darbyshire,
where John Duke of Barbon, taken
prisoner at Agincourt, was detained prisoner 19
years under the custody of Sir Nicholas de
Mountgomery the younger.

Melchior, the name of one of the Magi, or
Wise men of the East who offered gifts to our Saviour; He
offered Gold as to a King, the second call'd Jasper
frankincense as unto God, the third called Balthasar Myrrh
as to one that was to die; also the name of a great
Heretick, the founder of that sect called the
Melchiorists.

Melchites, a sort of Christians in
Syria, subject to the Patriarch of
Antioch, they are so called from Melchi,
which in the Syriack
tongue signifies a King, because they used to follow the
Emperours injunctions in matters of Religion.

Melicent, (French) honey-sweet, a Christian
name of women.

Meleager, the son of Oeneus King
of Calidonia, and Althæa, he gathered a
company of valiant youths
together to slay a wild Bore that wasted the Country of
Aetolia, and
having slain it, presented the head to Atalanta
the daughter of Jasius King of Argos,
which Plexippus and Toxeus
the brothers of Althæa indeavouring to take
away, he slew them both, and married Atalanta,
but Althæa enraged at the death of her brothers,
threw the brand into the fire which she had saved from the
Destinies when he was borne, which as it burnt, he
consumed away.

Melimele, see Pome
Paradise.

Not found in OED.



Melioration, (lat.) a making better, an
improving.

Melissa, see Mellona.

Mellation, (lat.) the driving away of the
Bees, and taking the honey out of the Hives.

Mellification, (lat.) a making
Honey.

Mellifuous, (lat.) flowing with Honey, full of sweetnesse.

Melliloquent, (lat.) speaking sweetly, as
it were speaking Honey.

Mellilote, or Melilote, a certain
herb, bearing round leaves with slender
branches, from the Greek
word meli, i. honey, and Lotus the
Lote-tree, as it were, the Lote bearing honey.

Mellona, a certain goddesse worshipt by the
ancient Romans, as the Patronesse of Bees, perhaps the
same with Melissa who first found out the use of
Honey, whom the Poets feign to have been turned into a
Bee; she was the daughter of Melissus
King of Creet, and the sister of
Amalthea, the
Nurse of Jupiter.

Melody, a musical sound, or sweet aire, 
from the Greek words, meli, i. honey, and
ode, i. a song, as it were a honey'd or sweet
song.

Melpomene, the name of one of the nine
Muses, the first inventresse of
Tragedies.

Membrane, (lat.) a certain little thin skin
which covereth every part of the
body, also a skin of
parchment, also the pill between the bark and the
tree.

Memnon, the son of Tithonus and
Aurora, and brother of Laomedon, he was
slain by Achilles in the Trojan War, and
his body being burnt, it is reported that there flew out
certain Birds, which are thence
called Memnonian
Birds, who are said every year to come out of
Aethiopia to visit the Tomb of Memnon.

Memorandum, (lat.) a short note or token
for the better remembrance of any thing, or as we commonly
say, an Item.

Memorable, (lat.) easie to be
remembred, worthy of
remembrance.

Memorial, (lat.) a remembrancer, or that
which puts one in mind of any thing.

Memphis, the chief City of Aegypt,
built



by Ogdous, and called after his daughters name,
and from whence the Aegyptians are anciently
named Memphians; it is now vulgarly called
Alcairo.


Menalippus, a Theban, who having
given Tydeus a mortal wound, was slain by the
friends of Tydeus, who causing
Menalippus his head to be brought to him, tore it
in pieces for revenge, and immediately after died.

† Mendaciloquent, (lat.) speaking
false, telling lyes.

Mendication, (lat.) a begging, whence a
Friar Mendicant is one that goes up and down begging
almes.

Menelaus, the son of Atreus and
Aerope, he marrying Helena the daughter
of Jupiter and
Leda, she was in his absence stollen away by
Paris the son of Priam, which was the
occasion of the Trojan war, wherein after 9 years
siege Troy was destroyed, and Helena
recovered.

Menestheus, the son of Peleus, he
with the help of the Tyndaridæ raising a
sedition against
Theseus, became King of the
Athenians,
but going to the siege of Troy he there
died.

Menial or Moenial servant, one
that lives within the walls of his masters house, from the
Latin word Moenia, i. walls, or from the old word
Meny, which signifies a
Family.

Meninges, (Greek) two thin skins which
enwrap the brain, the one called dura
mater next to the skull, the other pia mater,
which immediately covereth the brain.

Meniver, a kind of Fur, being as some
think, the skin of a Squirrels belly, or as others say, of
a little white beast, (like to a wesel) breeding in
Muscovy.

Mennow, (from the French word Menu,
i. small) a little fish, otherwise called a Cackrel,
in Latin Minimus.

Menoecus, a Theban youth, the son
of Creon, he was so zealous for the safety of his
Countrey, that when the Oracle had foretold that the
Citie, which was besieg'd by the Argives, could
not be saved unlesse the last of the race of
Cadmus would voluntarily
kill himself, he slew himself with his own sword.

Mensal, (lat.) belonging to a table.

Mension, (lat.) a measuring.

Menstruosity, (lat.) the abounding of
womens monethly flowers.

Mensuration, (lat.) the same as
Mension, or
measuring.

Mental, (lat.) kept in the mind, whence
mental reservation, a speaking something, and concealing
the rest.

Menteith, the name of a Country in the
south part of Scotland.

Mentition, (lat.) a lying, or forging
tales.

Mera, the daughter of Prætus and
Antia, she being a
great Huntresse and following
Diana in the Woods, was ravisht by
Jupiter, who lay with her in the shape of
Diana, whereupon the goddesse shot her to death
with one of her arrows, and afterwards turning her into a
dog, she placed her among the heavenly
Constellations; also the name of Icarius his dog. see Icarius.

Meracity, (lat.) a being pure and
without mixture.

Menker, the jaw of the Whale.

Not found in OED.



Meraud, the Christian name of divers women,
from the pretious stone called the Emerauld.

Mercature, (lat.) a buying, trading, or
merchandizing.

Mercedary, (lat.) hired with reward or
wages.

Mercenary, (lat.) the same.

Merch, the name of a Country in the south
part of Scotland.

Merchenlage, the law of the
Mercians, or the inhabitants of these eight Countries,
Glocester, Worcester, Hereford, Warwick, Oxford, Chester,
Salop, and Stafford, the Land being formerly
divided into three parts; the Mercians, the
West-Saxons,
and the Danes. see Denelage.

Not found in OED.



Mercury, as it were Medius currens
inter Deos & homines, i. e. sent on messages
between the gods and men,
the son of Jupiter
and Maia the daughter of Atlas, he lay
with his sister Venus and begat
Hermaphroditus,
he was counted the god of Eloquence, of Merchandry, of
Handycrafts-men, and the first inventour of the Harpe, also among
Astronomers the name of one of the seven Planets; among
Chymists of Quicksilver.

Mercurial, or Mercurialist, one
born under the Planet Mercury.

Meretricious, (lat.) belonging to a
Whore.

Meridian, (lat.) belonging to noon,
also substantively used for
one of the greater circles dividing the Sphear into two
equal parts, and passing through the Poles of the World,
and the Zenith or Vertical point.



Meridiation, (lat.) a sleeping at noon.


Meritot, a kinde of play used by
Children, wherein they
swing themselves up and down upon a Rope, to which is tied
a little beam, acrosse which they sit, it is
called in Latin Oscillum.

Meremaid, or Maremaid. see Syren.

Mern, a County in the North of
Scotland, the
people whereof were anciently called Vernicones,
by some Vecturiones.

Meroe, an Island encompass't with the River
Nilus, in which there is a Citie of the same
name, built by Cambyses, whose sister was called
Meroe, from wence the Citie and Island took their
denomination, this
Citie Astronomers make to be the farthest of the Northern
Climats, whose parallel-line they call Dia 
Meroes, because it runs through the midst of the
Citie.

Merope, one of the seven daughters of
Atlas and Pleione, they were feigned by
the Poets to be changed into seven stars, called the
Pleiades.

Merrick, a proper name of a man,
among the ancient
Brittains, in Latin Meuricus.

Mersion, (lat.) a ducking, or plunging over
head and eares into the water, a drowning.

Merton, a Town in Surrey, where Kinalph,
King of the West-Saxons was slain by a
Clito, or Prince of the bloud, in a Harlots
house, the Clito himself being
also stab'd immediately by Kinulphs followers:
in this place was born Walter de
Merton, founder of
Merton Colledge in Oxford.

Mese, see Mease.

Mesel, (Sax.) a Leaper.

Mesentery, (Greek as it were, the
middle of the entrails) a
certain thick, and double skin that fastneth the bowels,
or entrails to the back, and affordeth
passage to a number of
veins, called the Mesenterick,
or Meseraick veins.

Meskite, a Church, or Synagogue among the
Turks and Moors, from the Arabick word Mezquidun,
i. an Oration.

Mesnagerie, (French) husbandry, or
housewifery.

Mesnalty, a Term in Common-law, the right
of the Mesn, that
is, a Lord of a Mannour, who hath Tenants holding of him,
yet holding himself of a Superiour Lord, from the French
word Maisné, i. e. younger by
birth.

Mesopotamia, a large Countrey of
Asia; so called because it is between the two
Rivers Tigris and Euphrates, it was
called by the ancient Hebrews Aram Naharaim, i.
e. Syria of the Rivers, now Apamia, and
by some Adiabene.

Messagry, (old word) diligence in doing a
message.

Messalians, a Sect of Hereticks, who held
the Lords Supper, and baptism to be but of indifferent
concernment.

Messana, the chief Citie of
Sicilie, built by the Messenians, near
unto the Promontory of Pelorum.

Messapia, or Mesapia, a Countrey
of Italie, anciently so called from
Messapus, the son of Neptune, it containeth those
Regions which are now called Calabria, and
Apulia.

Messenæ, a famous Citie in
Greece, situate
in the Peloponnesus, whose ancient inhabitants
the Messenii, waged a long and bloudy war with
the Spartans, but at last were reduced to
absolute slavery.

Messias, the same in Hebrew as
Christos in Greek, i. anointed, and is
oft used in the Holy Scriptures for our Saviour Christ.

Messorious, (lat.) belonging to mowing,
reaping, or harvest.

Mesuage, in Common-law, is used for a
dwelling house, with Garden, Courtilage, Orchard, and all
other things belonging to it.

Metachronisme, (Greek) an errour in
Chronology by the mis-reckoning of time, or the ill
connexion of passages, a word compounded of the Greek
preposition
Meta and Chronos, i. time.

Metaleptick, (Greek) belonging to the
figure Metalepsie, wherein one thing is used to
signifie another.

Metalline, (lat.) belonging to
mettals.

Metamorphosis, (Greek) a changing of one
body, or figure into another.

A Metaphor, (Greek) a certain figure,
wherein one word is borrowed to expresse the signification
of another, as smiling Meadow's, youthfull Summer.

Metaphysicks, (Greek) a science, which
treateth of supernatural things, as God, Angels, the Souls
of men, &c.

Metaplasmus, (Greek) a Rhetorical
figure, wherein words, or
letters are plac't contrary to their usual order.

Metaris, an arm of the Sea in
Lincolnshire,
commonly called Maltraith, and the
Washes.

Metathesis, (Greek) transposition,
be­



ing a certain figure wherein one letter is put for another.


Metellus, a famous Roman Captain, who being
to go by Sea, with a great Army against the
Carthaginians and Sicilians, prayed to
all the gods but Vesta, who
being thereby offended, kept back the Navy with contrary
windes, which Caius Julius
the Priest affirmed could not be diverted, but by the
sacrificing of his daughter Metella, which he
yielding unto, the goddesse
took compassion of the Virgin, and sent a Heifer in her
stead, also the name of a High-Priest of the Romans, who
when the Temple of Vesta was on fire, running
into the Palladium out of the flame, he lost his
sight by venturing too far into the fire.

Metempsychosis, (Greek) a
Transmigration, or passing of the Soul out of one body
into another.

Meteor, (from the Greek word
Meteoros, i.
high) a certain imperfectly mixt body, consisting of
vapours drawn up into the middle Region, whereof are
ingendred Rain, Winds, Thunder, and Lightning.

Meteorologie, (Greek) a discourse of
Meteors.

Meteoroscopie, that part of Astrology,
which handleth the difference of
Sublimities, and distance of Stars.

Metheglin, (in latin Mulsum) a
kinde of drink made of Herbs, Hony, Spice,
&c.

Methodical, (Greek) belonging to a Method,
i. an orderly, or artificial
disposing, or placing of things.

Metiochus, the son of Alcibiades,
he being taken by the
Phænicians, and brought a prisoner to
Darius the King of Persia,
against whom his father
then made warre, was yet honourably received, the King
bestowing upon him large
possessions, and a wife named Persiba, by whom he
had many Children.

Metius Suffetius, Dictator of the
Albans, who being bound by Covenant to aide
Tullus Hostilius, King of the Romans, against the
Fidenates, stood with his Army upon a Hill, to
see the event of the battel,
for which he was by the command of Hostilius,
torn in pieces with wilde horses.

Metonymie, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure,
wherein there is a changing of one name for another, as of
the cause for the effects, of the subject, for the
adjuncts, and contrarily.

Metope, (a Term in Architecture) the
distance of space in a pillar, between the Denticles and
Triglyph's.

Metoposcopy, (Greek) the guessing at mens
inclinations, as also the future events of men, by looking
on their faces.

Metrical, (lat.) belonging to Meeter, or
verse.

Metropolitan, belonging to a
Metropolis, (Greek) i. the chief Citie
of a Countrey, or Province, whence an Arch-bishop is
called a Metropolitan Bishop, because his Sea is alwayes
in the chief Citie.

Mexico, a great and famous Citie of the
Mexican Province in Nova Hispania, the
Citie was the chief seat of Montezeuma,
who was Lord of the new world.

Mezentius, a King of the Thuscans,
who with his son Lausus, assisting
Turnus in the war against Aeneas, and
the Trojans, they both fell by the hand of
Aeneas himself.


M I

Miagrus, the God of flies, so called by
Plautus, by others Myopes.

Miasme, (Greek) a polluting, or
defiling.

Michæl, (Hebr.) who is like God.

St. Michæls Mount, a Rocky cliffe, or
Promontory in Corn-wall, which John,
Earle of Oxford fortified against King
Edward the fourth, there is also a place so called in
Normandy.

Miche, to play the Truant, or hide ones
self out of the way, from the French word Muser,
i. to be idle, or the Dutch Micke, i. a wary
looking about.

Mickle, much, from the Saxon word
Micel, or as some say from the Greek word
Megale.

Microcosme, (Greek) the body of man is
commonly so called, being as it were a little world, see Macrocosme.

Micrologie, (Greek) a discoursing about
petty small affairs.

Microscope, (Greek) a certain
instrument whereby the
full proportion of the smallest things may be
discerned.

Midas, a King of Phrygia, the son of
Gordias a
Cowheard, he having intertained Bacchus, and
being bid to ask of him what ever he had a minde to, he
desired that whatsoever he toucht, might be turned
into gold, which desire was immediately granted, and not
onely every thing else he touched, but his meat also,
before he could bring it to his mouth, was changed to
gold, whereupon he being forced to request that he might
be freed from that



gift he was counselled to wash himself in
Pactolus streams, which immediately
became very bright with
the glistering of the sands which were turned into gold,
afterwards Pan having challenged
Apollo to a musick duell; Tmolus being
chosen Judge, Midas being the onely man that
gave the victory to Pan, was adjudged for his
ignorance to have Asses ears grow to his head, which
disgrace neverthelesse had been concealed, had not his
Barber gone into a hollow place of the earth, and cried
out Midas hath Asses ears, and soon after the
reeds which grew in that place became vocal, and
continually uttered the same words.


Middleburgh, the chief City of
Zealand.

Midriffe, see Diaphragme.

Migration, (lat.) a removing, or
passing from place to place.

Mile, such a space of ground in length
onely, as containeth a thousand paces, or eight furlongs,
every furlong containing 125 paces.

Miles, the proper name of a man, in
Latin Milo, from
the grain called Milium, i. Millet,
others make it a contraction from Michæl.

Miletus, the chief
Citie of
Ionia, whose inhabitants the Milesii
were accounted the potentest, and the richest people of
all Asia; it was originally called
Anactoria, now Melazzo, also a Citie of
Caria, built by Miletus the son of
Apollo and Argea,
or as some say, by Sarpedon the son of
Jupiter, and the
brother of Minos, and Rhadamanthus.

Milfordhaven, a very commodious Haven in
Pembroke-shire, where Henry Earle of
Richmond landed, when by that famous battel at
Bosworth, he won the Crown from Richard
the third, this Haven hath sixteen Creeks, five Bay's, and
thirteen Rodes.

Militarie, (lat.) belonging to Souldiers or
War.

Millefoile.,  (in Lat.
Millefolium) a kind of Herb, otherwise called yarrow.

Millenarians, see Chiliasts.

Millet, in Latin Milium, in Greek
Cenchros) a kind
of plant, so called from the multitude of small granes, or
seeds which it beareth.

Milo, a certain Crotonian of that
vast strength, that at the Olympick games he
carried an Oxe the space of a whole
furlong, killed it with
his fist, and afterwards eat it all himself in one day.

Miltiades, a great Captain of the
Athenians, who
with 11000 Greeks overthrew 600000
Persians in the fields of Marathon, yet
afterwards being accused of bribery, he was forced by the
Athenians to die in Chains.

A Mime, or Mimick, (Greek) a
Jester, or one that counterfeits the gestures, or
countenances of others, whence Mimical, Apish, or given to
imitate.

Minacity, (lat.) a menacing, or
threatning.

Minchings, an ancient word for those
consecrated virgins, whom we call Nuns.

Mindbruch, (a Saxon word) a hurting of
honour and worship.

Mine, (French) the same as meen, the
aspect, or garb of any person. Cleop.

Mineralist, one skilfull in minerals,
(lat.) i. metals, or any thing growing in
mines.

Minerva, the goddesse of wisdom, she is
said to have been born without a mother, and to have
sprung out of Jupiters head, she is reported also
to have invented the liberal sciences, and to have found
out the use of wool, about which a Lydian Virgin
named Arachne, contesting with her, was
overthrown and turned into a Spider, also to her is
attributed the first finding out of the use of Oyl, she
was called in Greek
Athenæa, and from her the Citie of
Athens took its denomination.

Miniature, a drawing of pictures in
little, which is many
times done with Minium, i. red lead.

A Minime, a certain quantity in musick,
containing one time up, or down, from the Latin word
Minimus, i. least, also Minime friars,
are a certain order instituted by Fran. de Paul.

A Minion, or Mignon, (French) one
that is in highest credit and esteem with a great person,
above any one besides, but especially
in an amorous sence, it is also used adjectively for neat,
spruice, polisht, or adorn'd.

Minious, (lat.) of a red, or Vermilion
colour.

Ministery, (lat.) service, or charge in any
imployment, but used more especially
in a spiritual sence for the Priestly
function.

Miniver, see Meniver.

The Minor, in a syllogisme the latter part,
or assumption.

Minoration, (lat.) a diminishing, or
making lesse.



Minority, (lat.) nonage, or being
under age.


Minos, a King of Creet the son of
Jupiter, (or as
some say, of Xanthus) and Europa, he
having great wars with the Athenians
and Megareans, because they slew his son
Androgeus, had Megara
delivered to him by the
treachery of Scylla; he intertained
Dædalus an Athenian being banisht from
his Country, who being an excellent Artist, made that
famous Labyrinth into
which the Minotaur was put; But afterwards for
making a wooden Heifer into which Pasiphæ the
wife of Minos being
included, received the Bull again, by which she had
formerly had the Minotaur, he was shut up into
the Labyrinth himself, together with his son
Icarus; but he making
waxen wings for himself and his son, fled away into
Sicily, where he was stifled in a Bath by the
daughter of King Crocalus,
his son having melted his wings by the way, and fallen
into the Sea, which was thence called the Icarian
Sea.

Minotaurus, the Monster which
Pasiphæ the wife of Minos brought
forth, having had carnal copulation with a Bull, it had
partly the form of a man, partly of a Bull: to this
Monster the Athenians overcome by Minos,
were bound by covenant to sent yearly seven of their
noblest youths to be devoured; but in the third year
Theseus the son of Aegeus was sent to
slay the Minotaur,
which having done, he escaped with the help of
Ariadne out of the Labyrinth
by a clew of thread.

Minouery, (from the French word
Mainovre, i.
handy-work) is a trespasse committed
by a mans handy-work in the Forrest, as an engine to catch
Dear, &c.

Minster, a Saxon word, signifying a
Monastery.

Mint, a certain herb, so called from
Minthe the daughter of Cocytus, who
being taken away with Proserpina by
Pluto, was changed into a plant of the same name,
also the place where the Kings coin is formed, which at
present is at the Tower of London, but in ancient
times it was at Caleis.

Minute, (lat.) little, small, whence
Minution, a
diminishing, or making little, also a Minute is
substantively used for a moment or the smallest part of
time.

† Mirabile, (lat.) wonderful,
strange, to be admired.

Miraculous, (lat.) the same.

Mirmillions, (lat.) a sort of gladiators or
sword-fighters.

Mirour, or Mirrour, (French) a
looking-glasse.

Misanthropy, (Greek) a man-hateing, a
flying the company of men.

Mirach, the Girdle of
Andromeda.

Misaventure, in Common Law, is the killing
of a man, partly by negligence, and partly by chance, as
by throwing a stone carelessely, shooting an arrow, or the
like.

Misbode, (old word) wrong.

Miscellanies, (lat.) a mixture of several
things together, a collection of divers
notions treating of
different matters.

Miscreant, (French) an Infidel, or
unbeliever.

Mise, a French word, signifying in an
action of right or property, the point whereupon the
parties proceed to trial, either by Assize or Battle, as
issue is in an action personal.

Misericordia, in Common Law, is an
arbitrary punishment, very moderate, and rather lesse than
the offence.

Miskenning, is a changing of speech in
Court.

The Misne, or Misen-sail of a
Ship, is that which is between the poop and the main-sail.

Misogamy, (Greek) a hating or contempt of
marriage.

Mysogyny, (Greek) a hating of
women.

Misprision, (from the French word
mespris)
signifieth in Common Law, a neglect
or oversight, as a misprision of Felony, &c.
is a neglect or light account had of Felony committed, by
not revealing it, when we know it to be committed.

To Misqueam, (old word) to
displease.

Missale, (lat.) a breviary or
masse-book.

Misseltoe, or Misseldin, (in Dutch
Mistel) a certain plant which grows not upon the
ground, but upon other trees, of which it is reported,
that Thrushes eating the berries
of this plant and afterwards sitting to roust all night,
and shitting upon it, causeth it to bear bird-lime, whence
cometh the Proverb, The
Thrush shits her own sorrow.

Missile, (lat.) a dart or arrow, also a
term in Heraldry, being a mixture of
several colours
together.

Mission, (lat.) a sending, it is also taken



peculiarly for a power given by the Church of
Rome, to go into other
Countries and preach
the Catholick Faith, and those that are thus sent, are
called Missionaries,
or fathers of the Mission.


A letter Missive, (lat.) a letter which is
sent from one friend to another.

Mister, (old word) need, want.

Mistery, (French Mistier, Latin
Magisterium)
a craft, trade, or occupation, but coming from
Mysterium, it signifieth a secret or hidden
businesse.

Mithridates, a King of Pontus, who
spake 22 Languages, he rebelling against the Romans was
overcome by Sylla near Dardanus, and
afterwards by Lucullus near Cyzicus, and
flying to Tigranes King of Armenia he
renewed the war, but at length was totally overthrown by
Pompey, and besieged in his own Palace, where
having in vain attempted to
poison himself, he assisted Gallus the
Executioner (when his hand trembled) in the murdering of
himself. He was the first inventour of that excellent
Antidote against infection and poison, called from his own
name Mithridate.

Mitigation. (lat.) a pacifying or
asswaging.

Mittins, (in French Mitains)
certain winter gloves made of cloth or furs.

Mittimus, a Justice of peace his warrant to
send an offender to the Goale or prison.

Mitylene, an ancient City of
Lesbos, not far from Methymna: from this
City the whole Island now takes its
denomination.

Mixen, (old word from Meoxe, i.
dung) a dunghill.

Mixture, (lat.) a mingling of several
things together.

Mizmor, (Span.) a Dungeon.


M N

Mnemosyne, a certain Nimph who being got
with child by Jupiter, brought forth the nine
Muses; the word signifieth in Greek memory.

Mnesteus, see Menesteus.


M O

Mobbi, a certain drink made of Potato
roots, much used in the Island of
Barbado's.

Mobility, (lat.) moveablenesse,
inconstancy.

Modality, (lat.) a School-term,
signifying the manner
of a thing in the abstract.

Modder, (from the Dutch word Modde
or Moddekin, i. a Maid or Virgin) a young girle
or wench.

Moderation, (lat.) temperance,
government,
discretion.

Moderatour, (lat.) a discreet governour, a
decider of any controversie.

Modern, (lat.) of late time.

Modicum, (lat.) a little matter, a small
pittance.

Modification, (lat.) a qualifying, a
setting a measure or limit
to any thing.

Modulation, (lat.) an exact singing, a
keeping time and measure in singing.

Mogontus, a certain heathen god,
worshipped by the
ancient Brittains in Northumberland,
like as Bellotucardus in
Cumberland,
and Andates in Essex.

Moguntia, a City of Germany, now
called Mentz: the
Arch-Bishop of this place is one of the three spiritual
Electors of the Empire.

Moiles, (in Latin Mallei) a kind
of highsoaled-shooes worn in ancient times by Kings and
great persons.

Not found in OED.



Moitie, (French) the half part of any
thing.

Mokel, (Sax.) bignesse.

Molar, (lat.) belonging to a Mill, whence
the molar-teeth are those five most extreme teeth on
either side of the mouth both above and beneath, which are
called Grinders.

Molendinarius, (lat.) belonging to a
Mill.

Molestation, (lat.) a vexing, a
troubleing.

Moliminous, (lat.) requiring strength,
force, stresse, or indeavour.

Molition, (lat.) a trying, endeavouring, or
attempting.

Mollification, (lat.) a making soft or
tender.

Mollitude, (lat.) softnesse, tendernesse,
effeminatenesse.

Mollock, or Meore, (old word)
dirt, dung, excrement.

Molochite, see Malachite.

Moly, a certain herb of very great
vertue, mentioned by
Homer.

Momus, a certain deity among the
Ancients, reputed the
god of carping and reprehension,
he is feigned by the Poets to



have been born of Nox and Somnus, and
that his whole businesse was to reprehend and carp at
all the other gods.


Mona, see Anglesey.

Monachal, (lat.) belonging to a
Monk.

Monarchy, (Greek) the government of a
Common-wealth by a Monarch or one man alone.

Monas, (Greek) the number one.

Monasterial, (lat.) belonging to
Monasteries,
i. solitary places where Monks live: it comes
from the Greek word Monos, i. alone.

A Mond, a ball of Gold, being one of the
Ensigns of an Emperour, who challengeth
a kind of right to the whole World.

Predates OED "monde" (1765).



Monedule, (lat.) a jackdaw.

Not found in OED.



Monmouth, the chief Town of
Monmouthshire,
called in the Brittish tongue Mongwy, because it
is seated at the confluence of the Rivers Munow
and Wye. This Town is famous for the birth of
King Henry the fifth, and of Geffry ap
Arthur Bishop of Asaph, the compiler of the
ancient Brittish
Story.

Moneth, (Sax. Monad, Dutch
Mændt, from Mæne, i. the Moon) the
space of 28 dayes, in which time the Moon
compleateth her
circle. There are four sorts of moneths. First a moneth of
Apparition, i. the space of 26 dayes and 12
hours, wherein the Moon
appears, the other three days being deducted wherein it is
obscured by the Sun. Secondly Medical or
Decretorial, i. the space of 26 days and 22 hours, Thirdly of
Consecution or Progression, i. the space of one
conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, and the other being
29 dayes and a half. Fourthly of
Peragration, i. the space of the Moons
revolution from any
part of the Zodiack unto the same again, being 27 dayes
and 8 hours.

Monger, or Manger, a Saxon word
anciently used for a Merchant, whence Woodmonger,
&c. i. a Woodmerchant.

Moniers, a word anciently used for
ministers of the Mint, coiners of money.

Monition, (lat.) an admonishing, or giving
warning.

Monkeshood, a kind of flower called in
Latin Consolida Regalis.

Monoceros, (Greek) a Unicorn, or beast
having but one horn.

Monocular, (lat.) having but one
eye.

Monodical, (Greek) belonging to Monody,
i. a kind of Funeral-song, wherein one sings
alone.

Monogamy, (Greek) a single marriage, a
having but one wife or one husband.

Monogram, (Greek) a writing or
sentence, consisting of
one line or verse.

Monology, (Greek) a talking alone, a
discourse held by one man onely.

Monomachy, (Greek) a single combate, or
fighting of one couple onely hand to hand.

Monophagy, (Greek) an eating alone, or of
one kind of meat.

Monopoly, (Greek) the ingrossing of any
saleable commodity by one man, that no body can gain by
them but himself.

A Monops, (Greek) a kind of beast of
Pæonia, otherwise called a Bonasus,
which voideth a kind of sharp and fiery ordure deadly to
whomsoever it lights upon.

Monoptote, (Greek) a term in
Grammar, being a Noun
that hath but one Case.

Monostick, (Greek) a sentence
consisting onely of one
single verse.

A Monosyllable, (Greek) a word
consisting onely of one
syllable.

Monothelites, (Greek) a sort of
Hereticks living in the
year 640, who held that there was but one will in
Christ.

Monstrosity, (lat.) monstrousnesse, that
which is beyond the ordinary course of nature.

Montanists, a sort of Hereticks, so called
from their first Author Montanus; they held that
the Holy Ghost was not given to the Apostles, but to
themselves.

Montanous, (lat.) full of mountains,
belonging to a
mountain.

Montchensy, a great sirname in
Kent and Suffolk, stiled in Latin records de Monte Canisio.

Montefiasco, a sort of rich wine made at
Montefiascone a City in Italy.

Montera, (Span.) a kind of cap used by
Hunters and Seamen.

Monticulous, (lat.) full of Monticles,
i. little mountains or hillocks.

Montivagous, (lat.) wandering up and down
the hills and mountains.

Montfichet, a name of great note, stiled in
the Latin records, de Monte Fixo.

Montgomery, the chief City of
Montgomeryshire,
so named from Roger de Montgomery
Earle of Shrewsbury who built the



Castle. It is called in Latin Mons Gomericus.


Monument, (lat. from the verb
Monere, i.
to admonish) a memorial of any famous person or action, by
Sepulchre, Statue, Pillar, or the like.

Monychus, the name of one of the
Centaurs, whose
strength was such, that he could pull up the strongest
trees by the roots, and use them instead of darts.

Monyma, the wife of King
Mithridates, who when her husband was overthrown,
attempted to have strangled her self by tying her Diadem
to her neck, but the rope breaking, she cursed her Diadem,
as being neither useful in prosperity, nor adversity, and
delivered her self up to an Eunuch to be slain.

To Moor a ship, a term in Navigation, to
lay out her Anchors, as is most fit for the Ship to ride
by in that place where she is.

Moorland, a part of Staffordshire,
so called from certain
barren places thereabout
which have been anciently called Moores.

To Moot, (from the French word Mot,
i. a word, or the Dutch ghe-moet, i. a
meeting together) a term
used in the Innes of Court, and signifieth to handle a
case in Law, and those that handle these cases are called
Mootmen, who after 7 or 8 years study, are chosen
Utterbaristers.

Moral, (lat.) pertaining to manners or
civility, also the moral of a fable is used substantively
for the application of it to mens lives and manners;
whence to moralize, is
to give the moral sense or interpretation
of any thing.

Moration, (lat.) a tarrying or
staying.

Moravia, a Country of Germany,
anciently called
Marcomannia, it is now joyned to the Kingdom of
Bohemia.

Morbidezza, (Ital.) tendernesse,
effeminacy.

Morbifical, (lat.) causing sicknesse, bringing diseases.

Mordacity, (lat.) bitingnesse,
sharpnesse, also
bitternesse of speech, taunting terms.

Mordication, (lat.) a biting or fastning
the teeth deep into any thing.

Moresk work, (French) a kind of
antick work in painting or
carving, wherein there is a wild resemblance of birds,
beasts, trees, &c. intermingled.

Morgan, a proper name of a man,
signifying in the
ancient Brittish tongue, as much as Seaman.

Morglay, (from the French words Mort,
i. death, and Glaive, i. a sword) a
mortal or deadly
sword.

Moris, a proper name, in Latin Mauritius, from
Maurus a Moor. the most
famous man of this name was
St. Morice, a Commander in the Theban
Region, martyred for the
Christian Faith under Maximianus.

Morigeration, (lat.) as it were a
bearing manners, an
obeying, a yeilding obedience.

Morion, (Ital.) a steel-cap or
head-piece.

Morisco, (Span.) a Moor, also a kind of
Dance which seemeth to be the same with that which the
Greeks call Pyrricha, we vulgarly call it the
Morris Dance, as it were the Moorish Dance.

Morkin, (a term in Hunting) a Deer that
dies by mischance or sicknesse.

Morling, or Mortling, the wool
which is taken from the skin of a dead sheep.

Morology, (Greek) foolish speaking, talking
like a fool.

Morosity, (lat.) peevishnesse,
frowardnesse,
waywardnesse.

Morphew, a kind of white scurfe upon the
body, from the French word Mortfeu,
i. dead fire, because it lookes like the white sparkes
that fall from a brand extinguished.

Morpheus, the minister of sleep, used also
metaphorically for sleep it self.

Morta, the name of one of the three
Destinies according to the Latins. see Parcæ.

Mortal, (lat.) deadly, bringing
death.

Mort d' ancester, is a Writ that lieth
where a mans father, mother, brother, or Uncle die seised
of land, and a stranger abateth or entreth the
land.

Mortgage, (French) a pawn of land or goods,
bound for money borrowed to be the Creditours for ever, if
the money be not repaied at the time agreed on.

Mortiferous, (lat.) bringing death.

Mortification, (lat.) as it were a
making dead, a quelling or
subduing, but it is peculiarly used in Divinity for an
humbling or bringing down
the flesh by fasting and
prayer.

A Mortise, (French) a term in
Carpenters work, being
a fastning a piece of wood as it were by biting into
another piece.

Mortmain, (French) signifying a dead



hand) is in Common-law an Alienation of Lands, or
Tenements to any Corporation,
or Fraternity, and their Successours with the Licence of
the King and the Lord of the Mannour.


Mortresse, a kinde of made dish of meat
consisting of several ingredients.

A Mortuarie, (lat.) a Funeral, a
burying place, also a gift
left by a man at his death to his Parish in recompence of
his Tythes not duely paid in his life time.

Mosaical, Musaique, or Musive work, a kinde
of curious work in Architecture, consisting of small
inlayed pieces of stone, glasse, sundry coloured shells,
or other materials.

Moscovia, a large Countrey of
Europe, otherwise called Russia,
bordering upon Tartary, it is governed by the
great Duke of Muscovie, called also Emperour of
Russia.

Moses, (Hebr.) drawn up.

A Mosque, the same as
Meskite.

A Mosstick, a word used in painting,
being a round stick about a
yard long, which the Artist doth rest upon when he
paints.

Mot, or Motto, (French and
Italian) an Emblem, Impresse, or devise, as it were a 
short sentence comprised in a word, also a certain note
which hunts-men wind on their horn.

Motet, (French) a verse in Musick, a stanza
of a song, also a short posie.

Mouch, (old word) to eat up.

Mougnon, (French) the brawny part of the
arm, also the brassel, or that part of a Coat of Armour,
which covereth the Arms.

Mound, q. Munimentum, a Fence, or
Hedge.

Mounster, a Province in Ireland,
containing these
following Counties, Kerry, Desmond, Kork, Waterford,
Limmerick, Tipperary.

Mountain of piety, a certain stock, or bank
of money, which used to be raised out of voluntary
contributions, and treasured up to be lent upon occasion
to poor people, who were
ruined by the usury and extortion of the Jews.

Mountebank, (from the Italian word
Montimbanco, because he monts upon some high
bench or form) a Drugseller, or one that buys Drugs of
Apothecaries, and by much boasting of their vertues, sells
them again for choice Medecins. He is called in French
Charlatan, from his great talking and
bragging.

A Mowe, (from the French Amas, i.
a heap) a pile or
stack of corn or hay.


M U

Mucilaginous, or Mucculent, (lat.)
full of snotty or slimy substance.

Mucidity, or Mucour, (lat.)
mouldiness, hoarinesse, filthinesse.

A Mue for Hawks, a kind of cage or aviary
where Hawks are kept when they change their feathers, it
comes from the  French word Muer, to
change, whence that place called the Mues near
Charing-crosse came to be so called, it having been
anciently appointed for the keeping of the Kings
Hawks.

Mufti, the chief Priest among the
Turks, who is created by the Emperour
himself.

Mugwort, a kind of herb, which being
carried about a man, taketh away
wearinesse; it is called in Latin Artemisia, from
Artemisia the Queen of Caria, or from
Artemis, i. Diana.

Mulato, (Span.) one whose father is a
Blackmore, and his mother of another
nation or contrarily.

Mulct, (lat.) a fine, penalty, or
amerciament.

Muleto, (Ital.) a beast called a Moile or
great Mule, made use of in some parts for the carrying of
Sumpters.

Muliebrity, (lat.) womanishnesse,
softnesse,
effeminacy.

Mulier, in Common Law, is a word taken
contradistinct to a bastard, as if a man have a son by a
woman before marriage,
and then marrying the mother of that son who is called a
bastard, have another son,
this second son is called Mulier, and being
compared together, they have this addition, Bastard
eldest, and Mulier youngest; but the most proper
signification of
Mulier is a woman that hath had the company of man.

Mullar, (in French Mulleur) the
upper stone wherewith Painters use to grind their
colours.

Mullet, (in Latin Mullus) a kind
of fish called a Barbel, also a term in
Heraldry, being like a
spot falling from above, and divided into five
ends.

Mulse, (lat.) a kind of wine mingled with
honey.

Multifarious, (lat.) of divers sorts,
divided into many
parts.



Multifidous, (lat.) having divers slits, cleft
into several parts.


Multiformity, (lat.) a having divers forms,
or shapes.

Multiloquous, (lat.) talking much, of many
words.

Multiparous, (lat.) bringing forth
many young ones at a
birth.

Multiplicious, (lat.) manifold, consisting
of divers wayes or things.

Multiplication, (lat.) an increasing, a
making much or many.

Multipotent, (lat.) having much power, able
to do much.

Multiscious, (lat.) having much skill, or
knowledge.

Multisonant, (lat.) sounding much,
making much noise.

Multivagant, (lat.) straying, or
wandering much.

Multure, in Common Law, is a toll that a
miller taketh for grinding of corn.

Mumme, a kind of Dutch Beer made originally
at Brunswick.

Mummery, (French) a personating of any one
in a mask.

Mummy, (lat.) a kind of pitchy
substance arising from
the moisture which is sweat out of dead bodies that have
been embalmed with divers sorts of spices, and is called
in Greek Pissasphaltus.

Muncerians, a sort of Anabaptists that made
a great insurrection in Germany, so called from
their Ringleader Muncer.

Mundane, (lat.) worldly, belonging to the
world.

Mundification, (lat.) a making clean,
purging, or purifying.

Muneration, (lat.) a recompencing, or
rewarding.

Municipal, (lat.) injoying a freedom, or
the right of a free City.

Munificence, (lat.) bountifulnesse,
liberality.

Muniment, (lat.) a Fence or Fortress, also
a house of Strength where the Deeds or Plate of a Colledge
are kept.

Munite, (lat.) fenced, made strong.

Munkseam, (a term in Navigation) a kind of
sowing the canvasses of sails the edge of the one over the
edge of the other.

Murage, (lat.) a toll to be levyed for the
building or repairing of publick walls.

Mural, (lat.) belonging to a wall.

Mural Crown, a Crown which among the
ancient Romans was given to him who first scaled the walls
of an enemies City.

Murder, in Common Law, is a wilful and
felonious killing of any man upon premeditated
malice.

Murengers, certain officers in
Westchester that look to the City walls.

Muricide, (lat.) a mouse-killer, a
cowardly fellow.

Muriel, the Christian name of divers women,
from the Greek Myron, i. sweet ointment.

Muring, a term in Architecture, the raising
of walls.

Murrain, (from the Greek word
Maraino) a kind of rot or consuming
disease among cattel.

Murnival, (French) the number 4.

Murray, a Country in the North part of
Scotland, called in Latin Moravia.

A Murrey colour, (from the Greek word
Maurus) a dusky, blackish, or dun
colour.

Musach cassa, a certain chest in the Temple
of Jerusalem, wherein Kings were wont to cast
their offerings.

Musaph, a certain book containing the Laws
of the Turks.

Muscadel wine, (French) a sort of wine
brought from the Island of Candy, having a sweet
odour like to that of Musk.

Musehamp, a name formerly of great note in Northumberland,
stiled in Latin records, de Musko Campo.

Muscheto, a kind of Insect so called,
somewhat resembling a gnat.

Mussack, a kind of drink, much in use among
the Chineses.

Muscous, (lat.) mossy, or full of
mosse.

Musculous, (lat.) belonging to, or full of
Muscles, i. certain organick parts of the body
being of a fleshy and tendinous substance, and interlac't
with filaments and little veines and arteries, and serving
as the instruments of motion to every part.

Musen, a term among Hunters, is when a Stag
or male Deer casts his head.

Muses, the 9 daughters of Jupiter
and Mnemosyne, born in the Country of
Pieria (whence they are called Pierides)
and inhabiting
Helicon a hill of Boeotia, they were
accounted the goddesses of Musick and Poetry, and the rest
of the ingenuous Arts and Sciences, their names were
Calliope, Clio,
Erato, Thalia, Melpomene, Terpsichore,
Euterpe, Polyhymnia, and Vrania.



Musive, see Mosaical.


Musket, the tassel or male of a
sparrow-Hawk.

Muskinne, a kind of bird otherwise
called a finch, in Latin fringillago.

Not found in OED.



Musmon, the name of a certain beast
resembling partly a
sheep, partly a goat.

Mussitation, (lat.) a muttring or
speaking between the
teeth

Mussulmans, or Mulsulmans, an
Arabick word, signifying a people faithful in their
Religion, being an attribute which the Turks or Mahumetans
arrogate to themselves.

Must, (lat.) wine newly pressed from the
grape.

Mustache, or Mustachio, (French 
from the Greek word Mystax) the beard of the
upper-lip.

Mustaphis, certain Prophets or Learned men
among the Turks.

Not found in OED.



Musteline, (lat.) belonging to a
weasel.

Mustriche, a Shoomakers last.

Not found in OED.



Mutability, (lat.) changeablenesse,
inconstancy.

Mutation, (lat.) a changing.

Mute, (lat.) dumbe, speechlesse, also
Mutes, used substantively for those
consonants which have
no sound of a vowel before
them; also certain Executioners
among the Turks
appointed to strangle offenders,
are called Mutes. Also a Hawk is said to mute, not to
dung.

Mutilation, (lat.) a maiming or
curtailing of any
thing.

Q. Mutius, a stout Roman, who in the war
with Porsenna King of the Hetrurians
went into the enemies Camp with an
intent to have killed the
King; but being taken and threatned with extraordinary
punishments, he thrust his right hand into the fire and
burnt it off, to shew his contempt
of torments; whence he was called Scævola, and
telling Porsenna, that 300 youths had in like
manner conspired against
him, he was so terrified that immediately
he made a peace with the Romans.

Mutual, (lat.) passing between two,
interchangeable.


M Y

Myriad, (Greek) the number of ten
thousand.

Myrmidons, a certain people of
Thessaly, who went under the conduct of
Achilles to the wars of Troy. They were
so called from Myrmidon an ancient King of
Thessaly the son
of Jupiter and the Nimph
Corymosa, or else from a certain Virgin called
Myrmice, who for contemning Ceres, was
changed into an Ant, from which there springing up a
multitude of Ants, they were by the prayers of
Aeacus, when Thessaly
was almost depopulated, changed into men.

Myrobalanes, a sort of medicinal fruit, by
some called Egyptian acorns, of which there are five
sorts, Bellerick, Chebule, Citrine, Emblick, and
Indian.

Myropolist, (Greek) a seller of ointments
or sweet oiles.

Myrrha, the daughter of Cynaras
King of Cyprus, who by the help of her Nurse
coming to lie with her father, was got with child by him,
and brought forth Adonis the Paramour of
Venus, but Cynaras
afterwards being sensible of what was done, would have
slain her with his sword, whereupon she fled into
Arabia Felix and was changed into a Tree of her
own name, from which there distilleth a sweet
aromatick Gum called
also Myrrhe.

Myrrhine, (lat.) belonging to myrrhe, made
of myrrhe.

Myrsilus, the son of Myrsus, a
King of Lydia, called also Candaules the
last of the race of the Heraclidæ. see Candaules.

Myrtilus, the son of Mercury and
Phæthusa, he
was the Chariot-driver of Oenomaus,
who being to run a race with Pelops Myrtilus
being promised a great reward, loosened the axeltree so,
that the Chariot being overturned Oenomaus fell
out and broke his neck, but before he died, he
intreated Pelops to revenge his death;
whereupon when
Myrtilus came to demand his reward, he was thrown
into that Sea which from thence was called Mare
Myrtoum, now Mar
de Mandria.

Myrtle, a kind of low tree which
beareth a little blackish
leaf of a very fragrant scent, and groweth onely in hot
Countries; this tree
was by the ancients acounted sacred to
Venus.

Mysia, a Country of Asia the
Lesse, anciently divided into Higher Mysia and
Lower Mysia, it containeth those
Countries which are now called Servia, Bulgaria,
and Wallachia.

Mystagogical, (Greek) belonging to a
Mystagogue, i. e. he that interprets
Divine mysteries or ceremonies, also he that



hath the keeping of Church relicks, and shewing them to
strangers.


Mysteriarch, (Greek) a chief overseer of
sacred mysteries.

Mystical, (Greek) mysterious, secret,
hidden.

Mythology, (Greek) a discourse and
exposition of fables.


N A

NAam (from the Dutch word
Memmen, i. to nim
or take hold on) in Common Law is the taking of anothers
moveable goods, which if it be by
reasonable distresse
proportionable to the value of the thing distrained for,
it is called lawful Naam.

Nacre, (French) mother of pearle.

Nadir, an Arabick word oft used in
Astronomy, signifying
that point of heaven directly under our feet, and opposite
to the Zenith.

Nænia, (lat.) Funeral-songs,
Funeral-prayers or praises.

Not found in OED.



Naiades, the Nimphs of Rivers and
Fountains, from the Greek word Nao, i. to
flow.

Naiant, (French) swimming or
floating, a term in
Heraldry.

Naif, (French) a term in Jewelling and is
spoken of a Diamond or other Stone, which looketh quick
and natural, and hath all its properties as in water,
cleannesse, &c.

Nantwich, a Town in Cheshire,
famous for the pits of brine or salt water, which are
called Wiches; it was named by the ancient
Brittains Hellath Wen, i. the white Wich or Salt
pit; and by Latin Writers Vicus Malbanus, perhaps
from one William
Malbedeng or Malbanc, anciently Lord
thereof.

Napææ, the Nimphs of the woods and
mountains, from the Greek word Nape, i. a
wood.

Napthe, (lat.) a kind of sulphureous
substance, called Median oile, or
Babylonish bitumen.

Narcissus, a youth of great beauty, the son
of Cephisus and Liriope, of whom the
Prophet Tyresias foretold that he should live so
long as he should abstain from beholding
himself; he being beloved of many Nimphs and especially of
Echo, was insensible to all their loves, & at
length coming to drink of a clear Fountain, and beholding
his image in the water, he fell in love with it, and
seeing no hopes of injoying
it, he pined away for grief and was changed into a Flower
of the same name, vulgarly called a white Daffadilly, and
Echo seeing her self despised likewise, pined
away, and was changed into a voice. Also the name of a
Bishop of Jerusalem, who when oil was wanting at
Divine service for the
Lamps, by his prayers turned water into oil.

Narcotique, (Greek) of a stupefying and
benumming quality, whence divers things which are used in
physick to that end, are called Narcotic
Medicines.

Nares, a term in Faulconry, the holes in
the Hawks beake.

A Narration, or Narrative, (lat.)
a report, discourse, or relation of any thing.

Narses, an Eunuch who being General of the
Emperour Justinians Army in Italy, after
Belizarius performed very great service against
the Goths, but at last being affronted by
Sophia the Empresse, he
called in the Lombards into Italy.

† Nasicornous, a made word which
signifieth having a
horn upon the nose, from the Latin Nasus, i. a
nose, and Cornu, i. a horn.

Natalitious, (lat.) belonging to ones
nativity or birth-day.

Natation, (lat.) a swimming.

Nathaniel, a proper name, signifying in
Hebr. the gift of God.

Nativity, (lat.) the birth, or first
entrance into the
World.

Nativo habendo, a Writ for the
apprehending and
restoring to a Lord his villain
claimed as his inheritance, who in Common Law is called
Nief.

Naturalist, (lat.) one that understandeth
natural causes, a natural Philosopher.

Naturalization, (lat.) an admitting of
strangers into the number of Natural Subjects.

Naval, (lat.) belonging to a Ship or
Navy.

To Naucifie, (lat.) to set at
naught.

The Nave of a wheele, the middle, or that
part into which axeltree is put.

Naufrage, (lat.) shipwrack, losse at sea.
See Wreck.

Navicular, (lat.) belonging to
ships.

Navigable, (lat.) passable by ships.

Navigation, (lat.) a sailing, also the Art
of Seafaring, the knowledge of Sea-affairs.

Navity, (lat.) diligence,
stirringnesse.



Naulage, (French) the fraight or
passage money for going
over the Sea, or any River.


Not found in OED but see "freight.".



Naumachy, (Greek) a fighting at sea, a
sea battle.

Nauplius, the son of Neptune and
Amymone the
daughter of Danaus, he was King of
Eubæa, and father of Palamedes, who
being by the means of Vlisses stoned to death,
Nauplius in revenge made a great fire upon the
Mountain Caphareus, which the Greek Navy taking
to be the light of some near Harbour, sailed so near, that
they were cast away upon the rocks.

Nauseous, or Nauseative, (lat.)
going against ones
stomack, making one ready to vomit.

Nausicæ, the daughter of Alcinous
and Arete, she going out of the City one night
with her maid-servants to bath her, met with
Vlisses who was shipwrack't upon that shore and
almost naked, whom she brought to her fathers Palace, gave
him cloths, and entertained him with a great deal of
respect.

Naustible, (lat.) a Haven for ships.

Nautical, or Nautic, (lat.)
belonging to Mariners or to Ships.

Naxos, one of the Cyclades,
Islands in the Aegean, anciently called
Strongyle and Dia; in this Island
Ariadne being left by Theseus, married
Bacchus.

Nazal, (French) the nose-piece of a
Helmet.

Nazarites, (Hebr.) a sort of Jews who separated themselves from all
others, and vowed themselves to God for a certain time, in
which they abstained from wine and suffered their hair to
grow, also the Disciples were called Nazarites, from
Nazareth the
place where Christ was born.


N E

Neades, a certain kind of beast, whose
bones are of a miraculous greatnesse.

Not found in OED.



Neæra, the name of a very fair Nimph, who
being got with child by Phæbus, brought forth
two daughters, Lampetia and Phæthusa,
who kept the flocks of their father the Sun in
Sicily, many of which were killed by the
companions of Vlisses, for which they were cast
away at sea.

Neale-too, in Navigation, is when it is
deep water close to the shore.

See OED, "neal," a.



Neapolis, the City of Naples
situate in Campania in Italy, upon the
Mediterranean
Sea-side; it was built first of all by the Citizens of
Cuma and called Parthenope,
from the name of one of the Syrens who was there
buried, afterwards it was destroyed, then rebuilt and
called Neapolis,
which in Greek signifieth the new City; from this City the
Kingdom of Naples takes its denomination,
containing all those
Countries of Italy which are called Campania,
Apulia, Lucania, Magna
Græcia, and part of Latium.

Neap-tides, those smaller tides which
happen 7 dayes after the change, and 7 dayes after the
full of the Moon, whereas the greater tides which happen 7
dayes before the change and full, are called
Spring-tides.

Neat, (from the Dutch Nieten, i.
to but) an Oxe, Cow, or Stear.

Nebule, a term in Heraldry, bearing a
representation of the clouds.

Nebulous, (lat.) misty, foggy,
cloudy.

Necromancy, (Greek) a divination by calling
up deceased bodies, also the black art, or any kinde of
conjuration by dealing
with the Devil, or evil spirits.

Nectarean, (Greek) pleasant, immortal; from
Nectar, i. a certain pleasant drink which the
Poets faign to have been the drink of the Gods, and that
whosoever drunk of it would become immortal.

Nefandous, (lat.) hainous, horrible, not to
be mentioned.

Nefarious, (lat.) very wicked,
abominable.

Negative, (lat.) denying, or
gainsaying.

Negative pregnant, in Common-law, is when a
man being impleaded to have done a thing upon such a day
denies that he did it after the manner and form
declared.

Negotiation, (lat.) a merchandizing,
trafficking, or mannaging of affairs.

Negro, (Ital.) a black-more.

Neif, see Nativo habendo.

Nemoea, a certain wooddy Countrey of
Achaia, between Cleonæ and
Phlius, here it was that Hercules slew a
Lyon of a Monstrous
bignesse, which from the place was called the Nemæan 
Lyon, in remembrance of which exploit he instituted
certain games, called also Nemæan games.

Nemesis, the goddesse of reward and
revenge, and the daughter
of Jupiter and Necessity, she was also called
Adrastia and Rhamnusia, and placed by
the Aegyptians
above the Moon.

Nemoral, or Nemorous, (lat.) belonging



to woods, wooddy, shaded with trees.


Nenuphar, (Arab.) a certain flower
commonly called a
water-lilly.

Neogamist, (Greek) one newly
married.

Neophyte, (Greek) a plant newly set or
planted, also metaphorically one newly entred into any
profession, or one newly converted to the Faith.

Neoterical, or Neoterique, (Greek)
new or of a late time.

Nepenthe, a certain herb (mentioned by
Pliny) which being put into wine,
expeleth sadnesse. Some
think it to be the same with Buglosse.

Nephelian Crookhorn, is
Aries.

Nephritick, (Greek) troubled with a disease
which causeth a pain in the reines of the back.

Nepotation, (lat.) riotousnesse or
luxury.

Neptune, the son of Saturn and
Ops, in the division of the world among
Saturns sons, the Empire of the Sea fell to him by lot.

Nereides, the Nimphs of the Sea, the
daughters of Nereus and Doris, among
whom was Amphitrite the wife of
Neptune.

Domitius Nero, one of the ancient
Roman Emperours, who killed
his mother Agrippina, his wife Octavia,
the Poet Lucan, and
Seneca his master.

Nerve, (lat.) a sinew, also by metaphor,
force, or strength of body.

Nervosity, (lat.) a being full of Nerves or
Sinews, i. certain organick parts of the body,
which cause strength and motion; it is also metaphorically
taken for strength or vigour.

Nescious or Nescient, (lat.)
ignorant or not knowing.

Nesh, (old word) tender.

Nessus, one of the Centaurs whom
Ixion begat upon a cloud formed into the likenesse of
Juno, he was slain by Hercules for
attempting to ravish his wife Deianira.

Nestor, the son of Neleus and
Chloris, he came with 50 ships along with the
Grecian Army to the wars of Troy, and
was famous for his prudence and eloquence, and the great
age he lived to.

Nestorians, a sort of Hereticks, so called
from Nestorius, their first founder, their chief
tenet was, that there were two persons
as well as two natures in Christ.

Nettings, (a term in Navigation) those
small ropes which are ceased together with roap yarnes, in
the form of a Net with Mashes.

Nevin, a Town in Cærnarvonshire,
where in the year 1284. the Nobles of England
triumphed over the Welsh with solemne Justs and
Turnaments, wherewith they celebrated
the memory of King Arthur.

Nevosity, (lat.) fulnesse of Warts, or
Moles.

Neustria, a region of Gallia
Celtica, vulgarly
called Westrich.

Neutral, (lat.) indifferent inclining to
neither side.

Newark, a pleasant Town, seated upon the
River Trent in Nottinghamshire, it is so
called as it were, the new work, from a stately Castle,
built in King Stephens time, by
Alexander Bishop of Lincoln. In this
Town King John ended his dayes.

Newcastle, a noted Town in
Northumberland,
situate upon the River Tine, which maketh a very
commodious Haven for ships: It derived this name from the
new Castle built by Robert son to
William the Conquerour. Some think it to have
been that Town which was anciently called
Gabrosentum.

Newcolledge, a Colledge in the
University of Oxford, built by William
Wickam, Bishop of
Winchester.

Newyears-gift, a gift presented to friends
or great persons the first day of January, a
custom derived from the ancient Romans who used to offer
Presents to the Emperors in the Capitol though they were
absent. In Italy it is the custom for the
greatest persons to give to the meanest, whereas here the
meanest give to the greatest.

Nexible, (lat.) easie to be knit.


N I

Nias hawk, (a term in Faulconry) a Hawk
newly taken out of the nest, and not able to prey for her
self; also metaphorically
taken for a Novice.

Nicæa, a City of Bithynia, famous
for the great Synod or Council which was kept there by the
appointment of Constantine
the Great, consisting of 318 Bishops.

Nicia, a Christian name of women, in Greek
Victorious.

Nicias, an Athenian Captain, who
together with
Demosthenes being sent against the
Syracusians, was repulsed with a very great
overthrow by Gylippus the
Lacedemonian



who was sent to aid the Syracusians.


Niches, or Nices,
a term in Architecture, the hollow places in a wall
wherein Statues or Images
are set.

Nicholas, (Greek) Victorious over the
people.

Nicholaitans, a sort of Hereticks who held
it lawful to have their wives in
common, so called from
Nicholas of Antioch, who was created by
the Apostles, one of the 7 Deacons.

Nicomedia, a City of Bithynia,
wherein Constantine the Great died, having in his
sicknesse been baptized by Eusebius Bishop of
this City, a maintainer of the Arrian Heresie; it was
anciently built by King Nicomedes, and is at this
day called Nichor.

Nicodemites, a sort of Hereticks in
Switzerland, so called from their
imitation of
Nicodemus, who made profession of his faith in
private.

Nicopolis, (as it were the City of
Victory) a City of
Epirus, so called from the great Battle at
Actium (which is near this City) where
Augustus overcame M. Antony and
Cleopatra: It is now vulgarly called
Gallipoly.

Nicostrata, the mother of Euander,
she was otherwise called Carmenta.

Nicotian, a certain plant vulgarly
called Tobacco, it was
called Nicotian from one I. Nicot, who first
brought it from France into
Portugal.

Nictation, (lat.) a twinkling with the
eyes.

Nidgeries, (French) trifles,
fooleries.

Nidification, (lat.) a building of a birds
nest.

A Niding, an old English word,
signifying a
base-hearted fellow, a coward.

Nidisdale, a Country in the south part of
Scotland, q. the dale upon the River
Nid.

Nidulation, (lat.) the same as
Nidification.

Nief, see Neif.

Nightertaile, (Saxon) by night.

Nigrefaction, (lat.) a making black.

Nihil dicit, in Common Law, is a failing to
put in an answer to the plea of the Plaintiff by the day
assigned, whereupon judgement passeth against him as
saying nothing.

Nil, the sparkles that fly from mettals
tryed in a furnace: it is called in Greek
Pompholyx or Spodium.

Nilling, (old word) unwilling.

Nilus, a River running through the midst of
Aegypt and Aethiopia, counted the
chiefest and the father of all other Rivers, and as some
say, taketh its name from Nilus an ancient King
of Aegypt. This River is famous for overflowing
the Country every year, and making the soil fruitful, and
for falling into the Sea within seven mouths in the figure
of a Greek Δ.

Nimbiferous, (lat.) bringing tempests or
stormy showers.

Nimbot, (French) a dandiprat, a
dwarf.

Nimious, (lat.) excessive, overmuch.

Ninus, an ancient King of the
Assyrians the son of Jupiter Belus, he
very much enlarged the Assyrian Empire, overcame
Barzanes King of the Armenians, Pharus
King of the Medes, Zoroaster the King of the
Bactrians, the first inventour of
Magick, and
Sabarius King of the Sagæ, at length he
was secretly made away by his wife Semiramis,
(whom he had taken from Menon the Prefect of
Syria) who conspiring against his life succeeded
him in the Kingdom.

Niobe, the daughter of Tantalus
and sister of Pelops, she was married to
Amphion, and by
him had 6 sons and 6 daughters,
whom Juno prevailed with Apollo to kill
with his Bow and Arrows, because their mother had
adventured to preferre her self above the goddesse, and
Niobe her self while she was railing against
Juno was carried by a whirlewind into
Asia, and there changed into a stone.

Niphates, a Hill parting Armenia
the greater from Assyria, from this Hill the
River Tigris springs.

Niseus, a Tyrant of Syracuse, who
being admonish't by the Augurs that he had but a
short while to live, spent the remainder of his life in
excesse of luxury, and revelling.

Nisi prius, a Writ judicial that lieth
where the Enquest is panelled and
returned before the
Justices of the bank, the one party, or the other making
petition to have this
Writ for the ease of the Countrey.

Nisus, a King of the Megarenses,
against whom war was made by Minos, a King of
Crete, to revenge the death of his sonne
Androgeus, who was slain by the
Megarenses and Athenians, conspiring together; at length
Megara was taken by the treache­



ry of Scylla, who for the love of Minos
cut off her fathers purple Lock on which depended the
fate of his life and Kingdom,
whereupon Nisus pined away for grief, and was
changed into a Hawk, and Scylla seeing her self
despised of Minos pined away also, and was
changed into a Partridge.


Nitidity, or Nitour, (lat.)
cleannesse, gaynesse, brightnesse.

Nitrous, (lat.) full of, or savouring of
Nitre, i. a kinde of substance like unto Salt,
somewhat spongy, and full of holes, it a little resembleth
Salt peter, but is not the same as some suppose it to
be.

Niveous, (lat.) snowy, white, like unto
snow.

Nixii, certain gods among the Romans, who
were said to be assisting to women in Childbirth.

Nixus, one of the heavenly
constellations,
resembling Hercules with his knee bent, and
indeavouring to strike at the Dragons head; it is also
called Ingeniculum,
in Greek Engonasin.


N O

Nobilitation, (lat.) an enobling, or
making noble.

Noblesse, (French) nobility, generosity,
both of bloud and of minde.

Nocent, or Nocive, (lat.)
hurtfull, injurious, or
doing harm.

Noctiferous, (lat.) bringing night, or
darknesse.

Noctivagant, (lat.) night-wandring, walking
by night.

Nocturnal, (lat.) belonging to the night
time, nightly; also a Nocturnal is
substantively taken
for a night Dial.

Nocturnes, certain Prayers, or Psalms,
appointed by the Church
to be read in the night time.

Nocument, (lat.) hurt, damage, or
harm.

Nocuous, (lat.) harmfull, doing
hurt.

Nodinus, a certain God among the
Romans, being overseer of
the knots and joints in the stalks of Corn.

Nodous, (lat.) full of knots, knobs, or
joynts.

Noel, (French) the time of Christs
Nativity, vulgarly
called Christmas.

Noli me tangere, a kinde of Herb whose seed
spurts away as soon as it is touch't; also a disease so
called wherein the part affected, the oftner it is toucht
the worse it grows.

Nomades, a certain people of Scythia
Europæa, who are said to be descended from those
that followed Hercules in his expedition into
Spain.

Nomarchy, (Greek) a Mayralty, the
government of a Citie,
or County.

Nombreil, a Term in Heraldry, being the
lower part of an Escutcheon, the
honour point being the
uppermost part, the Fesse the middle part, the word
signifieth in French a Navel.

Nomenclator, (from the Latin word
Nomen, i. e. a name, and the Greek
Caleo, i.
e. to call) one that calleth things by their proper and
significant names,
among the Romans there were certain Officers, so called,
who gave unto their Lord an account of the names of all
such as saluted him as
they passed, they were also such as we call the Criers of
a Court.

Nominal, (lat.) belonging to a name.

Nominalia, (lat.) certain festival dayes
among the Romans wherein they gave names to their
Children, for Males it was the eighth day, for Females the
ninth, which was called dies lustricus.

Nomination, (lat.) a naming, also in Common
and Canon-law, it is taken for a powr that man hath by
virtue of a Mannour, or otherwise to appoint a Clark to a
Patron of a benefice by him to be presented to the
ordinary.

Nomographer, (Greek) a Writer of
Laws.

Nomothesie, (Greek) a making, or
publishing of
Laws.

Nonability, (a Term in Law) being an
exception taken against the Plaintiffe, or Defendant, why
he cannot Commence any suit in Law.

Nonacris, a Mountain of Arcadia,
at the foot of which is the River Styx, whose
water is so cold that it cannot be contain'd in any other
Vessel, but onely in the hoof of a Mule.

Nona, the name of one of the three
destinies among the
Latins, See Morta.

Nonage, in Common-law, is the time of a
mans, or womans being under age, see age.

Non claim, is an exception against a man
that claimeth not within the time limited by the
Law.

Non compos mentis, or one that is not in his
right wits, signifieth in Common-law; first, an Ideot
born; secondly, one that



by accident looseth his wits; thirdly, a Lunatick;
fourthly, a drunkard.


Non est culpabilis, the general answer to
an action of Trespasse, whereby the
Defendant doth deny the
fact imputed unto him by the Plaintiffe.

Non est factum, an answer to a
Declaration whereby a
man denieth that to be his deed whereupon he is
impleaded.

Non liquet, a Law-term, signifying it
appears not; a Verdict given by a Jury, when a matter is
to be referred to another day of Tryal.

Nonpareil, (French) Peerlesse, having no
fellow, or Peer; also a Term in
printing, see Pareil.

† Non-principiate, (a made word compounded
of non and principium) not
having a beginning.

Non-residencie, the unlawfull absence of a
beneficed man from his spiritual charge.

Non sanæ memoriæ, an exception taken to
any act declared by the Plaintiffe, or Defendant, as not
being well in his wits.

Non-suit, a renunciation of the suit by the
Plaintiffe, or Demandant when the the matter is so far
proceeded in as the Jury is ready to give their
Verdict.

Non-Term, the time of Vacation between Term
and Term, it was wont to be called the dayes of the Kings
peace.

Nones of a moneth, are certain dayes next
following the Calends, or first day, in March, May,
July, and October, they are six dayes, in
other moneths but four.

None of a day, the third quarter of the
day, from noon till sun set.

To stand at a Non plus, (lat.) to be able
to answer never a word, to have nothing more to,
say.

Nonupla, (a Term in Musick) being a very
quick time, and peculiar to Jiggs.

Noricum, a Countrey of Germany,
now called Bavaria it is divided from
Vindelicia, by the River Aenus, from the higher
Pannonia, by the Mountain Cecius.

Normal, (lat.) done exactly, according to
the rule, or square.

Normannia, or Normandy, a Countrey
of Gallia Celtica; so called from the
Normanni, a
people anciently inhabiting Norwegia,
who in the time of Charles the Grosse had this Countrey
assigned them to dwell in, it being formerly called
Neustria, and the people were all baptised with
their Duke Rollo, whose name was changed into
Robert.

Northallerton, or Northalverton,
the chief Town of Northallertonshire, being a
part of York-shire, anciently so called, near
this Town was fought that famous pitcht field, commonly
called the battail of the Standard, where Ralph
Bishop of Durham
overthrew David King of Scots, it was so
called because the English receiving the first
onset of the Scots, kept themselves close
together about the Standard, which resembled the
Caroccio, so much used by the
Italians.

Northampton, the chief Citie of
Northamptonshire,
so called by contraction from Northfandon, near
this place was fought that bloudy battel wherein King
Henry the sixth was taken prisoner, by
Richard Nevil, Earle of Warwick.

Nostoch, is taken by some for a certain
kinde of excrement, or polluted matter like to a gelly, of
an obscure red colour dropping upon the earth from some
luxuriant Planet, or other Star.

Norwegia, a Countrey of Europe,
formerly a Kingdom by it self; it is now called
Norwey, and is under the Government of the
Danes.

Norwich, the chief Citie of
Northfolk, heretofore called Northwick,
i. Northerly Creek, Wick signifying in the
Saxon tongue, the Creek, or Cove of a River, it
was set on fire by Sweno the Dane, in
the time of King Ethelred, but it flourisht again
after the Conquest, and the Castle was re-edified by
Hugh Bigod, Earle of Northfolk, Lewis
the Frenchman won it by assault from King
John.

Notarie, (lat.) one that takes Notes, and
makes a short draught of Contracts, Obligations, and other
instruments, a Scribe, or Scrivener.

Note, a Term in faulconory, vide
Pruneth.

Notification, (lat.) a making known, a a
giving information, or advertisement.

Notion, (lat.) understanding, or
knowledge.

Notius, vide Pisces.

Nottingham, the chief Town of
Nottinghamshire,
it is so called by a mollified pronuntiation, from the
Saxon word Snottengaham,
i. a house of Dennes, or Caves, it hath a strong Castle,
which the Danes held out against
Aethered, King of the West-Saxons, and
his brother Aelfrid, who were stirred up by
Burthred, King of the Mercians against
them.

Novæ tabulæ, (lat.) certain Tables
a­



mong the ancient Romans, whereby old debts, or obligations
were cancelled, and made void.


Novatians, a sort of Hereticks, who
condemned second marriages, and held that those who had
once fall'n, ought not to be received into the Church,
although they afterwards repented: they were
seduced by one
Novatus, in the year 215.

Novation, (lat.) a renewing, or making
new.

Novels, certain volumes of the Civil-law,
in number 168. they were set out by the Emperour
Justinian after the Codex, also certain
little tales, or Romances.

November, so called because it is the ninth
moneth from March.

Novempopulana, the Countrey of
Gascoin in France, whose chief Cities
are Bourdeaux
and Tolouse.

Novendial, (lat.) continuing the space of
nine dayes.

Novennial, (lat.) continuing the space of
nine years.

Novercal, (lat.) belonging to a
stepmother.

Novice, (lat. Tyro, Greek
Neophyte) one newly entred into Orders, also a
young beginner in any art, or profession.

Novity, (lat.) newnesse,
strangenesse.

Nowed, (French) tied in a knot, a Term in
Heraldry.

Noxious (lat.) guilty, also hurtfull, or offensive.


N U

Nubiferous, (lat.) cloud-bearing,
bringing, or causing
obscurity.

Nubilous, (lat.) cloudy, or
tempestuous.

Nude contract, in Common-law, is a bare
contract, or promise of any thing without assigning, or
agreeing what another shall give.

Nudation, (lat.) a making bare.

Nudity, (lat.) nakednesse,
barenesse.

Nugation, (lat.) a toying, or
trifling.

Nuisance, or Nusance, see Annoyance.

Nullifidian, (lat.) one of no faith, or
honesty.

Nullity, (lat.) nothing, or a being of no
effect.

Nullo, (Arithm.) a Cipher that stands for
nothing.

Numa Pompilius, the second King of the
Romans, a Sabine born, he built the Temple of
Janus, created the Dial
Martial, and
Quirinal Flamins, he made the twelve
Salii, or Priests of Mars, and the
High-Priest, consecrated the Vestal
Virgins, distinguisht the
dayes into hallow'd and unhallowed, and divided the year
into twelve moneths, and that
these things might gain the greater credit with the
people, he faign'd that every night he had private
discourse with the Nymph Aegeria,
and that what he had instituted was by her
appointment.

Numbles, (French) the entrailes of a Stag,
or Dear.

Numeration, (lat.) a numbring.

Numerical, (lat.) belonging to number, also
a Term in Logick, as Numerical difference
is that difference which together with the lowermost
species constitutes the Individuum.

Numitor, the son of Procas, King
of the Albanians, he was driven out of his
Kingdom by his younger
brother Amulius.

Nun, (Dutch) a Virgin that by holy vow
obligeth her self to perpetual virginity,
and espouseth her self to the Church.

Nuncupation, (lat.) a pronouncing, or
calling by name.

A Nuncupative Will, or Testament, is that
which is declared by words, and not written.

Nundinary, (lat.) belonging to fairs, or
markets, whence Nundination, a
Trafficking, or Trading.

Nuntio, (Ital.) a Messenger Legat or
Ambassadour, it is a word most peculiarly appropriate to
the Popes Legat.

Nuper Obiit, the name of a Writ, which
lieth for a Coheir, being deforced by her Coheir of Land,
or Tenements, whereof any of their Ancestours died seised
in fee-simple.

Nuptial, (lat.) belonging to a marriage or
wedding.

Nurture, for nouriture, i. a
nourishing, a teaching of good manners.

Nutation, (lat.) a nodding.

Nutrition, (lat.) a nourishing.


N Y

Nycteus, the son of Neptune and Celene, the
daughter of Atlas, he married a
Cretan Nymph, called
Amalthæa, by whom he had Antiope and Nyctimene, the
latter of which falling in love with her father, came



by the help of her Nurse to injoy him, but being
afterwards known, and flying from her fathers wrath, she
was changed into an Oake.


Nymphs, see Nymphal.

Nymphal, (lat.) belonging to the Nymphs,
which were accounted by the ancients certain rural
goddesses, of which some were called the Nymphs of the
woods, or Dryades, some of the
mountains, or
Oreades, some of the waters, or Naiades,
&c.

Nymphet, (French) a little Nymph.

Nysa, a Citie built by Bacchus in
India, being
situate in a very fruitfull soyl; also one of the tops of
the mountain Parnassus,
consecrate to Bacchus.

Nysus, a King of the Megarenses,
whose Citie was betrayed to Minos, by his
daughter Scylla,
see Scylla.


O A

OAxis, a River of Creet, so called
from Oaxis, the son of Apollo, who lived
there.

Oaxus, the son of Acacallis,
daughter of Minos, also a Citie of
Creet, which took its denomination from the above
mentioned Oaxus, in this Citie Etearchus the
father of Phronima, who was the mother of Battus
raign'd.


O B
† Obaceration, (lat.) a stopping ones
mouth.

Obambulation, (lat.) a walking abroad,
about, or against.

Obarmation, (lat.) an arming
against.

Obduction, (lat.) a covering about.

Obduration, (lat.) a hardning, a
growing obstinate
against.

Obedientia, hath been used in Law for a
certain Rent paid in ancient time, also in Canon-law it is
taken for the administration
of an Office, whence Obedientiales are those that
execute an Office under their Superiours.

Not found in OED.



Obelisk, (Greek) a great stone waxing
smaller and smaller from the bottom, and ending in a point
at the top, differing onely
from a Pyramid, in that it is four-square, and
all of one stone; also a long stroke in writing,
signifying that something
is amisse, and better left out then inserted.

Obequitation, (lat.) a riding about.

Oberration, (lat.) a straying, or
wandring about.

Obesitie, (lat.) grosnesse, or
fatnesse.

Objection, (lat.) a casting against, also a
laying to ones charge.

An Obit, (lat.) a trental, an obsequy, or
funeral.

Objuration, (lat.) a binding by Oath
against any person, or thing.

Objurgation, (lat.) a chiding, rebuking, or
reproaching.

An Oblat, (French) a Souldier, who
being maimed in the wars is
maintained in an Abbey; it is also taken for the
maintenance it self.

Oblation, (lat.) an offering, more
especially that which
is offered by religious persons to the Church, or to pious
uses, also a toll, or subsidy.

Oblatration, (lat.) a barking, or
exclaiming
against.

Oblectation, (lat.) a delighting, pleasing,
or recreating ones self.

Obligation, (lat.) a binding, or obliging
ones self to any thing.

Oblimation, (lat.) a plaistring, or
dawbing over, a stopping
up with mud.

Oblique, (lat.) crooked, awry.

Obliquation, (lat.) a crooking, or
bending.

Obliteration, (lat.) a blotting out, a
cancelling, or abolishing.

Oblivion, (lat.) forgetfulnesse.

Oblong, (lat.) a Term in Geometry, a
quadrangle, or foursquare figure, whose length exceeds its
breadth.

Obloquy, (lat.) a speaking evil against any
one, a backbiting, or slandring.

Obmutescence, (lat.) a remaining silent, a
holding ones peace.

Obnoxious, (lat.) guilty, faulty, lyable to
punishment.

Obnubilation, (lat.) a darkning, or
obscuring with
clouds.

Obnunciation, (lat.) a forbidding any thing
upon foreknowledge, or conjecture of ill successe.

Obole, (lat.) a certain kinde of Coyn,
valueing with us about a half penny; also a weight of 12.
or 14 grains.

Obreption, (lat.) a creeping, or stealing
upon by craft; whence obreptitious, i.
stollen upon by crafty means.

Obrizum, q. Ophirizum, fine gold,
gold of Ophir.

Obrogation, (lat.) an interrupting, or
hindring, also a gain-saying.



Obscæenity, (lat.) ribaldry, baudinesse,
unclean speech or action.


Obscuration, (lat.) a making dark or
obscure.

Obsecration, (lat.) a beseeching or
praying earnestly.

Obsequious, (lat.) dutiful, obedient,
diligent to
please.

Obsequies, (French) Funeral Rites, from the
Latin word Obsequium, i. duty, because in
accompanying the dead corps to the grave, we perform a
civil duty to the person of the dead.

Obserration, (lat.) a locking or
shutting up.

Observant, (lat.) diligently marking, also
dutiful, respectful: there are also a sort of Franciscans
or gray Fryars instituted
by St. Francis of Assisium, who are
called Observants,

Obsession, (lat.) a besieging, beleaguring
or encompassing about.

Obsibilation, (lat.) a hissing
against.

Obsidian stone, a kind of pretious stone,
spoken of by Pliny in his natural History. 
Cambden thinketh it to be the same with our
Canole cole.

Obsidional, (lat.) belonging to a siege, whence an Obsidional Crown,
is a Crown given to him who raiseth an
exraordinary siege,
an honour often conferred by the ancient Romans upon their
Captains.

Obsigillation, (lat.) a sealing up.

Obsolete, (lat.) grown old, out of use or
fashion.

Obstacle, (lat.) as it were a standing
against, a let or
hindrance.

Obstetrication, (lat.) a doing the office
of a Midwife.

Obstinacy, (lat.) as it were a holding
against, self-will, stubbornnesse.

Obstipation, (lat.) a stopping up.

Obstreperous, (lat.) making a loud
noise.

Obstrigillation, (lat.) a reprehending,
also a resisting or withstanding.

Obstruction, (lat.) a stopping or shutting
up, also a hindring.

Obstupefaction, (lat.) a stupefying,
astonishing, or
making abashed.

Obtemperation, (lat.) an obeying, a
yeilding obedience.

Obtenebration, (lat.) a making dark or
cloudy.

Obtestation, (lat.) an humble requesting or
beseeching, a calling God to witnesse for any
thing.

† Obticence, (lat.) a being silent, a
holding ones peace.

Obtrectation, (lat.) a calumniating,
depraving, or
backbiting.

Obtrition, (lat.) a bruising, or wearing
away against any thing.

Obturation, (lat.) a stopping, shutting,
or closing up.

Obtuse, (lat.) blunt having a dull point or
edge, also heavy or dull-witted. In Geometry an Obtuse
Angle, is when two lines do include more than a square,
make a blunt angle.

Obvallation, (lat.) an invironing or
encompassing with a trench.

Obvarication, (lat.) a hindring any in
their passage.

Obverted, (lat.) turned against or
about.

Obvious, (lat.) meeting in the way or
coming toward.

Obumbration, (lat.) an obscuring or
shadowing over.

Obuncous, (lat.) crooked.

† Obundation, (lat.) a flowing
against.

Obvolation, (lat.) a flying against.

Obvolution, (lat.) a rowling against, or to
and fro.


O C

Occæcation, (lat.) a blinding.

† Occallation, (lat.) a making hard
like brawn.

Occidental, (lat.) belonging to the
occident, i.
the going down of the Sun, or the west part of the World;
also when a Planet setteth after the Sun and is seen above
the Horizon after him.

Occiduous, (lat.) setting, falling, or
going down.

Occipital, (lat.) belonging to the
hinder part of the head,
which is called Occiput.

Occision, (lat.) a slaughtering, or
killing.

Occlusion, (lat.) a shutting up.

Occulcation, (lat.) a spurning or
treading upon.

Occult, (lat.) hidden, secret, privy,
whence occultation a hiding or keeping secret.

Occupation, (lat.) a using, also businesse
or imployment, also a Mystery or Art.

To Occur, (lat.) to happen, also to meet
with.

Oceanine, (lat.) belonging to the Ocean,
i. the broad and main Sea which compasseth the
World, and hath several denominations according to the several



Regions to which it is annext. Among the Poets the son
of Coelus and Vesta is cal­
led Oceanus, who marrying Tethys, was
thought to be the father of all the Rivers and Fountains.


Ochlocrasie, (lat.) such a government
wherein the common people or multitude bear sway.

Ockham, a term in Navigation, being toe or
flax, or old ropes untwisted and imployed about a Ship.

Ochus, the sirname of Artaxerxes
the son of Artaxerxes Mnemon by his daughter
Ancestris, he subdued Aegypt, overcame
Tennes King of Phoenicia, Hermias the
Acarnensian Tyrant, Euagoras King of
Cyprus, took Sidon, by the help of
Mentor, he buried his Sister and Mother in Law
alive, caused his Uncle with a hundred of his children and
grandchildren to be slain, but at last was poisoned by his Physitian
Bagoas.

Ocnus, see Manto.

Octangular, (lat.) having 8 angles or
corners, a term in Geometry.

Octave, (lat.) a musical proportion
called an eighth, also the
eighth day next after some Principall Feast, of the
year.

Octavo, a book is said to be in Octavo,
when it consisteth of sheets doubled into eight leaves a
piece.

Octennial, (lat.) comprehending the space
of eight years.

October, so called because it is the eighth
moneth from March.

Octohedrical, (a term in Geometry) having
eight sides.

Octonary, (lat.) belonging to the
number eight.

Octogon, (Greek) a Geometrical figure
consisting of eight angles.

Ocular, (lat.) belonging to the
eyes.

Oculate, (lat.) full of holes like eyes,
also quicksighted.

Oculus Christi, a certain herb very good
for the eyes, otherwise called wild clary.

Oculus Tauri, a constillation in 24
degrees 39 minutes of
Gemini.

Ocypete, the name of one of the three
Harpyes, so called from the swiftnesse of her
flight.

Ocyroe, the daughter of Chiron and
the Nimph Chariclo,
she being a great Prophetesse
fortold that Aesculapius should be the best of
Physitians, and that she her self should be changed into a
Mare, which things hapned accordingly.


O D

Ode, (Greek) a Song or Lyrick Poem.

Odelet, (dimin.) a short Ode.

Odoacer, a King of the Heruli and
Thuringians,
who having possest himself of Ticinum, Ravenna
and Rome, and utterly defeated
Augustulus, the last of those that usurped the
title of Roman Emperour, he caused himself to be
proclaimed King of Italy and
Placentia.

Odoriferous, (lat.) sweet-smelling,
bearing perfumes or
odours.

Odour, (lat.) a scent or smell.


O E

Oeconomical, (Greek) belonging to
Oeconomy, i. the ordering or governing of a
houshold or family.

Oecumenical, (Greek) belonging to the whole
world, universal.

Oedastine, (Greek) skilful in weights and
measures.

Not found in OED.



Oedematous, (Greek) belonging to an Oedemy,
i. a tumour or swelling in the body rising from the
abundance of flegme.

Oedipus, the son of Laius, King of
Thebes and
Jocasta the daughter of Creon, he was
brought by Phorbas to Polybius King of
Corinth, and bred up by the Queen as her own son:
when he came to age he unfolded
the riddle of Sphnix, slew his father, and
married his mother. see Creon and
Jocasta.

Oenomaus, see Pelops.

Oenopolist, (Greek) one that sells wine, a
Vintner.

Not found in OED.




O F

Offertory, (lat.) a part of the Masse, also
a place where offerings are kept.

An Official, (lat.) is used in the Canon
Law, for him to whom any Bishop doth commit the charge of
his spiritual jurisdiction.

Officine, (lat.) a shop or
workhouse.

Officious, (lat.) dutiful, or
serviceable.

Offton, a Town in Suffolk, so
nam'd from Offa King of the Mercians, as
it were Offa's Town.



Offuscation, (lat.) a shadowing, a
making dark or dusky.



O G

Ogdastick, (Greek) an Epigram or a Stanza
consisting of 8 verses.

Ogive, or Ogee, (French) a wreath,
circlet or round band in Architecture.

Ogyges, an ancient King of Boeotia
who built the City of Thebes, in his time
hapned a very great flood
called the Ogygian flood, bigger than that of Deucalion
but lesse than Noahs Flood.


O I

Oisterloit, a certain herb otherwise
called snakeweed, in Latin Bistorta.


O K

Oker, a colour used in painting whereof are
several kinds, Oker de lace, or yellow Oker, burnt Oker,
and brown Oker.


O L

Oleaginous, (lat.) belonging to an
Olive-tree.

Oleander, a certain shrub called
Rosebay, in Greek Rododendron, or Rododaphne.

Oleity, (lat.) the time of gathering
Olives, also oilynesse.

Olfactory, (lat.) belonging to the sense of smelling.

Olicana, the ancient name of a Town in
Yorkshire, re-edified by Virius Lupus
then Propretor in Brittain, and is thought to
have been the same with that which is now called Ilkely.

Olidous, (lat.) rank-smelling, having a
strong savour.

Oligarchy, (Greek) the government of a
Common wealth by a few.

Olivaster, (lat.) of an olive colour, also
a wild olive-tree.

Oliver, the proper name of a man,
derived from the
peace-bringing Olive, as Daphnis from the
Laurel.

Oliviferous, (lat.) olive-bearing,
bringing forth Olives.

Olivity, see Oleity.

Olla podrida, (Span.) a hotchpot or dish of
meat consisting of several ingredients,
being somewhat like that which the French call a
Bisque.

Olympia, a City of Greece, near
unto which were solemnized the great Games instituted by
Hercules in honour of Jupiter;
they were from the name of this City called the Olympian
Games, and were celebrated every fifth year, which space
was observed as an Epoch of time by the Greeks, and called
an Olympiad.

Olympias, the Christian name of divers
women, so called from Olympus.

Olympus, a hill in that part of
Thessaly that lieth against Macedon, the
top of this hill toucheth the clouds, and therefore it
hath been taken by the Poets for Heaven, or the seat of
the gods.

Olynthus, a City of Thrace which
Philip of Macedon won from the
Athenians by corrupting the souldiers with
money.

Olysippo, the chief City of
Portugal, vulgarly
called Lisbon.


O M

Ombrage, (French) a shadow, also a colour
or pretence.

Omega, (Greek) the last letter in the Greek
Alphabet: It is also used metaphorically
for the end of any thing.

Omelet, (French) a pancake or
froise.

Ominous, (lat.) portending good or ill
luck, but most commonly it is taken in the worst
sense.

Omission, (lat.) a neglecting or letting a
thing passe.

Omnifarious, (lat.) divers, sundry, of all
sorts.

Omniparent, (lat.) bearing or bringing
forth all things.

Omnipotent, (lat.) all mighty,
all-powerfull.

Omnipresent, (lat.) present in all
places.

Omniscious, or Omniscient, (lat.)
knowing all things.

Omnivagant, (lat.) wandring every where, or
in all places.

Omnivorous, (lat.) eating or devouring all kind of things.

Omology, (Greek) agreeablenesse or
proportion, also a
confession.

Omphale, a Queen of Lydia by whom
Hercules was highly rewarded for killing a
great Serpent upon the River Sangaris, and
afterwards he falling in love with her and desiring to
be intertained in her service,
she compelled him to sit and spin, while she leaving her
distaff, put on his armes and Lions skin; others say that he



was sold to her by Mercury at the
command of
Jupiter, for having slain Iphitus the
son of Euritus.



O N

Onagre, (lat.) a wild asse, also a certain
Engin used by the Ancients, out of which they used to
shoot great stones.

Onerary, (lat.) serving for burthen or
carriage.

Oneration, (lat.) a loading or
burthenning.

Onomancy, (lat.) a divination by names,
also a repeating of many names by the Art of memory.

Onomatopy, (Greek) the faining of a name,
from any kind of sound, as Bombarda,
i. a Gun, from the sounding of bom.

Onpresse, (old word) downward.

Not found in OED.



Onyx, a certain pretious Stone, so
called from the Greek word
ὀινξ. i. a naile of a mans hand,
because it is of a kind of whitish colour, resembling the
colour of a mans naile. Some say it is the congealed juyce
of a Tree called Onycha, it is also called a
Chalcedonie.


O P

Opacous, (lat.) shady, obscure,
darkned.

Opal, (Greek) a precious stone of
divers colours, yellowish,
green, and purple.

Opening of Gates, is, when a Planet
applies it self to
another, who ruleth the figure
opposite to his house, or when one Planet separates from
another, and applies
immediately to one that hath dominion
by house, in the signe opposite to these ruled by the
Planet with whom it was joyned, either by body, or
aspect.

Opera, a kinde of Dramatick Poem, in use
among the Italians, performed by voyces and
instrumental Musick in a recitative
stile, and adorned with Scenes by Perspective.

Operation, (lat.) a working, or
labouring.

Operiment, (lat.) a covering.

Operosity, (lat.) busie work, great pain,
or travel.

Ophthalmy, (Greek) a certain disease of the
eye, rising from an inflammation of the uttermost skin of
the eye, called Adnata.

Ophites, (lat.) a kinde of marble
variegated like a
Serpent.

Ophiuchus, a constellation in
Sagittary.

Ophiusa, an Island in the
Balearick Sea, so called from the abundance of
Serpents, which are in it.

An Opiate, (lat.) a confection of
Opium, i. the juyce of black Poppy, which is used
to cause sleep, or asswage excessive pain.

Opiferous, (lat.) bringing aid, help, or
succour.

Opifice, (lat.) workmanship.

Opimous, (lat.) fat, or grosse, also rich,
or plentifull.

Opination, (lat.) a thinking, or
supposing.

Opiniatrecy, (French) opiniativenesse,
obstinacy, a wilfull persisting in any
opinion.

A one-person term (the earl of Monmouth 1649-54; see OED)..



Opisthograph, (Greek) a book, or paper,
written upon on the back-side.

Opitulation, (lat.) a helping, or
aiding.

Opobalsame, (Greek) the gumme, or
liquor that distilleth from
the Balm-tree.

Oppication, (lat.) a covering over with
pitch.

Oppignoration, (lat.) a pawning, or
laying inpledge.

Oppilation, (lat.) an obstruction, or
stoppage in the inward parts.

Oppletion, (lat.) a filling up.

An Opponent, (lat.) a withstander, or
contradicter, one that maintaineth a
contrary argument in the
Schools, to what is generally held.

Opportune, (lat.) fit, seasonable,
convenient, whence
opportunity, due time, or season.

Opposite, (lat.) contrary, or over-against,
also opposites substantively used, signifie in Logick,
things relatively opposed
as master and servant, or privatively, as light and
darknesse, or contraries, as knowledge
and ignorance.

Opposition, (lat.) a contrary setting
against, also a
resisting; in Astrology it is when two Planets are in
houses opposite to one another, it is 180. d.
distance, or six signes, and is thus Charactered.
o---o.

Opprobrious, (lat.) reproachfull,
upbraiding, or
reviling.

Oppugnation, (lat.) a fighting against, an
assalting, or laying siege unto, also a violent
opposing.

Ops, the daughter of Coelus and
Vesta, the wife and sister of
Saturn.



Opsimathie, (Greek) a learning late.


Opsonation, (lat.) a catering, a
purveying, or buying of meat.

Optation, (lat.) a wishing, desiring, or
looking for.

Ophthalmie, (Greek) a certain disease in
the eye, occasioned by the inflammation of the annate Tunicle.

Optick, (Greek) belonging to the sight,
also substantively used for that science, whereby the
reason of sight is known.

Optimacie, (lat.) a governing of the
Common-wealth, by the Nobler sort of persons.

Option, (lat.) election, choice, wish, or
desire.

Opulencie, (lat.) riches, wealth,
plenty.

Opuscle, (lat.) a little work, or
labour.


O R

Or, (French) a Term in Heraldry,
expressing the colour of Gold.

Orache, or Orage, a certain
Pot-herb of an insipid taste, called in Latin Atriplex.

Oracle, (lat.) an answer, or Counsel given
by God, a foretelling of things to come by Divine
revelation, a saying whose truth is unquestionable,
Oracles were anciently
very frequent among the Gentiles,
but they all ceast immediately after the coming of
Christ.

Oral, (lat.) belonging to the mouth, face,
or visage.

Oration, (lat.) a praying, also a
speech.

Oratory, (lat.) eloquence, also a
Chappel, or place
dedicated to prayer.

Oratorians, an Order of Fryars, so
called from the Oratory of
St. Hierom in Rome, where they used to
pray, they were instituted by St. Philip Nerius,
a Florentine.

Orbation, (lat.) a bereaving, depriving, or
making desolate.

Orbe, a body contained under one round
superficies; those Orbs that belong to the
coelestial firmament, are either with, or without Stars,
that without Stars is the primum mobile, the
other are all stellified, either with fixed Stars, or
Planets.

Orbicular, (lat.) round, in fashion of a
Ball, or Globe.

Orbity, (lat.) the lack of Parents, or
Children, generally any want.

Orbona, a certain goddesse among the
ancient Romans, to whom Parents, or Children used to pray
against Orbity.

Orcades, certain Islands in the
Brittish Ocean, thirty in number, vulgarly called
the Isles of Orkeney.

An Orch, or Ork. a monstrous fish,
vulgarly called a
whirle-pool, also a Butt for wine, or figs.

Orchall, see Corck.

Orchamus, see Leucothoe.

Orchanet, (Arab. Alcanet) a
certain Herb, called in Spanish Buglosse, or
wilde Buglosse, in Greek Anchusa.

Orchel, or Orchal, a certain stone
like Allum, wherewith Dyers use to colour red, in some old
Statutes it seemeth to be the same thing with Cork.

Orchester, (Greek) that part of the Scene
in a Theater, where the Chorus useth to dance; it
is also sometimes taken for the place where the Musicians sit.

Orcus, a River of Thessaly,
flowing out of the Lake Styx, whose waters are so
thick, that they swim like Oyl upon the top of the River
Peneus into which it flows, it is oft times taken
by the Poets for Hell.

Ordeal, (a Sax. word, signifying
judgement) a kinde of
purgation practised in ancient times, whereby the party
purged was judged free from Crime, it is called in
Common-law purgatio vulgaris, of this purgation
there are several kindes; as Camp-fight, wherein
he that overcame in single Combat, was judged to have the
right on his side. Fire-Ordeal, i. a passing blindfold with
bare feet over red hot plough-shares, and
Water-Ordeal, i. e. a putting ones arms up to the
elbows in seething water.

Ordinary, (lat.) in the Civil-law,
signifieth any judge
that hath authority to take knowledge of causes in his own
right, as he is a Magistrate, and not by deputation, in
Common-law it is usually taken for him that hath ordinary
Jurisdiction in Causes Ecclesiastical; also in Heraldry,
Ordinaries are those charges that by a certain
property do belong, to that art, and are of ordinary use
therein, they are also called proper charges.

Oreads, (Greek) Nymphs of the
Mountains.

Oredelf, ore lying under ground, also a
liberty whereby a man claims the ore found in his own
ground.

Oreford, a Town in Suffolk, where in
the reign of King Henry the second, a certain
hairy creature perfectly resem­



bling a man, in all parts and proportions, was taken out of
the Sea by fisher-men in a Net, who after he had been
kept awhile, secretly slipt away into the Sea, and was
never seen after, this Ralph Cogeshall an old
Writer recordeth.


Orestes, the son of Agamemnon and
Clytemnestra,
he was preserved from Aegisthus, by his sister
Electra, and sent to Strophius, King of
the Phocences, where he remained twelve years,
after which returning disguised
to Argos, he slew Aegysthus (who had
murthered his father Agamemnon) together with his
mother Clytemnæstra, with whom
Aegysthus had lived in
adultery, he also with
the help of Macarus the Priest slew
Pyrrhus, in the temple of Apollo,
because he had taken away Hermione, the daughter
of Menelaus, who had been first espoused to him,
for which crimes, being strucken with madness, he was
cured at the Altar of Diana, being brought
thither by Pylades, who was so faithfull a friend
to him, that when Thoas King of Taurica
had designed to sacrifice Orestes, he affirmed
himself to be Orestes, that he might die for his
friend; but Orestes slaying Thoas, freed
both himself and Pylades, with the help of his
sister Iphigeneia, who had been made the
over-seer of those sacrifices, at last he was bitten by a
Viper in Arcadia, at a place called
Orestion, of which wound he died, and his body
being digged up, was found to be seven Cubits in
length.

Orewood, a kinde of Sea-weed.

Orfgild, a restitution made by the
hundred, or County of any
wrong done by one that was in Plegio.

Orfraies, (French) a certain frisled Cloath
of Gold, much worn heretofore in England, both by
the Clergy, and Kings themselves.

Orgal, the lees of wine dried, used by
Dyers.

Not found in OED.



Organical, (Greek) belonging to, or
consisting of Organes, i. instruments, also the
substantial parts, or Members of the body.

Organie, a kinde of Herb, growing much upon
the Mountains, called in Latin Origanum.

Orgeis, a word used in some old
Statutes, signifying the
greater sort of North-sea fish.

Orgies, (lat.) certain feasts and revels,
instituted by Orpheus to the honour of
Bacchus.

Orial Colledge, a Colledge in
Oxford, built by King Edward the second.

Oriental, (lat.) belonging to the
Orient, i. the
East, or that part of the world where the sun riseth.

Orifice, (lat.) the mouth, or utmost brim
of any thing, the outward hole of a wound.

Oriflambe, (French) the great and holy
Standard of France, having on the top a purple
Flag, or Ensign, born at first onely in the wars against infidels.

Original, (lat.) a beginning, or
fountain; also a stock,
or pedigree; also a first draught.

Orisons, (French) prayers.

Orion, the name of a great hunter, who
vaunting himself to be of that strength of body, that
there was no wilde beast that he could not kill, the earth
brought forth a Scorpion, which stinging him to death, he
was placed together with the Scorpion among the heavenly
constellations, some say he was the son of
Oenopion King of Sicilie, and that lying
with his sister Candiope,
he had his eyes put out by his father,
others deliver him to have been born by a very strange
way, of which see more in Hyreus.

Orithyia, the daughter of
Erectheus, King of Athens, she was
ravish't away by Boreas, who fell in love with
her, and brought forth Zethus and
Calais, who going
with the Argonauts to Colchos, put the
Harpies to flight.

Orle, a Term in Blason, being an
ordinary composed, of a
threefold line doubled,
admitting a transparency of the field through the
innermost space.

Orlop, a Term in Navigation, signifying the
second and lower deck of a ship.

Ormus, a famous Citie of Persia,
being most pleasantly situated in an Island, and abounding
with shells which breed the fairest and clearest Pearles
that are; it was taken by the Lieutenant General to the
King of Portugal, in the year 1506.

Ornature, (lat.) a setting forth,
trimming, or
adorning.

Ornomancy, (Greek) a kinde of
Divination by birds.

Orontes, a River of Coelosyria,
which rising out of the Hill Libanus runs under
ground, till it come to Apamia, and falleth into
the Sea, near Seleucia.

Orphanisme, (lat.) the state of an
Orphane, i. a fatherlesse Child.

Orpheus, a famous Poet, and Musician of
Thrace, the son of Calliope and
Apollo, he took so heavily the losse of his wife Euri­



dice (of which see Euridice) that he
utterly abandoned the
company of women, for which he was torn in pieces by the
Mænades at the Feast of Bacchus, and
his several members being cast down the
River Hebrus were gathered up by the
Muses and buried, and his
Harp translated up to Heaven.


Orpiment, a certain drug found deep in the
earth, being a kind of Arsenick or Ratsbane, and is called
in Latin Auripigmentum,
from its golden colour.

Orpine, a kind of herb called in Greek
Telephion, from Telephus the first
discoverer of it.

Orque, (lat.) a hulk or huge Ship, also the
same as Orch.

Orrice, a certain flower called in Greek
Iris, because it resembleth the Rainbow in
diversity of colours, it is vulgarly called a flower
delice.

Orsilochus, the son of Idomeneus,
who following his father
to the wars of Troy, was at the taking of
Troy slain by Vlisses.

Ortelli, a word used in the Forrest Laws,
signifying the claws of a dogs foot.

Not found in OED.



Orthodox, or Orthodoxal, (Greek)
of a true and right opinion, of a sound faith.

Orthogonal, (Greek) having even or right
angles.

Orthography, (Greek) the manner of right
and true writing: Also in Architecture 
or Fortification, it is taken for the upright erection of
any work, as it appears when it is finisht.

Ortygia, one of the Cyclades
Islands, called also Delos sacred to
Apollo, and into which the Poets feign
Asteria the sister of Latona to have
been turned after she had been turned into a quail, called
in Greek ortyx.

Orval, a certain herb otherwise called
Clary or Clear-eye.

An Oryx, or Orynx, (Greek) a kind
of wild Goat in Africa.


O S

Osbert, a proper name among the
Saxons, signifying, Light of the Family.

Osborn, another proper name signifying in
Saxon, House-child.

Oscillation, (lat.) a hanging or
tottering motion, a
swinging upon a rope whose ends are tyed to several
beams.

Oscines, (lat.) those kind of birds by
whose feeding or voices the Augures used to
fortell things to come.

Oscitation, (lat.) a yawning or gaping,
also idlenesse.

Osculation, (lat.) a kissing or
imbracing.

Osiris, the son of Jupiter and
Niobe the daughter of Phoroneus, whom he
succeeded in the Kingdom of Argos, but after a
while leaving that Kingdom to his brother Aegialeus, he
went and subdued Aegypt, and married the daughter
of Inachus called Io or Isis,
who first taught the Egyptians Letters, and
sundry Arts and Sciences; he was at length slain by
Typhon his brother,
and after his death was worshipped by the
Egyptians in the shape of an Oxe.

St. Osith, a Town in Essex so
called, for it was anciently named Chic, from
Osith a Virgin of a Royal Family, who having
consecrated her self to the service of God, was here slain
by Danish Pirates.

Osmund, the proper name of a man,
signifying in the Saxon
tongue House-peace.

Osprey, a kind of Eagle called in Latin Ossifraga, in Greek Perenopterus.

Ossicle, (lat.) a little bone.

Ossifrage, (lat.) a kind of Eagle which
breaketh bones with her beak, the same as
Osprey.

Ostensional, (lat.) a souldier attending
the Prince in publick Shews.

Ostent, (lat.) a wonder, a monster, or
strange thing.

Ostentation, (lat.) a boasting,
vain-glory.

Ostiary, (lat.) one that keeps the hoasts
in a Church a doorkeeper or porter.

Ostomachy, (Greek) a playing at
bones.

Ostracisme, (Greek) a kind of
punishment among the
Athenians which was a banishing for ten years by
delivering shells to the condemned persons, wherein their
names were written.

Oswestre, in Brittish Croix
Oswalds, a Town in Shropshire, so called
(for it was anciently named Masserfield) from
Oswald King of
Northumberland, whom Penda
the Pagan King of the Mercians after he had slain
him in a bloody battle, tore to pieces in a barbarous
manner.

Oswold, a proper name of a man
signifying in Dutch
House-ruler or Steward, and equivalent to the French
le Dispencer.


O T

Othes, in Latin Otho or
Eudo, the proper name of a man, from the Saxon
word Hud, i. Keeper.



Othryades, a certain Lacedemonian, who
in a combat of 300 Lacedemonians to 300
Argives, being the onely man of all his party
left alive, put to flight those two who were the onely
men left alive of the Argives, and writing upon
his shield these words, I have overcome, he
slew himself, as being ashamed to return to
Sparta, all the rest of his companions being slain.


Otraque, a certain drink which is made of a
Nut growing among the Molucca's.

Not found in OED.



Ottadini, the ancient name of a people
inhabiting that part of Brittain, which is now
called Northumberland.

Otterbourn, a Town in
Northumberland near which was fought a famous
battle between the English and Scots, in
which William Douglas the Leader of the
Scottish Army was slain,
and Sir Henry Percy called Hotspur
Commander of the English,
having lost 1500 of his men, was
taken prisoner
himself.

Otus and Ephialtes, the sons of
Neptune by Iphimedeia the wife of
Aloeus, they were of those Gyants that made war
with heaven, throwing huge rocks and hills
against the gods, and were
at last shot to death by Apollo: they were
reported to have grown the length of nine acres in nine years.


O U

Oval, (lat.) belonging to, or in the shape
of an egge.

Ovation, (lat.) a kind of petty Triumph for
a Victory obtained with the slaughter of a few men onely,
it is so called from the souldiers following their
Commander shouting and singing O, O, or from
Ovis, i. a sheep which used to be sacrificed by
him, whereas in a greater Triumph the General sacrificed a
Bull, and his souldiers following cryed out Io, Io,
Triumpho, also
Ovation, from Ovum, i. an egge
signifying the season wherein hens lay egges.

An Ouch, a collar of Gold, a Jewel or
Tablet; it is also caled a brooch.

Oviary, (lat.) a flock of sheep.

Oviparous animals, (lat.) those creatures
that bring forth egges or spawn.

Ounce, a certain weight, being the twelfth
part of a pound Troy weight, but in a pound aver du
pois, it is the sixteenth part; also a kind of
spotted beast called a Lynx.

Ounding, (old word) rising like
waves.

Ourage, (French) work or labour.

Outborow, see Inborow.

Outfangthef, see Infangthef.

Outlawry, (in Latin Vtlagaria) the
losse or deprivation of the benefit
belonging to a subject
of the Kings protection
and the Realm.

Outparters, a sort of theeves about
Ridesdale, that ride about to fetch in such
cattel or other things as they can light on.


O W

Owelty of services, an equality, when the
Tenant paravail oweth as much to the Mesen, as the Mesen
doth to the Lord Paramount.

Owen, (in Latin Audoenus) the
proper name of a man, being the same with the Latin
Eugenius, as appeareth by severall
Records.


O X

Oxford, the chief City of
Oxfordshire, which some say hath been anciently
called Cær
Vortigern, and Cær Vember, as being thought
to have been built by Vortigern
and Memprix; but the Saxons
called it Oxenford
(corresponding to Bosphorus
among the Greeks) from a foard of Oxen. Leland
deriveth it from the River Ouse, and supposeth it
may have formerly been called Ouseford. It is
chiefly famous for its
University which Cambden
calleth, Our most noble Athens, the Muses seat,
the Sun, the Eye, and the Soul of England. This
University was begun, as most Authors agree, in the year
of our Lord 806. three Colledges being built by the
learned Aelfred who then reigned.

Oxgang of land, see Bovata
terræ.

Oxygon, (Greek) a term in Geometry, being a
Triangle having three acute Angles.

Oxymel, (Greek) a certain kind of
potion made of honey,
vinegar, and water boyled together, being good to
attenuate grosse phlegmatick humours.


O Y

Oyer and terminer, (French) signifieth in
Common Law, a Commission granted to certain men for the
hearing and determining
of one or more causes.




O Z

Ozene, (Greek) a kind of disease or
putrified stinking sore in the nostrils.


P A

Pabular, or Pabulatory, (lat.)
belonging to forrage, provender or fodder for cattel.

Pacation, (lat.) a stilling or
appeasing.

Pace, a measure of two foot and a half, or
the distance from the toes of the
forefoot to the heels of
the hinderfoot: but a Geometrical pace consisteth of 5
foot, a thousand of which paces make up a mile.

Pachynum, a Promontory of Sicily
lying toward the Peloponnesus.

Paciferous, (lat.) bringing peace.

Pacification, (lat.) a making peace, an
asswaging or appeasing.

Paction, or Pact, (lat.) a
bargain, covenant, or
agreement; also a truce in war.

Pactitious, (lat.) done by bargain, or upon
condition.

Pactolus, a River of Lydia rising
out of the hill Tmolus, the gravel whereof hath
been said to be of a golden colour ever since
Midas washt himself in the streams.

Paddock, (from the Dutch word
Padde) a toad.

Padelion, a kind of plant otherwise
called great Sanicle, in
Latin Pes leonis.

Padua, a famous City and University of
Italy, now under the jurisdiction of the
Venetian: It was anciently built by
Antenor the
Trojan, and called Antenorea.

Paduentage, (French) common of
pasture in one or more
Parishes.

Not found in OED.



Padus, a famous City of Italy,
rising out of the Hill Vesulus, it is now called
Po.

Pæan, (Greek) a certain Hymn which the
ancient Greeks used to sing to Apollo.

Pædagogue, (Greek) a school-master, a
bringer up of youth in learning.

Pæonia, a part of Macedon was
formerly so called from Pæon the son of
Endymion.

Paganical, (lat.) belonging to country
villages, (whence Paganals, i. Wakes,
Country-Holidayes, Ploughmens Feasts) also belonging to a
Pagan, i. a paynim, Heathen or Gentile.

Paganism, heathenism, gentilism; also the
manner or fashion of the Country.

Paginal, (lat.) belonging to a page,
i. the side of a leaf in a book.

Pagod, a kind of Idol.

See OED "pagoda."



Paigles, a sort of flower otherwise
called Oxlips.

Paillardise, (French) lechery,
whoredom.

Pain fort & dure, signifying in
Common Law, an especial
punishment for those that being arraigned of felony refuse
to put themselves upon the ordinary trial of God and the
Country, and thereby are mute and dumb.

Paisage, (French) the discription of any
part of the Country in painting or drawing. see Landskip.

Palamedes, the son of Nauplius
King of Eubæa, he was the occasion of
Vlisses being
forced against his will to go to the Trojan wars,
but was himself by a forged accusation of
Vlisses, stoned to death by the Græcian
Army. He is said to have been the first that accomodated
the year to the course of the Sun; he is also said to have
found out the use of weights and measures, and to have
added to the Greek tongue these 4 letters,
θ. ξ. χ. φ.

Palate, (lat.) the roof of the mouth being
the uppermost hollow part, wherein
the sense of tasting lies.

Palatinate, the Country or chief Seat of a
Count Palatine or Paladine, i. a
Supream Officer in a
Sovereign Princes Palace;
but it is more especially taken for one of the Electors of
the Roman Empire called the
Palsgrave, or Prince Palatine of the Rhene; also
certain Knights of this Island, in ancient times called
Knights of the round Table, were called
Paladines, also Palatine signifieth adjectively
belonging to a Princes Palace.

Palæmon, the son of
Achamas
and Ino, called also Melicerta. see Ino.

Pale, a term in Heraldry, being an
Ordinary consisting of
two lines drawn perpendicularly
from the top to the bottom of the Escutcheon.

Pales, the goddesse of Shepherds, to whom
certain Feasts were consecrated, called Palilia.

Palestine, a Country of Syria,
thought by some to have been that Country called
Phoenicia, whereof Cadmus was King, it
containeth Judea, Samaria, and
Galilæa.

Palestrical, or Palæstrical,
(Greek) belonging to wrestling.



Palfray, (French) a horse of state for a
Princesse or great Lady.


Palici, or Palisci, two twins the
sons of Jupiter and the Nimph Thaleia,
whom he ravisht by the River Simethius, when she
was with child she wished that the earth would open and
hide her from the wrath of Juno, whereupon the
earth immediately
opened and received her within its bowels, and as soon as
she was delivered, it opened again and let out the two
twins into the World.

Palindrome, (Greek) a certain verse or sentence
which being read forward or backward the words and sense
are the same, as
Sator arepo tenet opera rotas


Palingenesie, (Greek) regeneration or new
birth.

Palinode, or Palinody, (Greek) a
recantation or
unsaying what one had spoken or written before.

Palinurus, a Promontory of
Lucania, so called from Palinurus the
Pilot of Aeneas, who sleeping fell into the sea,
and being taken up and rifled by the inhabitants of this
place, had a Grove consecrated and Cenotaph built unto him
to appease his ghost.

Palisado, (Span.) a defence made with
stakes, posts, piles, &c. to keep out an enemy.

Pall, (lat.) a certain robe or long
garment which hath usually
been worn by persons eminent either in learning or in war.

Palladium, a certain Image of
Pallas which was kept by the Trojans in
a Tower that was built on purpose, but this Image being
stollen out of the Temple by Vlisses and
Diomede, the City was soon after
taken by the Greeks, it was
at last brought to Rome and placed in the Temple
of Vesta.

Pallas, the same as
Minerva.

A Pallat, a word used in Painting,
being a thin peice of wood
which a Painter makes use
of to place his colours upon.

Pallemaille, (French) a certain Game
wherein a round bowle of box is with a mallet strook
through a hoop of iron, into which he that can strike it
at the fewest blows wins.

Pallet, a term in Heraldry, being the moity
or one half of the pale. see Pale.

Palletoque, or Pallecoat, (French)
a cassock or short cloak with sleeves, such as Pages wear.

Palliardize, see Pailliardize.

Palliation, (lat.) a cloaking, hiding, or
concealing.

Pallid, (lat.) pale, whitish, bleak.

Pallification, (lat.) a term in
Architecture, it
signifies the piling of the ground-work, or the
strengthning of the ground-work with piles of timber
driven into the ground, when they build upon a moist or
marshy soile.

Palmar, (lat.) belonging to a Palm,
i. the inward part of the hand called the Palm of
the hand; also a measure containing
the breadth of 4 fingers, a hand breadth.

Palm-tree, (lat.) a certain tree bearing
the fruit called Dates, it is reported to be both male and
female, the male bearing blossomes onely, the female both
blossoms and fruit. The leaves shoot upward though
oppressed with never so much weight. Whence the Palm is
metaphorically used for Victory, Praise, and Commendations.
Cleop.

Palm-Sunday, the Sunday before Easter, so
called because on that day the people went to meet our
Saviour with Palm and Olive-branches in their hands when
he rode solemnly into Jerusalem.

Palmer, a certain instrument wherewith
school-boys are struck on the palms of their hands,
otherwise called a Ferular; also a kind of caterpillar or
worm with many feet. also a poor Pilgrim that
travels up and down to
visit Holy places with branches of Palm in his hand.

Palmestry, the same as Cheiromancy.

Palmeto-tree, a certain tree in the Isle
Mauritius, of whose juice they make a very
pleasant sort of wine.

Palmiferous, (lat.) bearing Palms,
Victorious.

Palmipedous birds, (lat.) those that are
whole footed, or have plain and flat feet as water-foule.

Palpation, (lat.) a gentle handling or
feeling; also a flattring or fair speaking.

Palpitation, (lat.) a panting, or
trembling or moving up
and down.

Paltsgrave, a Dutch word signifying a Count
of a Palace, being more especially the Title of the Prince
Elector Palatine of the Rhene.

Paludament, (lat.) a certain Military garment
which used to be worn by none



but chief Captains; also a Heralds Coat of Arms.


Palumbine, (lat.) belonging to a Ring Dove,
otherwise called a Wood Culver.

Pamphylia, a Countrey of Asia the
lesse, wherein are two famous Rivers,
Eurimedon and Melas.

Pampination, (lat.) a lopping off, of
superfluous branches
from a Vine from Pampinus a Vine-branch.

Pan, the son of Demogorgon, he was
worshipp'd in Arcadia; as the God of sheapherds,
being smitten by Cupid, he fell in love with the Nymph
Syrinx, who passing over the River
Ladon, was turned into a Reed, which Pan
beholding, made him a Pipe with the same Reed, whence he
is said to have first found out the use of the Pipe and
Oaten Reed.

Panado, (Span.) a certain kinde of meat,
made of crums of bread boyled in water.

Pancart, (French) a paper containing the
particular rates of Tolls, or rates due to the King, or
Common-wealth.

Panchaia, a Countrey of Arabia,
where Frankincence grows in great abundance.

Pancratical, (Greek) expert in all kind of
Games, and exercises of activity.

A Pandar, one that procureth the hire of a
strumpet, a baud, or pimp.

Pandects, (lat.) books that handle all
subjects, or all the part of the subject whereof they
treat, there is also a volume of the Civil-law, so called.

Pandiculation, (lat.) a gaping &
stretching out of the whole body.

Pandion, the son of Erectheus, and
King of Athens, whose daughter Progne
was married to Tereus, King of Thrace,
by whom her sister Philomela was ravish't.

Pandora, by the Poets fained the first of
all women, made by Vulcan at the command of
Jupiter, and endowed with
several gifts, by all the
gods and goddesses, she was espoused to
Epimetheus, to whom she was sent with a box shut,
which he unadvisedly
opening, filled the world with all manner of diseases and calamities.

Pandure, (lat.) a kinde of Musical
instrument, called also a rebeck.

Panegyrick, (Greek) a solemne
convention of people,
at some publick solemnity;
also an Oration in the praise of some great person.

Panel, (from the French word Panne,
i. a skin) it signifieth in Common-law, a Schedule,
or Roll, containing the names of such Jurors; as the
Sheriffe provideth to passe upon any tryal.

Pangonie, (Greek) a kinde of precious
stone, so called from its multitudes of Angles.

A Panguts, (as it were all guts) a
drossel, a gorbelly, an unweildy fellow.

Panick, or Painick, (lat.) a
certain kinde of Grain like unto Millet, also
Panick fear, a
sudden fear, or distraction from god Pan, who was
the first that coming on a
sudden upon his enemies with much noise and tumult, cast a
mighty terrour and amazement into them.

Panifice, (lat.) a making of bread.

Pannade, (French) the curvetting, or
prauncing of a lusty horse.

Pannage, (in French Pasnage,) the
money taken by
Agistors, for feeding of Hoggs with the mast of
the Kings Forrest.

Pannicle, (lat.) a little piece of Cloath,
also the fleshy Pannicle, a Term in
Anatomy, being the membrane, or skin, which lies next under the fat of the paunch.

Pannier, (French) a dosser, or basket to
put bread in.

Pannonia, see Hungaria.

Panomphæan, an Epithete of
Jupiter, it comes from the Greek words
Pan. i. all, and Omphe, i. a voice,
because he was worship'd in all languages.

Panoply, (Greek) compleat Armour, or
Harnesse.

Pansie, a kinde of flowr, vulgarly called hearts-ease.

Pansophie, (Greek) wisdom, or knowledge
in all things.

Pantagruelist, (French) a merry
drunkard, or good fellow.

Pantarb, a precious stone, called in
Spanish Pantarva, in English the stone of the Sun.

Panters, toiles to take deer with.

Pantheologie, (Greek) the whole summe of
divinity.

Pantheon, (Greek) an ancient Temple in
Rome, dedicated to all the heathen gods, and
since by Pope Boniface the 4th. to the
Virgin Marie and all the Saints.

Panther, (lat.) a kinde of spotted beast,
the Leopard, or Libard being the Male, the Panther, the Female.

Pantomime, (Greek) a player, one that can
act all parts, and counterfeit all kinde of persons.

Panurgie, (Greek) craft, or skill in all
kinde of matters.



Papal, (lat.) belonging to the Pope, who is
called Papa, being a contraction of the two words Pater Patrioe.


Papaverous, (lat.) belonging to Chestoul or
Poppy.

Papelardise, (French) hypocrisie, or
dissembling.

Not found in OED.



Paphus, the son of Pygmalion, the
son of Cilix and Eburnea, for
Pygmalion being an excellent graver, came into
the Island of Cyprus, made the statue of a woman
so admirable, that he
fell in love with it, and prayed to Venus that he
might have a wife as like as might be, to the statue he
had made, which prayer was granted, and he coming home one
time found the statue enlivened, with whom having lain he
begat Paphus, who
became King of Cyprus, and built a Citie which he
called by his own name, and dedicated it to
Venus, who was thence called the Paphian
Queen.

Papian Law, see Popæan
Law.

Papulosity, (lat.) a fulnesse of blisters,
or pimples, called in Latin Papulæ.

Papyrius Cursor, a famous Roman
Captain, who in the war
against the Samnites was made Dictator, and gave
a totall overthrow to
the Enemy, after they had beat the Romans at a place
called Furcæ Caudinæ.

Parabien, (Span.) a congratulation, or
bidding of joy.

Parable, (Greek) a declaration, or
exposition of one thing
by another, which is like a similitude, or
comparison.

Paracelsian, a Physician that in curing of
diseases followeth the Method of Paracelsus.

Paraclete, (Greek) a comforter; the holy
Ghost is sometimes so called in Scripture.

Parackmastical, (lat.) diminishing, or
declining by little and little from the
violence of a hot fit in a feaver.

Parade, (French) a Term in Military
Discipline, being an appearance of
Souldiers at a set time
to receive Orders; also any great preparation, or
appearance.

Paradigme, (Greek) a pattern, or
example.

Paradise, (Greek) a place of
pleasure.

Paradox, (Greek) a thing which
seemeth strange and
absurd, and is contrary to common opinion.

Paradoxologie, (Greek) a speaking by
Paradoxes.

Paradrome, (Greek) a walk, or gallery that
hath no shelter over head.

Parænetical, (Greek) apt to perswade, or
admonish.

Parage, (old word) parentage.

Paragogical, (Greek) belonging to the
figure Paragoge, which is an adding of a letter,
or syllable at the end of a word.

Paragon, (French) a Compeer, an equal; also
a Peerlesse Dame, one without compare.

A Paragraphe, (Greek) a full head, or title
in any kinde of writing; as much as is comprehended in one
section, it is also called a Pillkrow.

Paralipomenon, (Greek) a title
commonly given to such
books as briefly contain those things, which are either
omitted, or imperfectly handled in others; in the Old
Testament, there are two books, so called.

Parallax, the difference between the true
place, or apparent place of a Comet, Eclipse, or Planet,
by reason we behold it from the superficies not from the
center.

Parallels, (Greek) a Term in
Geometry, lines running
at an equal distance one from the other and never meeting,
in Astronomy they are
certain imaginary Circles
in the Globe, for the better Calculation
of the degrees of Northern, or Southern Latitude.

Parallel, (Greek) to compare.

Parallelogram, (Greek) a certain
Geometrical figure,
wherein on each side the lines run parallel one to another.

Paragolisme, (Greek) a fallacious, or
deceitfull way of arguing, wherein from true extreams, a
false conclusion is brought out.

Paralytick, (Greek) sick of a
Paralysie, or palsie being a disease which causeth a resolution, or
loosening of the sinews.

Paraments, robes of state.

Lord Paramount, in Common-law, is the
highest Lord of the Fee, as he that
holdeth of a Superiour Lord, yet hath a Tenant
under him, is called Lord of the Mesne, but the lowest
Tenant is called Tenant paravail.

Paramour, a Lover, or Sweetheart.

Paranymph, (Greek) he, or she that is
joyn'd with the Bridegroom, or Bride, to see all things
well ordered at a Wedding, also one that maketh a speech
in commendation of those that are to commence Doctors.

Parapet, (French) a Term in
fortification, a
wall, or battlement of a wall, brestwork, to defend from the
enemies shot.



Paraph, (Greek) a subsignature, or
flourishing mark set
under ones name in signing a letter or deed, also a mark
in the margent of a book.


Paraphonalia, or Paraphernalia, a
word in the Civil-law, signifying those goods which a wife
bringeth her husband over and above her dowr, as Jewels,
Apparel, Plate, &c.

Paraphrase, (Greek) an exposition, which
altereth the words, yet holdeth the sence of the thing
expounded.

Parasang, a certain measure of ground,
containing thirty stades, or furlongs.

Paraselenii, the same that
Parelii, and those happen to the Sun, and these
to the Moon.

Parasite, (Greek) a smell feast, a
flatterer, a belly-friend.

Paravaile, see Paramount.

Parazon, a wood-knife.

Parbreak, (old word) vomit.

A Parbunkle, (a Term in Navigation) a roap
seased together at both ends; and so put double about the
Cask to holse it in by.

Parcæ, the three Destenies, Clotho,
Lachesis, and Atropos.

Parcinarie, in Common-law, is a
holding of Land, by two,
or more pro indiviso; or by Joynt-Tenants,
otherwise called Copartners.

Parciloquy, (Lat.) a moderation in words, a
speaking little.

Parcity, (lat.) thrift, sparingnesse,
frugality.

Pard, (lat.) a certain beast, called a
Libard.

Pareil, the name of one of the sorts of
Characters, or Letters used by Printers, the rest being
Nonpareil, Brevier, Longprimer, and Pica.

Parental, (lat.) belonging to Parents, or
ancestours.

Parentation, (lat.) a celebrating of
funerals.

Parelii, mock-suns appearing on each side
of the Sun, occasioned by a thick Cloud gathered together
toward the side of the Sun, in which the broken beams of
the Sun being gathered, the very same of the Sun is
represented to us therein.

Parenthesis, (Greek) the interrupting of a
sentence, by interposing a clause, which being removed,
the sence would neverthelesse remain intire.

Parenticide, (lat.) a killing of ones
Parents.

Parergie, see Lantskip.

Parian Marble, see Paros.

An entry in the Errata moves the entry for "Parricide" from after this entry to "Parrhasius."



Parilian, or Palilian feasts, see Pales.

Paris, the son of Priamus, and
Hecuba, he was also called Alexander,
whom his mother caused to be nursed up privately on the
Mountain Ida by the shepherds, where, coming to
age he fell in Love with the Nymph Oenone, and
lying with her, had two Children by her; afterwards, there
growing a contention between the three goddesses,
Juno, Pallas, and Venus, they agreed to
submit themselves to the judgement of Paris; Juno
proffering him a Kingdom, Pallas wisdom, and
Venus the handsomest of women, whereupon he gave
his judgement for Venus; soon after he was
returned home, he was sent into Greece as an
Ambassadour to demand Hesione,
and being intertained by Menelaus, he fell in
Love with Helena his wife, and Menelaus
being absent about some affairs,
he soon won her to his desires, and carried her away with
him by stealth, whereupon there immediately grew a violent
warre between the Greeks and the Trojans, wherein after
nine years siege Troy was taken, and
Paris (having shot Achilles in the heel
with his Bow and Arrows in the Temple of Apollo,
whither he had led him under pretence of
marrying him to his
sister Polixena) was himself slain by
Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles.

Parish or Parochial Church, is
that which is instituted for the saying of Divine
Service to the people
dwelling within a certain
compasse of ground near unto it, the other Churches being
either Cathedral, that is where the Bishop hath his chair
or seat, and conventual consisting of Dean and Chapter, or
of regular Clerks professing
some order of Religion.

Parisyllabical Nounes, (a term in
Grammar) those Nounes
which consist of equal syllables, or those Nouns that have
not more syllables in one Case than in another.

Parity, (lat.) equallity or
evennesse.

Park, an Inclosure or place fenced
about for the keeping of
Deer, or any other sort of wild beasts; it seems to be
derived from the Latin word Parcus which
Varro useth in the same sense.

Parliament, (Ital. q. parlar la mente)



the chief Assembly and Council of a Kingdom met together
to make or correct Laws, and to debate matters touching
the Common-wealth: in this Kingdom it used to consist of
the King and the three Estates of the Realm, i.
the Lords Spiritual,
Lords Temporal, and Commons.


Parmacety, a pretious and very
excellent confection, so
called from Parma a City of Italy
between Placentia and Cremonia,
or because it is made of the seed of the Whale which is
called Sperma Ceti.

Parmesan, an inhabitant of Parma,
also a sort of cheese so called because it is made in that City.

Parnassus, a Mountain of Phocis in
Greece, sacred to Apollo and the Muses,
who are thence called Parnassides, it hath two
tops, whereof one is called Tithorea the other
Hyampeus.

A Parnel, a pretty woman-lover.

Parochial, see Parish.

A lease Parole, in Common Law, is a lease
made onely by word of mouth, also when a prisoner of war
hath liberty given him upon his word to return at such a
time, he is said to go upon his Parole, which in French
signifieth a word or saying.

Paros, an Island of the Aegean
Sea, one of the Cyclades, it is so called from
Paros the son of Jason; in this Island
there is an excellent sort of Marble called Parian Marble.

Paroxysme, (Greek) the accesse or fit in an
Ague or Feaver.

Parrells, a term in Navigation, those
things made of trucks, ribs and ropes, which go about the
mast and are at both ends made fast to the yard.

Parrhasius, a famous Painter, the first
that painted by the life, he drew the picture of a linnen
Tablecloth so admirablely,
that Zeuxis looking on it, bid him take away the
cloth that he might see the picture
underneath it.

Parricide, (lat.) from Paricida) a
murtherer of his father, or mother; also any hainous murtherer, but from
paricidium, it signifieth the act it self.

An entry in the Errata moves this word-entry here from after "Parian Marble." 



Parsimony, (lat.) sparingnesse,
frugality, good husbandry.

Partage, (French) a partition, sharing or
dividing.

Parthenian, (Greek) belonging to
Virgins or Virginity.

Parthenope, the name of one of the
Syrens that indeavoured to insnare
Vlisses and his companions, also the ancient name
of a famous City of Italy, now called
Naples.

Parthia, a Country of Asia, whose
inhabitants were anciently a very warlike people; it is now called
Arach.

Partiality, (lat.) an inclining more to one
part than to the other.

Participation, (lat.) a being partaker, a
giving or taking part with any one.

Participle, (lat.) one of the parts of
speech in Grammar, so called because it partakes both of
the Noune, and of the Verb.

Particle, (lat.) a parcel, a small part or
portion.

Partile aspect, when two Planets are both
in the same number of degrees and
minutes either by conjunction or aspect.

Partition, (lat.) a parting, sharing, or
dividing.

Partisan, (French) a partaker or
partner, also a
leading-staff or javelin.

Partlet, a word used in some old
Statutes, signifying the
loose collar of a dublet to
be set on or taken off by it self
without the bodies, also a
womans neckercheif.

Partners, those timbers which are bolted to
the beams and do compass the shoot in the mast at the deck.

Parturient, (lat.) travelling or being
about to bring forth.

Parvity, (lat.) littlenesse,
smallnesse.

Pas a pas, (French) leasurely.

Not found in OED.



Pascage, (French) grazing or feeding of
cattel.

Paschal, (lat.) belonging to the
Pasche, i. the Jewish Passeover, also the Feast
of Easter.

Pascuous, (lat.) belonging to pasturage or
feeding of cattel.

Pasiphæ, see Minos.

Pasquil, or Pesquin, 
a certain statue or image in Rome whereon all
Satyricall invectives
were wont to be fixt and father'd as the Author, whence it
is commonly used for any slanderous libell or
defamatory book.

Passade, (French) an alms or
benevolence given to a
passenger, also a posture in the management of a horse.

Passant, (French) going or passing by, a
term in Heraldry.

A Passartdo, a rope wherewith we hale down
the sheat-blocks of the main and fore sails when they are
haled aft the clew of the main sail to the cubbridge head
of the main mast.

Passe-flower, a certain kind of flower,
otherwise called Pulsatil.



Passenger, a kind of small trained hawk called
in French Pellerin.


Passeport, (French q. passer le
port) a licence made by any that hath authority for
the safe passage of any man from one place to another, a
passe or safe conduct.

Passibility, (lat.) an aptnesse or ableness
to suffer.

Passion, (lat.) a suffering, also an
affection of the mind,
also in Poems and Romances
it is more peculiarly taken for the passion of love.
Artam.

Passive, (lat.) suffering or
bearing.

Pastill, (lat.) a lump of any kinde of
paste made up into a little long rolle, also woade.

Pastern, the huckle bone of any beasts foot.

Pastilication, (lat.) a making any thing
into the form of a pill or round ball

Pastination, (lat.) a digging or delving of
ground.

Paston, a Townlet in Northfolk,
giving sirname and residence to an honourable Family of this County.

Pasture, (lat.) a feeding.

Pastophories, (Greek) the most
honourable order of
Priests among the Egyptians.

Pastoral, (lat.) belonging to a shepherd or
rural life, whence a pastoral Song.

Pasvolant, (French) one that is foisted by
a Captain into his Company on a
muster-day, whence it
is taken for a hireling or base fellow.

Pataque, (French) a Neapolitan com worth a
hundred quadrins.

Patart, a Dutch coin, five whereof
amount to six pence.

Patee, a term in Heraldry, as a crosse
Patee, i. e. a crosse whose ends are broad and opened.

Patefaction, (lat.) a making open, also a
discovering or making manifest.

Patelena, see Matura.

Patelin, (French) a flatterer, cogger, or
deceiver.

Not found in OED.



Paten, a kind of wooden shooe, from the
Greek word Pateo, i. to tread under foot, also a
little flat saucer used by the Priests with the chalice at Masse.

Letters Patents, see Letters.

Patency, (lat.) a being uncovered, a
lying open.

Paterguardian, a title given to the chief
of the Franciscan Fryars in their Monasteries.

Paternal, (lat.) fatherly, belonging to a
father.

Pathetical, (Greek) apt to perswade or move
the affections.

Pathology, (Greek) that part of physick
which treats of the causes and differences of diseases.

Patible, (lat.) to be suffered or
indured.

Patibulary, (lat.) belonging to a
gallows.

Patin, (lat.) a kind of platter, charger,
or bason.

Patonce, a term in Heraldry, as a crosse
Patonce, i. e. whose ends are both broad and as
it were three wayes hooked.

Patration, (lat.) a doing any thing, a
finishing any work.

Patriarchate, (lat.) the estate,
dignity, or chief seat,
of a Patriarch, i. the first father of a Family
or Nation.

Patricians, (lat.) those men among the
Romans who were accounted of the most noble, as being
descended of Senatours.

Patrick, the proper name of a man, from the
Latin word Patricius, a Peer or
Statesman.

Patricide, see Parricide.

Patrimonial, (lat.) belonging to a
Patrimony, i. an inheritance or estate left by a father to his
children.

Patrocination, (lat.) a defending the
quarrel, or maintaining the right of any one.

Patroclus, the son of Menoetius
and Sthenele, he having slain Cleonymus the son of
Amphidamas, fled to Phia, where he was
intertained by
Peleus, and together with Achilles
educated by the Centaure Chiron, afterwards he
went to the wars of Troy with Achilles,
with whom he had contracted
an inviolable friendship, and when Achilles
having made a defection from the Grecian Army
could by no means be won to fight with Hector, he
at last was prevailed
with to send Patroclus in his stead, and with his
own armour, in which fight Patroclus being slain,
Achilles then whom no other respect could move,
would fight to revenge the death of his friend, and having
new arms made for him by Vulcan, he fought with
Hector and slew him.

Patronal, (lat.) belonging to a Patron,
i. an advocate, defender, or pleader; also in
Civil Law, a Patron is taken for him that hath
manumitted a servant and thereby challength of him
certain reverence and
duty during his life, and in the



Canon Law for him that hath the gift of a Benefice.


Patronymicks, (Greek) those names which men
derive from their fathers or ancestours with some little
addition, as Aeneades from Aeneas.

Patulication, (lat.) a being opened, or
made wide.

Pauciloquy, (lat.) a speaking few words,
little talk.

Paucity, (lat.) fewnesse, a being of a
little or small number.

Pavefaction, (lat.) a terrifying or
making afraid.

A Pavese, or Pavice, (Ital.) a
large shield which covereth the whole body.

Pavidity, (lat.) timerousnesse,
fearfulnesse.

Pavillion, (French) a Tent, or
Tabernacle of State.

Pavin, (Span.) a kind of Dance so
called.

Paul, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Hebrew, wonderful or rest.

Paulin, a diminutive from Paul.

Paunage, see Pannage.

Pavoisade, or Pavezado, (French 
and Spanish) a target defence in Gallies whereby the
slaves are defended from the small shot of the enemy.

Pavonine, (lat.) belonging to a peacock or
peahen.

Pausade, (French) a pausing or
resting.

Not found in OED.



Pausanias, the son of Cleombrotus,
he was a famous Lacedemonian Captain and won many
Victories in the wars against the Athenians, also
a Macedonian youth who slew Philip of
Macedon, because having received a rape, and
complaining often of it to Philip, he could
receive no redresse.

Payn, the proper name of a man, in
Latin Paganus, a Villager.


P E

Pean, the same as Erminois, a term
in Heraldry. see Erminois.

Pearch, a rod or pole wherewith land is
measured, fourty whereof in length, and four in breadth
make an acre, it containeth sixteen foot and a half.

Pearles, a sort of Gemms which are bred in
some kind of shell-fishes.

Peccadillo, (Span.) a little crime or
fault.

Peccant, (lat.) sinning, committing a
crime.

Pectination, (lat.) a kembing, also a
raking together of Corn.

Pectoral, (lat.) belonging to the brest,
also used substantively for a brestplate, peitrel, or stomacher.

Pecuarious, (lat.) belonging to beasts, or
cattel.

Peculation, (lat.) a robbing of the Prince
or Common-wealth.

The Court of Peculiars, a certain Court in
the Bishops time, which dealt in certain Parishes exempt
from the Bishops jurisdiction
in some Diocesses, and were peculiarly
belonging to the Arch-Bishop of
Canterbury.

Peculiation, (lat.) a taking away a mans
goods.

Pecuniary, (lat.) belonging to
money.

Pedage, (lat.) money given for
passing by foot or horse
through any Countrey.

Pedal, (lat.) containing a foot in
measure.

Pedaneous, (lat.) going on foot.

Pedantism, (French) the office of an
ordinary School-master or Pedant.

Pedation, (lat.) a propping or setting up
of vines.

Pedature, (lat.) an assignment of so
many foot to workmen in
digging or building.

Pederasty, or Pæderasty, (Greek)
buggery, or a lusting
after boyes.

Pedestal, (French) a term in
Architecture, the
basis or foot of a pillar.

Pedestrial, (lat.) going on foot,
belonging to the foot.

Pedicle, (lat.) a little foot, also the
stalk of any fruit or flower.

Pedobaptism, or Pædobaptism,
(Greek) Infant-baptism, the baptizing of Children.

Pedotribe, or Pædotribe, (Greek)
one that instructs children how to exercise their
bodies.

Peere, (French) a Fortresse made
against the force of the
Sea, also Peers q. pares, i, equals are the
Nobles or chief Lords in Parliament: this denomination is
thought to be derived from the 12 Peers of France
instituted by Charles the great, or
Lewis the younger; also in Common Law those that
are impanneled upon Enquest are called Peers.

Pegasean, (lat.) swift, from
Pegasus the winged horse of Perseus.

Pejeration, (lat.) a forswearing.

Pejoration, (lat.) a making worse.



Peitrel, or Poitral, (French) the
brest-leather of a horse.


Pelagians, a sort of Hereticks so called
from Pelagius their first founder; they
denied original sin, and
had many other erroneous tenets.

Pelasgi, an ancient people of
Greece, so called from Pelasgus the son
of Jupiter and Larissa, they inhabited a
part of the Peloponnessus
called Pelasgia.

Pelias, the son of Neptune and
Tyro the daughter of Salmoueus, he was
the brother of Aeson King of Thessaly,
and meditating the ruine of his brothers son, he sent him
to Colchos for the Golden Fleece, he was at last
slain by his daughters at the instigation of Medea.

Pelion, a mountain of Thessaly
which the Titans when they made war against the
gods heaped upon Ossa a neighbouring
mountain; the top of this mountain is thick set with
Pine trees, and hangeth over the Pelasgian
Gulph.

Pellican, a certain bird that pecking her
own brest, draweth blood thence to feed her young
ones.

Pelliculation, (lat.) a deceiving with fair
words.

Pellicle, (lat.) a little skin or thin
rind.

Pellucid, (lat.) clear, bright, shining
thorough.

Pel-mel, (French) confusedly, one with
another.

Pelopæa, the daughter of
Thyestes, who being got with child by her father,
brought forth Aegysthus.

Peloponnesus, a Country of Greece,
lying upon the Adriatick Sea, it was anciently
called Pelasgia, now Morea.

Pelops, the son of Tantalus King
of Phrygia, by Taygete, he, when his
father had invited the gods to a Feast, was killed and set
before them to eat, from the eating
of which when all the gods abstained, onely Ceres
eat up his shoulder, for which Jupiter restoring
him to life again, made him an Ivory shoulder, he being to
run with Oenomaus King of Elis, was to
marry his daughter Hippodamia on condition he won
the race, which he did by corrupting Myrtilus the
Chariot-driver of Oenomans. see Myrtilus.

Pelota, the ball of the foot, from the
French Pelote, i. a ball.

Not found in OED.



Clerk of the Pels, an officer of the
Exchequer, who enters
every tellers bill in a parchment roll called pellis
receptorum, i. the skin or roll of receipts, and
makes another roll of
payments called Pellis exituum.

Peltiferous, (lat.) a Target-bearer, he
that carrieth a Pelt which is a kind of Target made of skins.

Peltwool, wool pulled off the pelt or skin
of a dead sheep.

Pelure, rich Fur.

Pelusium, one of the seven mouths of Nile
now called Damiata.

Pembroke, the chief Town of
Pembrokeshire,
in Brittish called Penbro, i. a Cape or Head of
the Sea, Pen signifying in the Brittish tongue, a
head. It hath a little Castle (built by Arnulph
of Montgomery, brother to the Earle of
Shrewsbury) which Girald his Constable
valiantly holding out with a small Garrison against the
force of all South-Wales laying siege to it,
thereby purchased to
himself much honour, and raised his Family to a great
height, from which the Giraldines and
Fitzgiralds in Ireland are
descended.

Penarious, (lat.) belonging to victuals or
provision.

Penates, (lat.) houshold-gods.

Pencills, certain small instruments made of
Bears, Ermin's or Hogs hairs put into quills of several
sizes, which Painters use to paint withal.

A Pendant, a Jewel, q. Pendent, i.
hanging down, also
Pendants in a Ship, are short ropes made fast at one end
either to the head of the mast or to a yard, or to the
clew of a sail.

Pendiloches, (French) a term in
Jewelling, the lowest
part of Jewels that dangle and hang down.

Not found in OED.



Pendulous, (lat.) hanging down in a rope,
clammy.

Penelope, the daughter of Icarius
and the wife of Vlisses, she being careful to
preserve her chastity in her husbands absence,
being importuned by many suiters, who having been put off
a great while, were at last resolved to ravish her; she
desired onely so much time till she had made an end of
what was upon her distaff, which when she had obtaind, she
ravelled over night what she had spun in the day time, by
which means she put them off till her husband returned home.

Penetrable, (lat.) to be pierced or bored
thorough.

Peneus, a River of Thessaly, upon
whose bank Daphne was turned into a
Laurel-tree, near unto which is a most pleasant



Vallie, called the Peneian Vallie.


Peninsule, (lat.) a tract of Land, which is
almost an Island, onely joyned to the continent by a
narrow neck of Land, called an Isthmus.

Penitential, (lat.) sorrowfull, penitent,
also moving to repentance.

Penitentiary, (lat.) a Priest that
imposeth what penance
upon an offender he thinks fit; also a place in
Rome, where Priests sit and hear the confessions
of those that come unto them to that end.

Pennigerous, (lat.) bearing feathers,
winged, feathered.

Pennant, see Pendant.

Pennocrucium, the ancient name of a Town in
Staffordshire, called from thence at this day
Pencridge.

Penon, (French) a flagge, or banner
in warre; also a streamer in a ship, also a Term in
Heraldry.

Penoncels, little Penons.

Pensans, (i. the Cape, or head of Saints,
or as some interpret it, the head of sands) near which is
that famous Rock, called Main-Amber, or
Marine-Amber, which being equally counterpoised
upon a lesser Rock, may be stirred by the push of a
finger, but cannot be removed out of its place by a
multitude of men.

Pensitation, or Pensiculation,  (lat.) a diligent
considering, weighing, or pondering.

Pension, (lat.) a stipend, or ordinary
payment.

Pensive, (French) sad, heavy,
sorrowfull.

Pentahedrical figure, (Greek) a
Mathematical Term,
being a figure which hath five sides.

Pentaglottical, (Greek) skilfull in five
tongues, having several languages.

Pentagonal, (Greek) having 5 angles, or
corners.

Pentameter, (Greek) a verse consisting of
five feet.

Pentasticks, (Greek) Stanza's,
consisting of five
verses; also Porches having five rows of Pillars.

Pentateuch, (Greek) the five books of
Moses; also any volume consisting of five books.

Pentecontarck, (Greek) a Captain that hath
the command of fifty men.

Pentecost, (Greek) the feast of
Whitsuntide, so
called, because it is the 50th. day from
Christs resurrection.

Penthesilea, a Queen of the
Amazons, who coming to help the Trojans,
was slain by Achilles.

Pentheus, the son of Echion and
Agave, the daughter of Cadmus, he was
torn in pieces by his mother and sister, for
despising the rites of Bacchus.

Penurie, (lat.) want, need, poverty.

Pepin, a King of the Francks, and
father of Charles
the Great, he reduced the Lombards to the obedience of the
Church, for which he had the title of most Christian King,
bestowed upon him and his successours by Pope
Zacharie.

Peple, (lat.) a hood, or kerchief; also a a
kinde of imbroidered vesture.

Peptick, (Greek) concoctive, or digestive.

Peracter, a Mathematical instrument, the
same as circumferentor.

Peraction, (lat.) a performing, or
finishing a businesse.

Peragration, (lat.) a travelling, or
wandring about.

Perambulation, (lat.) a walking through or
about.

Perangust, (lat.) very narrow.

Not found in OED.



Percepier, a certain Herb, growing in some
parts of Somersetshire, it hath small flowrs of a
greenish hew, and is good to provoke urine.

Perceptible, (lat.) perceiveable, or to be apprehended.

The Perch-stone, a white stone found in the
head of a Perch.

Percival, a proper name from
Percheval, a Town in Normandy.

Percolation, (lat.) a straining
through.

Percunctation, or Percunction,
(lat.) a diligent
searching, inquiring, or demanding.

Percullis, see Poursuivant at Arms.

Percussion, (lat.) a striking, or
hitting.

Perdiccas, a stout Macedonian, one
of the Commanders of Alexander the Great.

Perdition, (lat.) destruction, utter
losse.

Perdix, the Nephew of Dædalus, he
found out the use of the saw, for which being envied of
his Uncle, and by him cast down from a high Towr, he was
changed into a Patridge.

Perduction, (lat.) a leading
through.

Perdues, a Term in Military discipline,
certain chosen Companies, who are put upon the most
desperate services; from the French word Perdu,
i. lost.

Perduellion, or Perduellisme,
(lat.) an open act of Hostility.



Perduration, (lat.) a lasting very long.


Peregrine, the proper name of a man, in
Latin Peregrinus, i. out-landish; also a Hawk of
the kinde of Falcons.

Peregrination, (lat.) a going on
Pilgrimage, a
travailing into far Countreys; in Astronomy it is an
essential debility, as when a Planet is in a sign, wherein
he is altogether a stranger, by being neither in his
House, Exaltation, Trine, Term, or face: and
therefore then he is very weak.

Peremptorie, (lat.) absolute, without
ex­
ception, or excuse, from Perimere, i.
utterly to take away.

Perendination, (lat.) a putting off for a
day.

Perennity, (lat.) continuance, long
lastingnesse.

Pererration, (lat.) a wandring up and
down.

Perfidie, (lat.) treachery, falsness,
breach of faith, or trust.

Perforation, (lat.) a boring, or piercing
through.

Perfretation, (lat.) a wading
through.

Perfrication, or Perfriction,
(lat.) a rubbing, or chasing throughly.

Perfunctorie, (lat.) carelesly, or
negligently done.

Pergamus, a Citie of Natolia,
where Parchment, or Vellum was invented, which is thence
called Pergamena.

† Pergraphical, (Greek)
work-manlike, artificial.

Periander, a Tyrant of Corinth,
the son of Cypselus, he was accounted one of the
seven wise-men of Greece.

Pericardie, (Greek) the film, or thin skin,
wherein the heart is enwrapped.

Periclitation, (lat.) an adventuring,
hazarding, or endangering.

Pericranie, (Greek) the hairy scalp, or
skin that covereth the skull.

Perigee, (Greek) that point of heaven,
wherein the Sun, or any other Starre is nearest the Center of the earth.

Perillus, see Phalaris.

Perimeter, (Greek) the outermost line of
any solid body; also a verse that hath a syllable above
the just measure.

Perioch, (Greek) an argument,
containing briefly the
summe of an ensuing discourse.

Not found in OED.



Periodical, (Greek) belonging to a
period, i. e. the Term of time wherein any thing is finisht; also the end of
a perfect sentence.

Perioici, or Perioeci, those that
dwell in the same climate.

Peripateticks, (from the Greek word
Peripatein, i. to walk) the Disciples and
followers of Aristotle, who was wont to teach walking.

Periphelium, (Greek) that point of the
heaven, wherein the earth, or any other Planet is nearest to the Sun.

Peripherie, (Greek) as it were a
carrying about the
circumference, or round crooking line of a Circle.

Periphrastical, (Greek) spoken by a
Periphrase, i.
circumloquution, or expressing a thing by many words.

Peripneumonical, (Greek) sick of a
Peripneumony,
i. a disease which causeth an inflammation of the Lungs,
and shortnesse of breath.

Periscians, (Greek) those that dwell where
the shadows are cast round about them.

Perissologie, (Greek) a redundancy, or
superfluity of speech.

Peristaltick, (Greek) having the power to
strain, or presse together.

Perit, a certain measure, being the
20th. part of a Droit, a Droit the 24th. part of a Mite, a Mite the 20th. of a
Grain, a Grain the 24th. part of a
penny-weight, and a penny-weight the 20th. part
of an Ounce, 24. blanks make a Perit.

Peritoneum, the caule, which is
extended over the bowels,
and vessels that lye between the Diaphragma and the thighes.

Perjuration, see Pejeration.

Perkin, a proper name, as it were
Peterkin, i.
little Peter, the particle Kin, being in
the Saxon language a note of diminution.

Permagies, a sort of Turkish
boat.

Not found in OED.



Permanent, (lat.) durable, very
lasting.

Permeation, (lat.) a going, or passing
through.

Permission, (lat.) a suffering, or giving
leave.

Permistion, (lat.) a mingling well
together.

Permutation, (lat.) an exchanging one with
another.

Pernel, the Christian name of divers
women from Petronilla, pretty stone.

Pernicious, (lat.) hurtfull, destructive,
dangerous.

Pernicity, (lat.) swiftnesse.

Pernoctation, (lat.) a tarrying all
night.

Pernour of profits, (French) a taker of
profits, a Term in Common-law.



Peroration, (lat.) the conclusion, or last part
of an Oration.


Pero, the sister of Nestor and
Periclimenes,
and the daughter of Neleus and Chloris,
she was married to Bryas, the son of
Amythaon and Aglaia, after he had
brought Neleus the Oxen, which Hercules
took from Diomedes.

Perpenders, or Perpent stones, stones
fitted to the thicknesse of a wall.

Perpendicle, (lat.) a Plumb-line, whence
Perpendicular, i. falling directly down, and inclining neither way.

Perpenna, a famous Roman
overthrown by Pompey, he slew Sertorius
at a Banquet.

Perpension, or Perpensation,
(lat.) a diligent
weighing, considering, or examining.

Perpession, (lat.) a suffering, or
induring.

Perpetration, (lat.) a committing, acting
or atchieving any thing.

Perpetuation, (lat.) a making a thing
continue, or abide everlastingly.

Perplexity, (lat.) doubtfulnesse,
incertainty; also
trouble, or anguish of minde.

Perplication, (lat.) a folding
through.

Perquisites, (lat.) those profits that
accrew to a Lord of a
Mannour over and above his yearly Rents, by virtue of his
Court Baron.

Perquisition, (lat.) a diligent searching,
or inquiring.

Perry wright, (old word) imbroidered with
precious stones.

Not found in OED.



Perscrutation, (lat.) a searching
throughly, or into the
depth of any thing.

Perse, sky colour.

Persecution, (lat.) a following after any
one, to do them harm.

Perseverance, (lat.) constancy, firmnesse,
stedfastnesse in any thing.

Perseus, the son of Jupiter and
Danæ, see Danæ, and
Andromeda.

Persia, a famous Countrey in the Eastern
part of the world; so called from Perses, the son
of Perseus and Andromeda, its famous Citie
Persepolis was destroyed by Alexander, at
the request of Lais.

Personable, a Term in Law, inabled to hold
Plea in Court; as, he was made personable
by Parliament; that is, he was made able to stand in Court.

Personality, (a Law-Term) an abstract of
personal, as the action is in the per­
sonalty; that is, brought against the right person, against whom in
Law it lieth.

Personate, (lat.) to sound very loud; also
to represent the person of another.

Perspective, (lat.) the art of advantaging
the sight by the contrivance of glasses,
being a branch of Opticks.

Perspicacity, (lat.) quicknesse of sight,
or apprehension.

Perspicil, (lat.) a kinde of mirrour, or
looking-glasse, wherein the form of any thing is clearly represented.

Perspicuity, (lat.) clearnesse, easinesse
to be seen through.

Perspiration, (lat.) a breathing through.

Perterebration, (lat.) a boring through
with a wimble.

Perthia, or Perth, a large and
plentifull Countrey in the North-part of Scotland.

Pertinacie, or Pertinacity, (lat.)
obstinatenesse,
stifnesse in opinion.

Pertinent, (lat.) pertaining, or
belonging unto.

Pertingent, (lat.) joyning, or reaching
near unto.

Aelius Pertinax, a Roman Emperour; so
called because he obstinately refused the Empire when it
was offered him, he was slain in his Palace by the
Prætorian Souldiers
at the instigation of Didius Julianus, who succeeded.

Pertingent lines in Heraldry, vide
Entire.

Pertransient lines in Heraldry,
vide Entire.

Perne, a great Province in
America, or the West-Indies, having in it a famous Citie of the
same name.

Perturbation, (lat.) a disquieting, or
troubling.

Pervade, (lat.) to go through, or
into.

Pervagation, (lat.) a straying, or
wandring through, or up and down.

Perversity, (lat.) frowardnesse, crosnesse,
overthwartnesse.

Pervert, (lat.) to corrupt, to overthrow,
or turn upside down.


Pervestigation, (lat.) a finding out by
diligent seeking.

Pervicacy, (lat.) obstinacy, or
stubbornnesse.

Pervigilation, (lat.) a watching all
night.

Pervise, (a rail, or barre) also a
conference among young pleaders and Stu­



dents in the Law, it was so called in ancient time, and
seemeth to be the same with that which we now call mooting.


Not found in OED as a noun.



Pervious, (lat.) easie to be passed
through.

Pessary, (lat.) a kinde of suppository made
of soft wool.

Pessundation, (lat.) a putting to the
worst, a casting under foot.

Pestiferous, (lat.) bringing Pestilence and
destruction, unwholesome.

Petalisme, (Greek) a manner of
banishment among the
Siracusians, which was
inflicted by writing the
offenders name upon an Olive leaf.

Petard, (French) a kinde of Engine like a
Mortar, wherewith strong gates are burst open in war.

Petarrade, (French) a gun-shot of farting,
a yerking out of a horse behind, commonly accompanied with farting.

Petaurist, (Greek) a tumbler or dancer on
the ropes.

Peter, the proper name of a man, from the
Greek word Petra a rock.

Peterpence, a tribute given by
Inas King of the West-Saxons being in pilgrimage at
Rome in the year 720, which was a penny for every
house, it was also called the fee of Rome.

Peters post, that famous delph or quarry of
stone in Yorkshire, out of which the stones that
built St. Peters Church in York were
hewed, by the liberal grant of the
Vavasours.

Clerks of the Petit bag, three officers of
Chancery who record the return of all inquisitions out of
every Shire, all liveries
granted in the Court of Wards, make all Patents of
Customes, Gaugers, Controllers,
&c. each record being put in a petit or
little leather bag; whence they had the denomination of
Clerks of the Petit bag.

Petitory, (lat.) belonging to a petition,
i. a request or intreaty made by an
inferiour to a Superiour.

Petrary, the same as
Mangonel.

Petreius, a famous Roman Captain who was
Cæsars Legat in Gallia, but
afterwards taking part
with Pompey, he was overthrown in
Mauritania, together with King Juba,
whereupon they consented
mutually together to kill one another.

Petrification, (lat.) a making stony, a
turning to stone.

Petrobusians, a sort of Hereticks that
denied the keeping of Feasts.

Petrol, (lat.) a sort of marle or chalky
clay; some take it for a kind of Bitumen or
Naphta.

Petronel, a kind of Harquebuse, or
Horsemans piece, so
called because it is to aime at a horses brest.

Petropolis, a Town in
Northamptonshire, commonly called
Peterborow, from a Monastery
dedicated to St. Peter, begun by Penda,
a Christian King of the Mercians & finisht by
his brother Wolpher to expiate the crime of
murdering his two sons Wolphald
and Rufin. This Town was
anciently called
Medeswelhamsted or Medeshamsted, from
Medeswell a deep whirlpool.

Pettifogger, a silly Advocate, Attorny, or
Lawyer; fogen signifying in Dutch to comply or
insinuate.

Pettisergeantry, a certain tenure of Lands
holden of the King by yeilding him a shield, bow, arrow, &c.

Not found in OED.



Petulancy, (lat.) saucynesse, impudence,
wantonnesse.

Pexity, (lat.) the roughnesse of the
web.


P H

Phædra, the daught of Minos King
of Creet, and the wife of Theseus, she contrived the
destruction of her son in Law Hippolytus because
he would not yeild to her allurements. see Hippolytus.

Phæmonoe, a Virgin who first invented
Heroick Verses, and who was the first Priestesse of
Apollo at Delphos.

Phænomena, (Greek) appearances of Meteors
or any other Signs in the Aire or Heavens.

Phæton, the son of Sol and
Clymene, he, when Epaphus the son of
Jupiter and Isis had objected to him
that he was not the son of Phoebus, requested of
his father that he might have the guidance of his chariot
for one day, which being granted, he set the Heavens all
of a flame, for which Jupiter
struck him down with his thunder into the River
Padus or Po.

Phætontiades, the sisters of
Phæton. see Heliades.

† Phagedænick, (Greek) troubled with
pimples, pushes, or breakings out in the body.

Phalanx, (Greek) a Military squadron consisting
of 8000 men, most in use among



the Macedonians; some think it was first
invented by Phalanx, and from him so
called; he was the
brother of Arachne, and was instructed in
Military discipline by Pallas, and taught his
sister the use of the needle, but afterwards lying with
his sister, they were both turned into vipers by Pallas.


Phalaris, a Tyrant of Agrigentum
who caused Perillus, a rare Artificer, to make a
brazen Bull wherein he tormented many by putting them into
the belly of the Bull after it had been heated with a
vehement fire, and among many others Perillus the
author of it was served in the same
manner.

Phalerated, (lat.) dressed or adorned with
trappings.

Phaleucian verse, a verse consisting of
eleven syllables, and five feet, viz. a
dactyle, spondee, and three trochee's.

Phanatick, (lat.) see Fanatick.

Phantasie, (Greek) a representation of
things to the phancy or imagination, a conceiving of
things in the mind.

Phantasm, (Greek) the same, also a false
imagination or apparition, a vision of night-ghosts.

Phao, a Lesbian youth, who
receiving from Venus an Alabaster box of
ointment, became therewith so beautiful, that the chief
Dames of Mitylene especially Sappho fell
in love with him.

Phare, (Greek) a watch-tower or high place
by the sea coast wherein lights
continually shine to light Seamen to their Haven, so called from
Pharos an Island in the Canopick mouth
of Nile, where such a tower was built by
Gnidius the Architect.

Pharetriferous, (lat.) bearing a quiver of
arrows.

Pharisaism, hypocrisie, the profession and
opinion of the Pharisees, who were a sect of the Jews so
called from the Hebrew word Pharesh, i. to separate, because they were
Interpreters of the Law, and separatists from the rest of
the Jewish Church, pretending more holinesse than the rest
of the people.

Pharmaceutick, (Greek) belonging to Medicines or
Drugs also that part of
physick which treateth of Medicines.

Pharnaces, the son
of Mithridates King of Pontus, who
coming with a great army into Cappadocia was
overthrown by Cæsar.

Pharsalus, a Town of Thessaly,
seated upon the banks of the
River Enipeus, near unto which are those famous
fields where the great battel was fought between
Cæsar and Pompey, and between
Augustus, Brutus, and Cassius.

Phasm, (Greek) a surprising vision, or
dazeling appearance of light.

Same date as earliest example in OED.



Phegeus, the father of
Alphesibæa, he purged
Alcmæon
of his crime when he had slain his mother by his fathers
command, and gave him his daughter Alphesibæa in
marriage.

Pheon, the head of a dart, a term in
Heraldry.

Pheron, the son of Sesostris King
of Egypt, he being strook blind for shooting a
dart into the the stream of Nilus, was advised by
the oracle to wash his eyes in the urine of a woman that
had known but one man, which having done, he recovered his sight.

Phial, (lat.) a pot or glasse with a wide
mouth, also a certain measure.

Philadelphia, a City of Misia in
Asia the Lesse, also the proper name of a woman,
signifying in Greek brotherly or sisterly love.

Philanthropy, (Greek) humanity, the love of
mankind.

Philargyry, (Greek) the love of silver,
covetousnesse

Philauty, (Greek) self-love.

Philibert, the proper name of a man
signifying in the German tongue, Bright and Famous.

Philippolis, a City of Macedon,
near which are the Philippick fields, where
Augustus and M. Antony got the great victory over
Brutus and Cassius.

Philippus, the name of many famous men,
especially the father of Alexander the Great, the
word signifieth in Greek, a lover of horses; there is also
a coin of gold so called worth three shillings sterling.

Phillis, the proper name of a woman,
signifying in Greek, Lovely.

Philoctetes, the son of Pæas, and the
companion of Hercules, to him Hercules
dying left his bow and arrows dipt in the
Lernæan poison, and because the
Delphian Oracle admonished that there was need
of the arrows of Hercules, he was brought to
the wars of Troy, where he received an almost
irrecoverable wound by letting fall one of his arrows
upon his foot, whereupon
being ashamed to return lame into his own Country, he
went into Calabria



in Italy where he built Petilia, at
length by the help of Machaon he was cured.


Philology, (Greek) the love of learning or
study.

Philomela, the daughter of Pandion
King of Athens, her sister Progne was
married to Tereus King of Thrace (the
son of Mars by the Nimph Bistonis) who
having ravisht
Philomela and cut out her tongue, that she might
not declare her sufferings to any one, she wrought the
story of them with her needle, and sent it to her sister
Progne, who in revenge caused her son
Itys to be killed at the Feast of
Bacchus, and set before Tereus, who
following Progne with his sword drawn was changed
into a Moorcock, Itys into a Pheasant,
Progne into a Swallow, and Philomele
into a Nightingale.

† Philomusous, (Greek) a lover of the
Muse.

Philonomia, the daughter of
Nyctinus and Arcadia, she, as she went a
hunting one day with Diana, was got with child by
Mars, and after she had brought forth twins she
cast them into the River Erymanthus,
who being a little after found by the Shepherd
Tyliphus sucking a she Woolf, they were brought
up by Tyliphus, and being called
Lycastus and Parrhasius, succeeded in
the Kingdom of Arcadia.

Philosophical, (Greek) belonging to a Philosopher or Philosophy,
i. the love and study of wisdom, knowledge of
natural causes.

Philotimy, (Greek) the love of
honour.

Philtre, (Greek) a potion, powder, or any
kind of Medicine procuring love.

Philyra, the daughter of Oceanus,
with whom Saturn lying in the shape of a horse,
begat the Centaur Chiron, who being wounded with
one of the arrows of Hercules
that had been dipt in Lernæan
poison, wished to die, but
being immortal was placed among the heavenly Signs, and
called Sagitarius.

Phineus, the son of Agenor, or as
others say of Phoenix and Cassiopæa, he
was King of Thrace, and had by his first wife
Cleopatra,
Orythus and Crambus, whose eyes he put out
at the perswasion of his second wife Harpalice
the sister of Zethes and
Calais, for which
he was strucken blind himself,
and the Harpyes were sent against him who
continually defiled his meat as it came to his table; but
at last they were driven by Zethes and
Calais into the Strophades
Islands, and Phineus himself was killed by
Hercules after he understood that the children
were blinded without a cause.

Phlebotomy, (Greek) a cutting of a veine, a
letting blood.

Phlegmatick, (Greek) full of phlegm or
fleam, i. one of the four humours of the body
being cold and moist.

Phlegmon, (Greek) a hot and red
swelling of the body, caused by an inflammation
of the blood.

Phlegræan fields, certain fields of
Thessaly, where the Gyants fought against the gods.

Phlegyas, son of Mars and King of
the Lapitheans in Thessaly, he was the
father of Ixion and the Nimph Coronis,
who being ravisht by Apollo, Phlegyas in revenge
burnt his Temple, for which being cast into Hell, he
remained in continual fear of the falling of a great stone
which hung over his head.

Phoebus, the son of Jupiter and
Latona, born at the same birth with
Diana, he is also called Apollo and
Sol.

Phoenix, (Greek) an Arabian Bird
of which it is reported that there is but one of them in
the World at a time, and that having lived 500 years, it
builds a nest of combustible spices, which taking fire
from the Sun, she fans it with her wings, and burns her
self therein, out of whose ashes there springs up a new
Phoenix; It is also an ancient name of several famous men.

Phorbas, the son of Priamus and
Epithesia the daughter of Stasippus King of
Mygdonia, he was, after many great atcheivements
performed in the Trojan war, slain by
Menelaus.

Phorcys, the son of Neptune and the Nimph Thesea,
and father of Medusa, he was King of
Corsica and Sardinia, and
being overthrown by Atlas in a Sea-fight, was turned into a Deity of
the Sea.

Phospher, (Greek) as it were a bringer of
light, the morning Star.

Phrase, (Greek) a
certain peculiar manner and form of speech.

Phrenetick, (Greek)
possessed with a Phrensie, i. a certain kind of
madnesse, arising from an inflammation of the
membranes of the brain.

Phrygia, a Country of Asia the
Lesse, bounding upon Caria, Lydia, and
Bithynia, it is divided into the Greater Phrygia and the
Lesser.



Phryxus, the son of Athamas and
Nephele, and
the brother of Helle. see Ino and Helle.


Phtisick, (Greek) a kind of
Consumption accompanied with a Cough and Ulceration
of the body.

Phylarch, (Greek) the Govenour or chief
Ruler of any Tribe or Family.

Phylacteries, (Greek) scrolles of
parchment having the ten
Commandments written upon them, which the Pharisees were
wont to wear about their necks and arms; also
preservatives against poison or witchcraft; also places to
keep things safe in.

Phyllis, the daughter of Lycurgus
King of Thrace, she hanged her self for the love
of Demophoon, who she thought had
neglected her, and was turned into an Almond tree.

Physick, (Greek) natural Philosophy, also
the Art of curing by Medicines.

Physiognomy, (Greek) an Art which teacheth
to know the dispositions of men by looking on their
countenances, it is vulgarly called Phisnomy.

Physiology, (Greek) a discourse of
natural things, a handling
of natural causes.


P I

Piacular, (lat.) able to absolve or clear a
man from some hainous sin or offence.

Pia mater, (lat.) a film or skin which
encompasseth the brain.

Piation, or Piacle, (lat.) a
satisfaction for sin, a purging by sacrifice or intercession.

Piazza, (Ital.) a great open place or broad
street, a market-place.

Picardy, a Province of that part of
France called Gallia Belgica, whose
chief City is Amiens.

Piccage, money paid in a Fair for
breaking up the ground to
set up a standing or booth.

Picenum, or Picentum, a Region of
Italy between the Apennine hills and the
Adriatick Sea,
vulgarly called Marca Anconitana.

Pickadil, (from the Dutch word
Pickedillekens)
the hem about the skirt of a garment, also the extremity
or utmost part of any thing, also an Ordinary at St.
James's so called.

To Pickear, (French picquer) is
when particular persons fight between two Armies before
the main Battle is begun.

Picle, or Pitle, (from the Italian
word Piccolo, i. little) an inclosure or small close.

Piepouders court, (from the French word
pied, i. a foot, and pouldreux, i.
dusty) a Court held in Fairs for the redresse of all
disorders committed within them.

Pierced, a term in Heraldry, as a crosse
pierced, i. e. bored in the middle.

Pieria, a Country in the confines of
Macedonia, by the Rivers Axius and
Haliacmon.

Pierpoint, a sirname of great note and
antiquity, stilled in Latin records, De Petræ
Ponte.

Pight, (old word) propped setled.

Pigment, (lat.) a kind of painting
wherewith women colour
their faces; it is also used metaphorically for deceit or guile.

Pigneration, (lat.) a gaging or laying to
pawn.

Pignitis, a certain kind of Mineral,
commonly called black chalk.

Pigritude, (lat.) lazinesse,
slothfulnesse.

Pilaster, (French) a little pillar, also an
inflammation of the Uvula.

Pilchard, or Pilcher, a kind of
fish, called in Latin Sarda, in Greek Trichis.

Pile, a term in Heraldry, being an
Ordinary consisting of a
twofold line, formed after the manner of a wedge.

Pilgrim, (from the Ital.
Pelegrino) one that travelleth out of devotion
thorough strange Countries to visit holy places.

Pilkrow, see Paragraph.

Pillaw, a kind of meat made of rice, used
among the Turks.

Pilosity, (lat.) hairinesse,
roughnesse.

Pilotage, the office of a Pilot or
Steersman of a Ship,
called in Dutch a Lootsman.

Pilumnus, the son of Jupiter, and
King of Daunia, he married Dane the
daughter of Acrisius and mother of
Perseus.

Pimpernel, a kind of little flower called
in Latin Pimpinella.

Pimpompet, a kind of antick dance wherein
three hit each other on the bum with one of their feet.

See OED "bumdockdouse."



Pimplea, a mountain in Macedon,
near which was the Pimplean Fountain and Den
sacred to the Muses, from whence they were called
Pimpleides.

Pingres, or Pingles, (French) a
kind of play wherein they use Ivory balls.

Not found in OED.





Pinguedinous, (lat.) fat, or grosse.


Piniferous, (lat.) bearing
Pine-trees.

Pink, a kinde of yellow colour used in
painting.

Pinnace, a kinde of small ship, so called,
q. Pennata, i. winged, or from Pinus, i.
a Pine-tree, of which it is commonly made.

Pinnigerous, (lat.) finned like a fish,
bearing fins.

Pioners, certain underminers and casters up
of trenches in an army, from a certain people of
Mysia, called Piones, who used to digge them
houses in Rocks.

Pipation, (lat.) a kinde of shrill
crying, or weeping.

Pipe, a measure of wine, or oyl,
containing 26 gallons, or half a tun.

Clerk of the Pipe, an Officer in the
Exchequer, who having
all accounts and debts due unto the King, drawn out of the
remembrancers Office, chargeth them down into the great Roll.

Piquant, (French) sharp, biting, or quick-tasted.

Pique, (French) a quarrel, or
distaste.

Piqueron, (French) a Javelin, or
Dart.

Piquy, a Term in printing, see Pareil.

Piratical, belonging to a Pirate,
i. a Robber on the Sea; so called from the Greek
word, Peiran, i. to passe the Seas.

Pirene, see Pyrene.

Pirithous, the son of Ixion, he
was join'd with Theseus in a perpetual league of
friendship, and assisted him against the
Centaurs that would have
ravisht away Hippodamia,
at last they going together to Hell to fetch away
Proserpina, Pirithous was slain by
Cerberus, and Theseus being taken
prisoner by Dis, was freed by
Hercules.

Piscarie, in Common-law, is a liberty of
fishing in another mans waters.

Piscation, (lat.) a fishing.

Piscinal, (lat.) belonging to a
fish-pond.

Pisces, the 12th. and last
figure of the Zodiack, the one is Northerly, the other
Southerly, and is called Notios.

Pisistratus, a King of the
Orchomenians, who for too much favouring of the
people was slain in the
Senate-house by a faction of the Nobility, his son
Telesimachus
being chief of the conspiracy; also the name of a famous
Tyrant of Athens, the son of
Hippocrates, he was a man of singular
eloquence, and a great favourer of the Arts and Sciences.

Pissaphalt, (Greek) a kinde of mineral,
consisting of pitch, and the lime Bitumen incorporated together.

Pistachoes, or Pistack Nuts, a kinde of
small Nuts growing in Aegypt and Syria,
being often used in Physick.

Pistolado, (Ital.) a shot, or wound
given with a Pistol.

Pistrine, (lat.) a grinding house, or mill;
also a bake house.

Pittacus, a Philosopher of
Mitylene, and one of the seven wise-men of
Greece, who in a war between the
Athenians and Mitylenians,
overcame Phrynon, Captain of the enemies by
intangling him in a Net, from whence arose the faction of
the Retiarii and the Myrmillions.

Pituitous, (lat.) flegmatick, full of
waterish humours.


P L

Placability, (lat.) easinesse to be
pacified, or appeased.

Placard, (French) a Licence, whereby a man
is permitted to maintain unlawfull Games; also a decree,
or Mandate of a Prince; also any Table hung up, wherein
Laws, or Orders are written.

Placence, see Greenwich.

Placidity, (lat.) gentlenesse, mildnesse,
quietnesse.

Placit, (lat.) an opinion, or
decree.

Plagiary, (lat.) he that steals people out
of one Countrey, and sells them into another; also a stealer
of other mens works, or writings.

The Plain Table, a certain
Mathematical instrument used for the surveying of Land.

Plaint, (in Common-law) is the
propounding of any
action real, or personal in writing, whence Plaintiffe,
see Demandant.

Planetarie, (lat.) belonging to a Planet,
i. a wandring star; whereof there are
seven in number, which take
their names from the chief heathen deities Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol,
Venus, Mercury, Luna.

Planiloquy, (lat.) plain, and free
speech.

Planimetry, (Greek) a measuring of plains,
as lands, boards, &c.

Planisphære, (lat.) an Astrolabe, or plain
Sphere.

Plantation, (lat.) a planting, or
setting.

Plastick, (Greek) the art of making, or
forming the figure of any thing out of earth.



† Plastograph, (Greek) counterfeit
writing.


Platanine, (lat.) belonging to a
Platane, or Planetree.

Platonick, belonging to, or affirm'd by
Plato, (whence Platonick love, or
Platonick year i. the space of 36000 years) he was the chief of
the Academick Philosophers,
he was at first called Aristocles, was a great
wrestler, and much given to painting;
afterwards became a hearer of Socrates,
then he sayl'd into Italy, to hear
Pythagoras, and took many things out of the books
of Philolaus Crotoniatos, next he went into
Aegypt to hear the Gymnosophists, and as
some say, read the books of Moses, he was called
Divine Plato, & was
esteemed the most famous
Philosoper of the world, his chief opinion being, that the
abstract Idea's, or images of all virtues, and of
all forms had a peculiar subsistence by themselves.

A Plaudite, (lat.) a clapping of hands for
joy, a sign of rejoycing, it being a substantive made of a verb.

Plausible, (lat.) acceptable, received with
praise, favour, or joy.

Plea, a Term in Law, that which either
party alleadgeth for himself in Court.

Plebeian, (lat.) belonging to the
common people; also mean, vulgar, inferiour.

Plebiscite, (lat.) a decree, statute, or
law, made by the common people.

Pledge, (French) a surety, whence to pledge
one in drinking, is to be his surety,
or to ingage that he shall receive no harm while he is
drinking, which custom was first occasioned, as some say,
by reason of the practice
of the Danes, heretofore
in this Kingdom, who used frequently
to stab the Natives while they were drinking.

Pleget, a long plaister of Leather, or
Linnen Cloath.

Pleiades, the seven daughters of
Atlas, and the Nymph Pleione, whose
names were Electra, Alcynoe, Celæno, Taygete,
Asterope, Maia, and Merope, they were placed
by Jupiter among the stars, and called by the
Latins Virgiliæ.

Plenarie, (Fr.) full, intire.

Plenartie, a word used in Common-law,
signifying a benefice supplied.

Plenilunarie, (lat.) belonging to the
Plenilune, or full Moon.

Plenipotentiaries, Ambassadours that are
invested with full power and authority to conclude with
that state to whom they are sent about those
things contained in
their Commissions.

Plenitude, or Plenity, (lat.)
fulnesse.

Pleonasme, (Greek) a certain
Rhetorical figure,
wherein some superfluous word, or sentence is added.

Plethorick, (Greek) troubled with a
Plethora, i. an abounding, or being too full of
humours.

Pleurifie, (Greek) an inflammation of the
inward skin of the Ribs, caused by too great an abundance of bloud.

Pliant, (French) flexible, easie to be bent.

Plicature, (lat.) a plaiting, or folding.

Plimouth, a famous Port Town in
Cornwell, so called as it were the mouth of the River Plime:
in this place, the fable goeth that Corinoeus
threw down the Gyant Gogmogog
from a steep Rock, it was anciently called
Sutton, and was divided into two parts,
Sutton Prior, as belonging to the Priors, and
Sutton Vautort belonging to the
Vautorts, stiled in old Records de
Valle Terta.

Plinth, (Greek) the lowermost part of the
foot of a pillar, being in the form of a Tile, or square brick.

Plisthenes, the son of Pelops and
Hippodæmia,
he dying young, recommended his two sons,
Agamemnon and Menelaus, to the care of
his brother Atreus, whence they were called
Atreides.

Plonkets, a word used in some old
statutes, signifying woollen cloath.

Plottons, a Term in Military Discipline,
consisting of eight in front.

Plumage, (French) a bunch of
feathers.

Plumbagin, (lat.) silver mingled with lead
stone, or oar.

Plumbeous, (lat.) leaden, of the colour of
lead; also blunt, or dull.

A Plumestriker, a parasite, or flatterer,
so called from pulling hairs, or feathers off from other mens Cloakes.

Plumigerous, (lat.) bearing feathers,
having feathers on.

Plunder, (Dutch) to rob, or take away by
violence in time of war.

Plurality, (lat.) a being more then one.

Pluries, the name of a Writ that goeth out
the third time; if the Original Capias,
and the sicut alias speed not.

Plutarch, a famous Philosopher of
Cheronea, who liv'd in the time of the Emperours,



Trajan and Adrian, and wrote many
excellent books; he
was in such high esteem with Adrian that he was
sent with Consular power into Illyria.


Pluto, the son of Saturn and
Ops, to whom in the division of the World
betwen him and his two
brothers Jupiter and Neptune, there fell
the infernal Empire by lot.

Pluvial, or Pluvious, (lat.)
rainy, full of rain, or watery clouds.


P N

Pneumatical, (Greek) belonging to wind or
spirits.


P O

Pocillation, (lat.) the waiting on a great
mans cup.

Poculent, (lat.) that may be drunk.

Podagrical, (lat.) having the gout in the
feet.

Podalirius and Machaon, the sons
of Aesculapius,
they were Physitians in the Grecian
Army that went against the Trojans.

Podarge, the swiftest of Mares, that fed in
a place called Vernum Pratum, on whom
Zephyrus begat the Horses of
Achilles.

Podestat, (Ital.) or chief Magistrate of a
City.

Podimetry, (Greek) a measuring by the
foot.

Poesie, or Poetry, (Greek) the art
of making a Poem, i. any kind of subject consisting of Rythm or
Verses.

Points, in Heraldry are certain places in
an Escutcheon diversly named according to their several positions.

A Poinard, or Poinado, (French) a
daggar or short sword.

Pointblanck, punctually, absolutely, from
the French words, poinct a prick, and
blanc white.

Polar, or Polary, (lat.) belonging
to the Poles, i. the ends of the axeltree about
which Astronomers imagin the heavens to be moved. The
North Pole is called the Arctick Pole, the South Pole the
Antarctick, whence the
Polar-circles are two little circles near the Poles of the
World described by the Poles of the Zodiack.

Polemical, (Greek) Military, belonging to
War.

Policy of Assurance, a giving to some or
other a certain rate or proportion to
secure the safe arrival of
a ship and so much wares at a place agreed on.

Political, (Greek) belonging to policy, or
the government of a Common-wealth.

Politure, (lat.) a polishing or
trimming.

Pollard, a cheven
or cod-fish, also a stag or male Deer having musen'd or cast his head.

Pollicar, (lat.) containing the measure of
an inch, which is the breadth of a thumb or toe.

Pollicitation, (lat.) a promising.

Pollinarious, (lat.) belonging to, or made
into fine flower.

Pollincture, (lat.) the embalming of dead
bodies.

Poltron, (French) a knave or rascal,
also a coward or lazy fellow.

Polycrates, a Tyrant of Samos,
being a man of very great wealth, and of that
fortune, that having let
fall into the Sea a ring of great value, it was found the
next day in the belly of a fish; but in his later end he
was taken by Orontes the
Persian and crucified.

Polydamas, the son of Antenor and
Theano the sister
of Hecuba, he marryed Lycaste,
the daughter of Priamus by a
Concubine, and is said together with his father
Antenor and Aeneas, to have
betrayed the City
Troy to the Greeks. Also the son of
Panthous the master of Hector, he was a
man of vast strength.

Polydorus, see Polymnestor.

Polygamy, (Greek) the having more wives
than one.

Polygony, (Greek) the having many angles or
corners, also an herb called knot-grasse.

Polyhymnia, or Polymneia, the name
of one of the nine Muses, she is said to have been the
first inventour of History.

Polymnestor, a Tyrant of Thrace,
who when Priamus fearing the Trojan War
had committed his youngest son Polydorus to his
tuition with a great summe of Gold, for greedinesse of the
money killed the child.

Polymorphean, (Greek) having many shapes or
forms.

Polynices, the brother of
Eteocles, and son of Oedipus King of
Thebes, by his mother
Jocasta.

Polyphagian, (Greek) one that eats much, a
great feeder.

Polyphemus, the son of Neptune by the
Nimph Thoosa the daughter of Phorcus, he



was one of the Cyclops, and faling in love with
the Nimph Galatea, slew the youth Acis
whom she preferred before him; he devoured four of the
companions of Vlisses
when they were cast upon that shore, and would have
served the rest in like manner, but that
Vlisses made him drunk with black wine, and put
out that one eye which he had in the midst of his
forehead.


Polyptote, (term in Grammar) a Noun that is declined with many
Cases

Polypus, a kind of fish that hath a great
many feet, called also Pourcontrel; also a tumour or
swelling in the nose.

Polysyllabical, (Greek) having many
syllables.

Polysyndeton, (Greek) a certain figure
wherein a sentence is joyned with many conjunction
copulatives.

Polyxena, (the daughter of
Priamus) whom Pyrrhus the son of
Achilles slew upon
his fathers Tomb and sent her to the infernal shades to
his father who for her sake had been slain by
Paris.

Pomander, (in Dutch Pomamber, as
it were an apple of Amber) a little round ball made of
several fragrant perfumes to smell to, or hang about the wrist.

Pomarious, (lat.) belonging to a
Pomary, i. an
Orchard, or place set with Apple-trees.

Pomegranate, a kind of round fruit, so
called because it is full of graines, or
because it groweth
chiefely in Granata a Region
of Spain.

Pomelegryse, (old word) dapple-gray.

Not found in OED.



Pomeparadice, a fruit called a
John-apple, In Greek Melimelum, as it
were a Honey-apple.

Pomeridian, the same as
Postmeridian.

Pomiferous, (lat.) bearing apples or
other kind of round fruit.

Pommade, (French) a kind of sweet ointment,
also a trick in vaulting.

Pomæry, (lat.) a certain space about the
walls of a City or Town.

Pomfret, or Pontfract, a Town in
Yorkshire, so
called (for in the Saxons time it was named Kirkby)
from a wooden bridge over Are, broken by the
confluence of a great multitude of people that accompanied
William Arch-Bishop of York, King
Stephens Nephew when he returned from
Rome. This place hath been stained with the
blood-shed of many Great men; here Thomas Earle
of Lancaster was beheaded by King Edward
the second; King Richard
the second was here made away by the appointment of King
Henry the fourth. Also Anthony Earle
Rivers, and Sir Richard Grey, were here
beheaded by King Richard the third.

Pomona, the goddesse of Orchards, with whom
Vertumnus falling in love, courted her in several
shapes, at last in
the form of an old woman he spake so effectually for
Vertumnus, that he prevailed, and
returning to his own
shape he married her.

Cneus Pompeius, sirnamed the Great, which title was
given him by the Army of Sylla for Triumphing
over Iarbas a King of Africa, then
joyning with Metellus he overcame
Sertorius in Spain; next he was chosen
Emperour in the Pyratick War, which he finisht in
three moneths; afterwards
he triumphed over Mithridates, and restored
Tigranes to the Crown of
Armenia. Lastly
he quelled the Iberians, Albans, and
Jews, taking prisoner their King
Aristobulus;
at length in the Civil War between
him and Julius Cæsar he was
overcome at the Battle of
Pharsalia, and flying into Aegypt was
slain by Aquila, through the treachery of
Ptolomy the young King.

Pompetts, Printers balls wherewith they put
the Ink upon their letters.

Pompus, (lat.) full of pomp,
stately.

Ponderosity, (lat.) weightinesse,
heavynesse.

Pone, a Writ whereby a cause depending in
the County Court, is removed to the Common Bank.

Pontage, a contribution toward the
reedifying of bridges,
or keeping them in repair.

Pontes, a Town in
Buckinghamshire, so called from the 4 bridges,
over the 4 channels into which the River Cole is
divided. This Town is now calld Col-Broke.

Pontfract, see Pomfret.

Pontick, (lat.) belonging to
Pontus, i. the Sea between Meotis and
Tenedos, as also the Country joyning to that Sea
containing
Armenia, and Cappadocia.

Pontifical, or Pontificial, (lat.)
belonging to a Pontif or
Pontifex, i. a Bishop or Prælate, who being clad
in his Episcopal vestments or those ornaments with which
he performeth Divine Service on Festival dayes, as also
those who have on their richest apparel, are commonly said
to be in their Pontificalibus.



Popelin, (French) a little finical
darling.


Popination, (lat.) excessive eating, or
drinking; also a haunting Popinas, i.
Taverns, or Victualing houses.

Popingey, a kinde of Parret; also an Herb,
so called from being of the colour of that bird, being a
kinde of greenish colour, this Herb is called in Latin Symphonia.

Poplemans, a sort of Hobgoblins, so
called from Popleman, a cruel Tyrant, anciently of
Polonia.

Not found in OED.



Poplet, (old word) a young wench.

Poplitick, (lat.) belonging to the ham, or
leg.

Poppæan Law, a certain Law among the
Romans against single life.

Not found in OED.



Populace, (Fr.) the vulgar, or meaner sort
of people.

Popularity, (lat.) familiarity with the
common people.

Population, (lat.) a wasting, destroying,
or unpeopling of any place.

Populiferous, (lat.) bearing poplar
Trees.

Populosity, (lat.) abundance, or fulnesse
of people.

Porcelane, a kinde of Sallet-herb,
called in Greek Andrachne; also the cream, or flowring on the top
of a certain chalky earth, in China steeped in
water, of which they make China dishes.

Porcine, (lat.) belonging to a Hog.

Porculation, (lat.) a fatning of Hogs, or
Swine.

Porcupine, a kinde of beast, called in
Latin, Histrix, which casteth out of her body
certain sharp bristles, like darts
against the Dogs when they hunt her.

Porosity, (lat.) fulnesse of Pores,
i. certain little
holes in the skin, through which sweat and vapours do
exhale out of the body.

Porpaise, a kinde of fish of
a duskish colour,
called in Greek Phocæna.

Porphyretick, (lat.) belonging to
Porphyrie, i. a
fine reddish marble, streaked with divers colours, whence
the Porphyrie Chair of St. John Lateran
at Rome, wherein
the Pope is inaugurated.

Porrection, (lat.) a stretching out.

Portable, (lat.) to be carried, or
born.

Portcullis, (French) the falling gate of a
Citie, which is made to slip down, to keep out the enemy.

Portegue, a certain Coyn in Gold,
valuing three pound ten shillings.

Portemote, (from Port, i. a Haven,
and the Dutch word Gemetan, i. to meet) a Court
kept in Havens, or Port Towns.

Portentous, (lat.) prodigious,
portending, or
betokening some ill to come.

Portglaive, (French) a sword-bearer.

Portgreve, a prefect,
or chief Governour of a
Port Town, in ancient times the chief Magistrate of
London, was so called.

Portguidon, (French) the Cornet, or
Ensign-bearer, to a Troup of horse, or men at Arms.

Not found in OED.



Portmanteau, (French) a kind of
Cloak-bagge.

Portmen, a name commonly given to the
inhabitants of the Cinque Ports.

Portpain, (French) a kinde of Towel used at
Court, wherein they carry their bread to serve for the Table.

Portsale, a sale of fish, presently upon
return into the haven; also
a publick sale like that of the ancient Romans, who used
per præconem sub hasta vendere.

Posade, (French) a respite, or
breathing; also a lighting down of birds.

Not found in OED.



Pose, see Catarre.

Position, (lat.) a putting; also a Term in
Logick, a foundation upon which an argument is built.

Possession, (lat.) an absolute injoyment of
any thing, in Common-law it is taken for Lands &
Inheritance, or for the actual injoyment of them.

Possibility, (lat.) likelyhood.

Posteriority, (lat.) a being after, or
behinde; also in Common-law a man holding
Tenements of two Lords, is said to hold of the first by
Priority, of the last by Posteriority.

Posthume, (lat.) a Child, born after the
death of the father; also Posthume works are writings
publish't after the death of the Author.

Postick, (lat.) being behinde, or on the
back-side.

Postil, a compendious exposition,
containing more then hath been observed before,
from the Latin post illud, i. after that.

Postillon, (French) a Posts guide, or
fore-runner; also he that rides upon one of the foremost
of the Coach-horses, when there are six.

Postliminie, (lat.) the return of one, who
was thought to be dead.

Postmeridian, (lat.) done in the
afternoon.

Postnate, (lat.) the same as
Posthume.



Postpone, (lat.) to set behinde, to esteem
lesse then another.


Postposure, (lat.) a setting behind.

Postvene, (lat.) to come after.

Postulation, (lat.) a requiring, or
demanding.

Potable, (lat.) fit to be drunk.

Potatoes, a sort of Indian fruit,
whose root is of great virtue.

Potent, or Potential, (lat.)
powerfull, able, indued with might.

Potent, in Blazon, expresseth the
resemblance of the top of a crowtch.

Potentate, (lat.) one powerfull, or
mighty.

Potulent, (lat.) that may be drunk.

Pouches, a Term in Navigation, small
bulk-heads made in howld, either
thwartships, or longst ships.

Poul-davies, or Ouldernesse, see Medrinacles.

Pounce, (Spanish Poncar, Latin
pungere) to jagge, or cut in and out.

Pounces of Hawks, the claws, from the Latin
Pungere.

Poundage, a subsidie granted to the King
out of all Merchandizes, to the value of twelve pence in the pound.

Pourcontrel, the same as Polypus.

Pourmenade, (French) a walk, or
Gallery open over head.

To make Pourparty, to sever the Lands that
fall to partners, which before partition
they held joyntly.

Pourpresture, (French) an inclosure;
also an incroaching upon any
Land, or Jurisdiction that belongs to the King.

Poursuivants, (French) followers, also messengers attending the King in
wars, or to be sent upon any special occasion, or message;
the four Poursuivants at Arms are those that
attend the Heralds, and are called
Bluemantle, Rougecrosse, Rougedragon, and
Percullis.

Pourtraiture, (French) a delineating, or
drawing a Pourtraict, i. a picture, or image of any thing.

Pourveyour, (French) an Officer of the
King, or other great personage that
provides Corn, and other victual for the house.

Power of the County, the attendance of all
Gentlemen, Yeomen, Labourers, &c. within the
County, above the age of fifteen,
that are capable to bear arms.

Pownd, in Common-law, signifieth an
inclosure to keep beasts in, but more especially a place
of strength, where Cattell distrained for any trespasse
are put, untill they be replevied, or distrained.

Poynings Law, an Act of Parliament, whereby
the Laws of England became of force in
Ireland; so called, because it was made when Sir
Edward Poynings was Lieutenant of Ireland.


P R

Pragmatical, (Greek) busie, or expert in
many things.

Practick, or Practical, (Greek)
ready to practise, or deal in any Art, or Science, also
substantively taken for any Art, or Science.

Prandicle, (lat.) a breakfast, or
repast.

Pratique, (Ital.) the same as practick,
also a licence to traffick.

Præamble, see Preface.

Præbendary, (from the Latin
Præbere, to afford) he that receives a
Præbend, i. a portion
allowed for the maintenance of the Members of a Cathedral
Church; he is also so called
from affording his Counsel, and assistance to the Bishop.

Præcaution, (lat.) a fore-seeing,
fore-warning, or preventing.

Præcedence, (lat.) a going before, also a
surpassing, or excelling.

Præcellence, (lat.) an exceeding, or
excelling.

Præcention, (lat.) the flourish, or
entrance of a song, or ballad.

Preceptive, (lat.) belonging to a
precept, i. a
teaching, instruction, or lesson; also a Command.

Præceptories, certain benefices, anciently possest by the
better sort of Templers.

Præcidaneous, (lat.) that, which is cut,
killed, or sacrificed before.

Præcipice, (lat.) a steep place, a
downright descent.

Præcipitation, (lat.) a casting down
headlong; also rashnesse, or unadvisednesse;
also a Term in Chymistry, being a steeping, or dissolving
of metals, or other bodies in corroding liquours.

Præcocity, (lat.) a too early, or
overhasty ripening of fruits.

Præcognition, (lat.) fore-knowledge of any
thing.

Præcontract, (lat.) a former bargain, or
contract.

Præcursour, (lat.) a fore-runner, a
messenger sent before.



Prædation, (lat.) a preying, robbing, or
spoiling,


Prædecessour, (lat.) an Ancestour or
Fore-father,

Prædestination, (lat.) a pre-appointing,
fore-ordaining, or designing before what shall come after.

Prædial, (lat.) belonging to Lands,
Manours, or Farms.

Prædicable, Prædicament, and
Prædicate, (lat.) three words which are most
commonly used as terms in
Logick, Prædicables (which are 5. viz.
genus, species, proprium, differentia, and
accidens) are those things which may truly,
naturally, and immediately, be affirmed of more things than one.
Prædicaments (which are also called
Categories, and are 10 in all, viz.
Substance, Quantity, Quality, Relation, Action, Passion, Where, When,
Situation, and Habit) are the Series of things
gradually disposed under
the same summum genus. A Prædicate is
the last part of the Proposition or the major term of a Syllogisme.

Prædiction, (lat.) a foresaying, or
foretelling.

Prædominant, (lat.) bearing chief sway or
rule.

Præeminence, (lat.) a being to be set
before others for eminence or excellence.

Præexistent, (lat.) existing or being
before.

Præface, (as it were a speaking before,
from the Latin Præ, and fari) a
prologue or preparatory speech before any
discourse. It is also called a Præamble, which is as it were a walking
before.

Præfect, (lat.) a Governour or chief Ruler
of a City or Province; there was also anciently a chief
Officer in the Roman Empire called Præfectus Prætorio.

To Præfer, (lat.) to advance or set
before others.

Prægnant, (lat.) great with child, also
ripe, forward, of a prompt and ready wit.

Prægnotaries, signifies in Common law, the
chief Clerks of the Kings Court, whereof three are of the
Common pleas, and one of the Kings Bench.

Prægression, (lat.) a going before.

Prægustation, (lat.) a tasting or trying
before.

Præjudication, (lat.) a judging before
hand; whence Præjudice is used for hurt or hinderance.

Prælation, (lat.) a preferring or setting
before.

Prælections, (lat.) Lectures, or
Readings before.

Prælude, (lat.) a proæm or entrance
into any discourse or subject; also in Musick it
is taken for a voluntary or flourish upon any instrument.

Præmature (lat.) ripe before.

Præmeditation, (lat.) a fore-thinking, a
musing of a thing before hand.

Præmission, (lat.) a sending before,
whence the præmises, i. things sent out or
spoken of before.

To fall into a Præmunire, signifieth in
Common Law, to forfeit a mans goods to the Prince, and his
body to remain in prison: it is a word corruptly used for
præmonere, i.
to admonish or forewarn, and is taken either for the writ,
or for the offence whereupon the writ is granted.

Præmonition, (lat.) a forewarning.

Præmunition, (lat.) a fortifying before
hand.

Prender, a word used in Common Law, things
which lie in prender are those things which the Lord of a
Manour may have before atturnment, as the ward of the
body of an heir, or of the
land escheats; whereas those things which lie in Render he
cannot take before atturnment; as rents, releifs, heriots,
&c.

Prænomination, (lat.) a forenaming.

Prænotion, (lat.) foreknowledge.

Prænunciation, (lat.) a fore-shewing, or
declaring before hand.

Præoccupation, (lat.) a possessing before
hand, also a preventing.

Præpensed, (French) fore-thought.

To Præponderate, (lat.) to weigh well, or
consider before hand.

Præposition, (lat.) a putting before, also
one of the eight parts of Speech in
Grammar, so called
because it is set before a Noun or a Verb.

Præposterous, (lat.) rash, headlong, out
of order.

Præpuce, (lat.) the foreskin which
covereth the nut of the yard.

Prærogative, (lat. a having ones opinion
first askt) a priviledge, a peculiar authority or
præeminence.

Præsage, (lat.) a foreguessing or
foretelling.

Presbytery, (lat.) Priesthood, Eldership,
or a government of the Church by Elders.

Præscience, (lat.) foreknowledge.



Præscription, (lat.) a prescribing,
limiting, or determining by a rule or law; also the course or use of
any thing for a long time.


Præsentaneous, (lat.) present, ready,
speedy, effectual.

Præsentation, (lat.) a shewing or setting
forth; also in Common Law presentation is the offering or
presenting of any one by his Patron to the Bishop, to be
instituted in a Benefice of his gift.

Præsepe, a constellation in 2 degrees 13
minutes of Leo.

To Præside, (lat.) to rule or have
authority over.

Præsidiary, (lat.) belonging to a
Præsidy, i. a
Garrison of souldiers, also aid, help, or defence.

Prest-money, (from the French
Prest, i. ready, prompt) money that bindeth those
who have received it, to be ready at all times appointed.

Præstigiation, (lat.) a deceiving,
jugling, or playing the impostor.

Præsumption, (lat.) a taking upon one, a
being proud or arrogant.

Prætence, or Prætext, (lat.) a
cloak or colour for any thing, also Prætence or
Prætension,
a claim or title to any thing.

Præterition, (lat.) a going by, a
passing over.

Prætermission, (lat. as it were a sending
besides) a suffering to passe by, a leaving out or omitting.

Prætorian, (lat.) belonging to a Prætor,
i. one that was anciently the chief Ruler of any
Province or Country subject to the Roman Empire, and he
had supream authority
not onely in Military affairs, but also in matters of
judgement; also the Prætorian Guard was a Band of
souldiers consisting of 10000 who were peculiarly to
attend upon the Emperours person.

Prævarication, (lat.) deceit or
double-dealing.

Prævious, (lat.) leading the way, or going
before.

Prasutagus, an ancient King who
reigned over a people of Brittain called the Iceni.

Pravity, (lat.) crookednesse, deformity,
also naughtinesse, leudnesse.

The Prerogative Court, a certain Court
belonging to the Civil Law, in which the Commissary sits
upon Inheritances fallen either by the Intestate, or by
Will and Testament.

Priamus, the son of Laomedon King
of Troy, he having been led captive by
Hercules into
Greece, was afterwards ransomed for a great summe
of money: He had 50 sons whereof 17 he had by his wife Hecuba; in his
time it was that Troy was taken and sackt by the
Greeks.

Priapismus, (lat.) a disease wherein there
is an erection of the yard without lust, from
Priapus the son of Bacchus and
Venus, he being born at Lampsacus,
became through the malice
of Juno, who was his mothers Midwife, very ugly
and deformed, yet he had
something about him so pleasing to the women of
Lampsacus that after he was banisht by the men of
that place, they built a Temple to him where they were
wont to sacrifice an asse, and called him the god of Gardens.

Pricker, a term in Hunting, being used for
a Huntsman on horseback.

Pricketh, a term in Hunting, when a Hare
beates in the plain highway where you may yet perceive her
footing; it is said she pricketh.

Pricket, a brocket, spitter, or young male
Deer of a year or two old, beginning
to put forth the head.

Pridian, (lat.) belonging to the day
before.

Primacy, (French) the first place or chief
rule, especially in Ecclesiastical
affairs, whence a Metropolitan or Arch-Bishop is called a Primate.

Primage, a duty due to Mariners for loading
of a Ship, at the first setting forth from any Haven.

Prime, (lat.) first or principal, also
taken substantively for the first hour of the day; whence
a Primer is a kind of little prayer book containing
prayers, responsories, and antiphones, chosen for that hour of the day.

A Prime, is n Surveying, an exact part
containing 19 inches and four fift parts of an inch.

Primævous, (lat.) of a former age,
elder.

Primero, and Primavista, (Ital.)
two games at Cards formerly much in use.

Primier seisin, a word used in Common Law,
a branch of the Kings prerogative, whereby he hath the
first possession of all Lands and Tenements through the Realm.

See OED, "premier," a. and n., 2 (1652 quotation).



Primigenious, (lat.) coming naturally, or
having its original from it self.

Primitial, (lat.) belonging to the first
fruites.



Primitive, (lat.) ancient, or of the first Age.


Primogeniture, (lat.) a first birth, also a
being eldest or first born.

Primordial, (lat.) belonging to the first
original or beginning of all things.

Primum mobile, (lat.) the tenth or
highest Orb, so called by
Astronomers, as being the
first, and upon which the motion of the inferiour Orbs depends.

Principality, (lat.) the dignity or chief
seat of a Soveraign Prince; also
Principalitie is taken for one of the Orders of Angels.

Princox (from the Latin Præcox) a
hasty or over-ripe headed young boy.

Priority, (lat.) see Posteriority.

Prisage, a custom or share belonging to the
King out of such merchandises as are taken by way of lawful prize.

Priscilla, the proper name of a woman,
being a diminutive of Prisca, which
signifieth in Latin ancient.

Priscillianists, a sort of Hereticks
instituted by one
Priscillianus, they denied the Persons of the
Trinity, and held that things had their beginning from two
Gods, the one good, and the other bad.

Prism, (Greek) a certain Geometrical figure 
being a solid triangle.

Pristine, (lat.) former, ancient,
wonted.

Pristis, (lat.) a kind of fish very long
and slender; also a Ship fashioned long and narrow after
the manner of that fish.

See OED "sawfish."



Privado, (Span.) a favorite.

Privation, (lat.) a depriving,
bereaveing, or taking away.

Priviledge, that which is granted to any
person or place, against or beside the course of Common Law.

Probability, (lat.) likelihood.

Probat of testaments, the producing of dead
mens Wills before the Ecclesiastical Judge, Ordinary of
the place where the dead man dieth.

Probation, (lat.) a proving or trying;
whence a Probationer in the University, is one that is to
be approved and allowed of by the Colledge for his
doctrine and manners, before he be chosen Fellow.

Probe, a Chyrurgions Instrument
wherewith he tryeth the
depth of wounds.

Probity, (lat.) honesty, goodnesse,
integrity.

Problematical, (lat.) belonging to a
Problem, i. a hard question
propounded to any one to explain.

Proboscide, (Greek) the snout of an
Elephant.

Procacity, (lat.) saucinesse,
malepertnesse, scoffing.

Procatarctick, (Greek) as
Procatarctick cause,
that cause which foregoeth or beginneth another cause.

Procerity, (lat.) heighth of stature,
tallnesse.

Processe, (lat.) the manner of
proceeding in every
cause be it personal or reall, civil or criminal, even
from the original writ to the end.

Procession, (lat.) a passing on, a going
forward, also a custom among Clergymen
of passing along the streets singing of Psalms, making
supplications and visiting the bounds of the Parish.

Prochronism, (Gr.) an errour in
Chronology, or the
computation of time.

Prochyta, an Island in the
Tyrrhene sea, not far from Puteoli in
Campania, so called
from Prochyta the Nurse of Aeneas; it
hath been reported of old, that a mountain of
Inarime a neighbouring Island
being cast into the Sea by an Earthquake, was the original of this Island.

Procidence, (lat.) the falling down of any
thing out of its place.

Procinct, (lat.) a being prepared, or in a
readinesse.

Proclivity, (lat.) an aptnesse, propensity,
or inclination to any thing.

Proconsul, (lat.) one in the stead or place
of a Consul, a deputy Consul.

Procrastination, (lat.) a delaying or
putting off from time to time.

Procreation, (lat.) an ingendering or
begetting.

Proctors, (in Latin Procuratores) 
Advocates, or those
that sollicit other mens businesses; also those that
appear in Parliament
for Cathedral or other collegiate Churches, or for the
common Clergy of every diocesse. There are also in the
University two men chosen from among the Schollars to see good orders kept
and exercises performed,
who are called Proctors. Also in the State of
Venice there are certain
chief officers called Procurators.

Proculcation, (lat.) a trampling, or
treading under foot.

Procyon, the lesser Dog-Star.

Prodigality, (lat.) riotous, or wastefull
expence.

Prodigy, (lat.) a monstrous or unnatural
action, betokening some great evil to come.



Proditorious, (lat.) belonging to
Prodition, i. treason, or treachery, traytour-like.


Prodrome, (Greek) a Præcursour,
or fore-runner.

Production, (lat.) a producing, or
bringing forth (whence
the product in Arithmetick
is any number brought forth out of another) also a
lengthning, or making longer.

Profanation, (lat.) a putting holy things
to a common use.

Profection, (lat.) a walking forward, or
going any journey; in Astronomy
Profection, and Progression are all one, being no more then a
regular change of the significators,
according to the succession of the signs.

Professour, (lat.) a Lecturer, or Reader of
any Art, or Science in the publick Schools of a University.

Proficient, (lat.) helping forward, or
profiting.

Profile, (Ital.) a Term in painting,
being a picture onely drawn side-wayes.

Profligation, (lat.) a driving away, or
putting to flight.

Profluence, (lat.) a flowing plentifully,
abundance.

Profound, is oft-times joyned to other words, to add a weight and
aggravation to them, as profound reverence. Cleopatra.

Profundity, (lat.) a great depth, a deep
extent.

Profusion, (lat.) a powring out lavishly, a
wasting.

Progeny, (lat.) an off-spring, or issue,
whence Progenitour, a fore-father, or ancestour.

Progne, see Philomela.

Prognostication, (lat.) a foretelling of
things to come.

Progression, (lat.) a making progresse, or going foreward.

Prohibition, (lat.) a forbidding, in
Astronomy it is, when
two Planets are applying
to Conjunction, or Aspect, and before
they come to joyn themselves, another
comes to Conjunction, or Aspect of the Planet applied to.

Projections, a Mathematical Term, all sorts
of Globes, or Spheres in Plano.

Projecture, (lat.) a forecasting, or
designing; also a Term
in Architecture, a jutting out in pillars, or buildings.

Prolatation, (lat.) a delaying, or
deferring.

Prolation, (lat.) a putting forth, a
pronouncing, or speaking plain.

Proleptical, (Greek) belonging to a
Prolepsie, i. a
conceaving of things in the minde before-hand, a figure
wherein we prevent what another intendeth to alleadge.

Proletaneous, or Proletarious,
(lat.) having many Children, and little to maintain
them, of a mean, or low condition.

Prolifical, (lat.) apt to breed, or
bring forth, fruitfull. Prolifical signes are
Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces.

Prolixity, (latin) teadiousnesse in
speech.

Prologue, (Greek) a Preface, a Speech which
commends to the people a Comedy,
or Fable, or the Author of it.

Proloquutour, (lat.) he that speaks
before others, a Chair-man,
or Speaker of a Synod, or Convocation-house.

Prolusion, (lat.) as it were a playing
before, an Essay, or making tryal before hand of what a
man is able to do.

Prolyte, (Greek) one that hath studied the
Law four year, a Licentiate.

Not found in OED.



Prometheus, the father of
Deucaleon, and son of Iapetus and
Asia, he having formed of Clay the Image of a
man, and climbing up to Heaven by the help of
Minerva, he kindled a little stick at the Sun,
and with that celestial fire, inlivened the man he had
made, for which he was at the command
of Jupiter, bound by Mercury to the
Mountain Caucasus, where a Vulture was
continually pecking at his Liver, but afterwards having
diswaded Jupiter from marrying Thetis,
he was for his good counsel freed by Hercules.

Prominence, (lat.) a jutting, or
standing out farther then another.

Promiscuous, (lat.) mingled, or confused one
with another.

Promontorie, (lat.) the top of a Hill,
butting out upon the Sea.

Promoters, or Promouters, those
men, who for complaining of such as offend in
actions bearing a penalty,
have part of the profit for their reward.

Promptitude, (lat.) quicknesse, or
readinesse.

Promptuarie, (lat.) a Cellar, or
Buttery.

Promulgation, (lat.) a proclaiming, or
publishing by hanging any Law in the open market place.

Prone, (lat.) stooping downward, or lying
with the face downward.



Pronephew, (lat.) a Nephew, or
Grandchilds son.


Prooem, (lat.) a preface, or prologue, an
entrance into any discourse.

Propagation, (lat.) a planting of many
young Vines from the old one cut down; also a spreading
abroad, the multiplying of a stock.

Propelled, (lat.) thrust out, or driven forward.

Propension, (lat.) a pronenesse, or
inclination to any thing.

Properation, (lat.) a doing a thing
quickly, a making haste.

Prophetical, (Greek) belonging to
Prophesie, i. a foretelling of things to come by
certain hidden, and mysterious speeches.

Propination, (lat.) a drinking to any
one.

Propinquity, (lat.) nearnesse, or
neighbourhood, also affinity.

Propitiatory, (lat.) a place where God is
pacified.

Propitious, (lat.) favourable, whence
Propitiation, an appeasing of Gods displeasure by
sacrifice, or prayer.

Propontis, all that Sea that reacheth from
the Streights of Hellespont, to the Bosphorus Thracius.

Proportion, (lat.) a convenience, or
answerablenesse of
one thing to another.

Proposition, (lat.) a propounding, or
shewing what one intends to speak of;
also the major, or first term
in Logick.

Proprætor, (lat.) a Deputy
Prætor, or Chief Justice.

Proprietary, (French) an owner, or he that
hath a property in any thing, or one that hath the fruit
of a benefice to himself and his Heirs.

Propudious, (lat.) shamefull, filthy,
dishonest.

Propugnacle, (lat.) a Bulwark, or
Fortresse, whence
propugnation, a defending, or fighting for.

Propulsation, (lat.) a chasing away, or
driving back.

Proreption, (lat.) a creeping, or
stealing on by little and little.

Proritation, (lat.) a stirring up, or
provoking.

Prorogation, (lat.) a deferring, or
putting off to another
time; it is spoken more especially of the adjourning of a
Parliament, or Councel.

Prosaick, (lat.) belonging to prose.

Proscription, (lat.) a banishing, or
outlawing, a making it lawfull for any man to kill the Proscript, or person
outlawed, where ever he findeth him.

Prosecution, (lat.) a following, or
pursuing eagerly.

Proselyte, (Greek) a stranger converted to
our faith, it was heretofore meant onely of one converted
from Heathenisme to the Jewish religion.

Proserpina, the daughter of
Jupiter and Ceres, she being ravisht by
Pluto, was sought for by Ceres all over
the earth, but after the whole matter was related by the
Nymph Cyane, Jupiter at her earnest request, granted that her
daughter should return again to earth, on condition she
had tasted no meat since she came to Hell, but
Ascalaphus having declared that she had eaten
part of a Pomegranate (for which Ceres turned him
into an Owl) she could obtain no more, but that she should
be 6 moneths upon earth, and 6 moneths with
Pluto.

Prosodie, (Greek) the art of giving words
their due accent, or tone.

Prosopopæa, (Greek) a certain figure,
wherein divers things are personated, which are not real.

A Prospect, (lat.) a view, or sight of any
thing afar off.

Prospicuous, (lat.) fair, or goodly to
behold.

Prosternation, (lat.) a throwing to the
ground, or laying flat, an overcoming.

Prostitution, (lat.) a Harlots letting out
the use of her body for hire.

Prostration, (lat.) a falling at ones
feet.

Protatick, (lat.) belonging to a
Protasie, i. a
proposition; also the first part of a Comedy.

Protelation, (lat.) a driving, or chasing
away.

Protend, (lat.) to stretch forth.

Protervity, (lat.) way-wardnesse, or
frowardnesse.

Protesilaus, the son of Iphiclus,
who going to the Trojan war, contrary to the Oracles advice, was
slain by Hector.

Protestation, (lat.) an open declaring of
ones minde, whence the Reformers in
Germany, from the
protestation they made at Spires, were called Protestants.

Proteus, a Sea deity, the son of
Oceanus and Thetys, he was reported to
have been Neptune's Sheapheard, and the keeper
of his Sea-calfs; the Poets also feign that he was a
great Prophet, and that he could



transform himself into what shape he pleased,
Servius affirms that he reigned in the
Carpathian Island, leaving
Pallene, a Citie of Thessaly, where he first lived.


Protocol, (Greek) the first draught of a
deed, contract, or instrument, or a short Register kept
thereof; also the upper part of the leaf of a book,
wherein the Title is written.

Protolicia, a Castle in
Northumberland, where in King Henry the
second's reign, William King of Scots
laying siege to it, received a repulse; it is thought to
have been the same with that, which is now called
Prudhow-Castle.

Protologie, (Greek) a fore-speech, or
Preface.

Protomartyr, (Greek) the first Martyr, or
witnesse of the New Testament.

Protoplast, (Greek) first formed, or
made.

Prototype, (Greek) the Original type, or
first pattern.

Protraction, (lat.) a putting off,
deferring, or delaying of time.

Protractor, a certain Mathematical
instrument made of
brasse, consisting of the Scale and Semicircle, used in
the surveying of Land.

Protreptick, (Greek) doctrinal, or
giving instructions.

Protrusion, (lat.) a thrusting
forward.

Protuberant, (lat.) rising, or swelling
out.

Protype, (Greek) an Example, or Copy, after
which any thing is made.

Proveditor, (Italian, as it were a
providour) a great
Military Officer among the Venetians.

Proverbial, (lat.) belonging to a
proverb, i. an adage, or old saying.

Provincial, (lat.) belonging to a
Province; also a Provincial is taken substantively
for a chief Governour of an Order of Fryars.

Proviso, (Ital.) a caveat, or condition,
made in any writing, without the
performance, of which the writing becomes void.

Provocation, (lat.) a provoking, stirring
up, or challenging.

Proul, to pilfer, or steal in the night.

Prow, (old word) honour, also the
fore-castle of a ship; also a point jutting out in a building.

Provost, a President of a Colledge, or Cathedral Church; also a
chief Magistrate of a Town.

Proximity, (lat.) nearnesse, or
neighbourhood, a nigh degree of kindred.

Prudence, the Christian name of divers
women, the signification well known.

Pruinous, (lat.) frosty, covered with
frost.

Prunel, an Herb, otherwise called
sicklewort.

Prunella, a kind of fruit, or Plum,
somewhat like a Prune.

Pruneth, a Term in Faulconry, they say a
Hawk Pruneth, and not picketh her self; yet a
Hawk cannot be said properly to prune her self, but when
she beginneth at her legs, and fetcheth moisture at her
tail, wherewith she embalmeth her feet, and striketh the
feathers of her wings through her beak, and this fetching
off the Oyl is called the Note.

Prurient, (lat.) itching, or having an
itching desire.

Pruriginous, (lat.) having the itch.


P S

Psalmodie, (Greek) a singing of Psalms, or
verses made of short songs, or sentences.

Psalmographie, (Greek) a writing of
Psalms.

Psaltery, (Greek) a certain Musical
instrument with ten
strings, somewhat like a Harp, some call it a Shalm.

Psephisme, (Greek) an Ordinance,
Statute, or Decree.

Pseudography, (Greek) a false writing, or
counterfeit hand.

Pseudologie, (Greek) a false speaking, or
lying.

Pseudomartyr, (Greek) a false witnesse, a
counterfeit Martyr.

Pseudoprophet, (Greek) a false
Prophet.

Psychomachy, (Greek) a conflict, or war of
the Soul.


P T

Ptisane, (lat.) a kinde of drink made of
Barly.

Ptolomæus, one of Alexander the
Great's Captains; also the name of several Kings of Aegypt.


P U

Puberty, (lat.) youth, the age when hairs
begin to grow about the privy members.



Publican, a Farmer of publick Rents, or Revenues.


Publication, (lat.) a publishing, or
making common.

Pucelage, (French) Virginity.

Pucle-Church, a Town in
Glocershire, in times past, a Mannour of the Kings; where King
Edmund interposing himself between his Sewer and
one Leove a ruffian to part them as they were
quarreling, was thrust through the body, and so lost his life. 

Pudibund, (lat.) bashfull, or
shame-fac't.

Pudicity, (lat.) chastity, or
purity.

Puerility, (lat.) boyishnesse,
childishness. or simplicity.

Puerperous, (lat.) bearing children, or
causing to bear children.

Pugill, (lat.) a small handfull.

Pugillation, (lat.) a playing the
Champion, a fighting for any one.

Pugnacity, (lat.) an eager desire of
fighting.

Puisne, or Puny, (French as it
were born after) a word used in common Law for the younger.

Puissance, (French) power, force,
might.

Pulchritude, (lat.) fairnesse, or tallnesse
of person.

Pulicous, (lat.) full of fleas.

Pullation, (lat.) a hatching of
chickens.

Pullulation, (lat.) a springing, a
budding forth, a shooting up.

Pulmonary, (lat) the herb Lungwort.

Pulmonarious, (lat.) diseased in the
Lungs.

Pulp, (lat.) the brawny or musc'ly part of
the body; also a kind of fish, otherwise called a Cuttle-fish or Polypus.

Pulsation, (lat.) a knocking, striking, or
beating upon.

Pulverisation, (lat.) a breaking to dust, a
reducing into powder.

Pulverulent, (lat.) dusty, full of
powder.

Pumication, (lat.) a making smooth with a
Pumice-stone, i. a stone that is spongy and full of holes.

Punch, a kind of Indian drink.

Pungency, (lat.) a pricking.

Punctillo, (Ital.) a diminutive of Puncto,
i. a little point; also a thing of no value or moment.

Punick faith, falshood or perjury.

Punition, (lat.) a chastising or
correcting.

Puny, see Puisne.

Pupill, (lat.) the ball or apple of the
eye, also derived from Pupillus, it
signifieth an Orphan or fatherlesse Child, one under age or ward, or the tuition of a Tutor.

Purbeck, a demy Island in
Dorcetshire, in the midst of which standeth
Corf Castle, where Aelfrith to make way
for her own son Ethelred to the Crown, caused her
son in law Edward to be barbarously murthered as he came
from hunting to visit her.

Purfle, (French pourfile) a guard,
border, or fringe about any garment.

Purflew, a term in Heraldry, common to all
furs so long as they are used in borders.

Purgatory, (lat.) a place of cleansing or
purging, a certain place where the
Roman Catholicks say the souls of men are cleansed before they go to Heaven.

Purification, (lat.) a purifying, a
making clean or pure.

Purlue, (French, as it were pure ground)
all that ground near any Forrest, which being anciently
made Forrest, is afterwards by perambulations severed again from the same.

To Purloin, to lurk, to get privily away.

Purple, or Purpure, signifieth in
Heraldry that colour which we commonly call red.

Purpurean, (lat.) made of Purple, or of the
colour of Purple.

Purulent, (lat.) full of matter or
filth.

Purveyour, see Pourveyour.

Pusilanimity, (lat.) cowardlinesse, or
faint-heartednesse.

Pustulous, (lat.) full of Pustules,
i. blisters, blaines, or wheales.

Putation, (lat.) a lopping or cutting off
superfluous branches; also a thinking, reputing, or esteeming.

Putrid, (lat.) corrupt, rotten, full of
matter, whence putrescence, corruption.

Puttocks, (a term in Navigation) small
shroudes which go from the maine, fore, and missen masts
shrouds, to the topmasts shrouds,

To Put over, a term in Faulconry. A Hawk is
said to put over when she removeth
her meat from her gorge into her bowels by traversing with
her body; but chiefely with her neck.


P Y

Pygmachy, (Greek) a fighting with
Hurlbats.



Pygmies, a certain people inhabiting the
uttermost mountains of India, not above a cubit
in heighth, of whom it is reported that they ride forth
in the Spring time upon Goats or Rams toward the Sea
side, armed with bows and arrows to destroy the nests of
the Cranes, which else would grow so numerous, that they
would not be able to overcome them.


Pyramidal, (Greek) belonging to a Pyramid,
i. a Geometrical figure, see Obelisk.

Pyrenæan hills, certain hills that divide
France from Spain.

Pyrotechnie. (Greek) any structure or
machination made by fire-works.

Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, also
a King of Epirus who made war with the Romans for
a long while, he was slain at the taking of
Argos, by the fall of a tile.

Pythagorical, belonging to
Pythagoras, a famous Philosopher, who was the
chief that held transmigration or the passing of soules
out of one body into another.

Pythonical, belonging to Python,
i. a prophecying spirit; also the name of a Serpent of a
very vast magnitude which was killed by Apollo,
in memory of which the Pythian Games were instituted.


Q U

QVabb, a kind of fish, called a water-weasel, or Eelpout.

Quacksalver, (Dutch) a Mountebank or simple
Physitian.

Quadragenarious, (lat.) belonging to 40
years.

Quadragesimal, (lat.) belonging to
Quadragesima, i. the fourtieth day before Easter, or first Sunday in Lent.

Quadrain, (French) a stanza or staff
consisting of 4 verses.

Quadrangular, (lat.) belonging to a
quadrangle, i. a foursquare figure.

Quadrant, (lat.) a certain Mathematical
Instrument, being the fourth part of a circle, also the
fourth part of any measure or number.

Quadrantal, (lat.) four fingers thick; also
a certain figure every way foursquare.

Quadrature, (lat.) a squaring, a making
square of any thing.

Quadriennial, (lat.) of four years.

Quadrigarious, (lat.) belonging to a Coach
or Charriot drawn with foure horses.

A Quadrin, (French) a mite or small piece
of money, valueing about a farthing.

Quadringenarious, (lat.) belonging to 4 hundred.

Quadripartite, (lat.) divided into four parts.

Quadrivial, (lat.) consisting of 4 wayes or turnings.

Quadrupedal, (lat.) having 4 feet.

Quadrupedian signs, representing four-footed beasts, Aries, Taurus, Leo,
Sagitarius, Capricornus.

Quadruplation, (lat.) a doubling four
times.

Quadruplication, (lat.) a folding of a
thing 4 times.

Quail, a kind of bird, called in Latin Cothurnix.

Quakers, a modern Sect of religious
Enthusiasts, who take that denomination from their strange gestures and quaking
fits which come upon them in their
publick Assemblies.

Quandary, (as it were quando ara,
i. when will the altar be ready) a studying or doubting what to do.

Quarantain, (French) Lent, or the term of
40 dayes before Easter.

Quardecue, (French) the fourth part of a
French crown.

Not found in OED.



Quare impedit, the name of a Writ that
lyeth for him that hath purchased a
Manour with an advouson
thereunto belonging,
against him that disturbeth him in the right of his advouson.

Quarentine, a right allowed by the Law of
England to the Widow of a landed man
deceased, of continuing 40 dayes after his decease
in his chief Manour-house.

Quarry, a place whence stones are
digged out, also a term in
Hunting, being a reward given to hounds after they have hunted.

Quarril, (French) a kind of coin
valuing 3 half pence of our mony, the fourth part of a real.

Not found in OED.



Quartan, (lat.) belonging to the
fourth.

Quartary, (lat.) the fourth part of a
sextary, i. two pound.

Quarter, a term in Blazon, being a fourth
part of an Escutcheon.

Quartile aspect, a term in Astronomy, the
distance of three signs between one star and another.

Quarto, a book is said to be in Quarto,
when it consisteth of sheets doubled into 4 leaves a piece.



Quassation, (lat.) a shaking or brandishing.


Quater cosins, fourth cosins, the last
degree of kindred; also such whose friendship declines.

Quaternion, or Quaternity, (lat.)
the number of four.

Quaver, one of the quickest times or pauses
in Musick.

Queenborough, a Town in Kent,
built by King Edward the third in honour of Queen
Philip his wife, who built Queens Colledge in Oxford.

Queint, (old word) quenched, also strange.

Quercine, (lat.) belonging to an oak.

Querimonious, (lat.) mourning, bewailing,
complaining.

Quern, a hand-mill.

Querpo, see Cuerpo.

Querulous, (lat.) singing or cherping
sorrowfully, declaring ones complaints.

Quest, or Inquest, a meeting of
Citizens to inquire what misdemeanours are committed in every Ward.

Questour, or Quæstour, (lat.) the
Chamberlain of a City, a publick Treasurer.

Quicksilver, a certain Mineral, being a
slimy water, mixt with a pure white earth.

Quiddity, a term in School-philosophy, the
essence of any thing, also a quirk or subtile question.

Quid pro quo, signifieth in Common Law, a
mutual performance of a contract by both parties.

Quincupedal, (lat.) having five feet, or of
the measure of five feet.

Quingenarious, (lat.) belonging to five
hundred.

Quinquagesime Sunday, the fiftieth
Sunday before Easter called Shrove Sunday.

Quinquangle, (lat.) having 5 corners or
angles.

Quinquennial, (lat.) five years old, or
lasting five years.

Quinquepartite, (lat.) divided into 5
parts.

Quinquereme, (lat.) a Gally having 5 ranks
of oares, or wherein every oare hath 5 men; as the Quadrireme
consisted of 4. and the Trireme of 3.

Quinsiesme, in Common Law, is a
certain tax laid upon the subject by the Prince, being the fifteenth part of mens
lands or goods.

Not found in OED.



Quintain, (French) a certain Game formerly
much in request at marriages, being a running a Tilt with
poles against a thick plank or Buttresse of wood,
wherein he that shewed most actively, had a Peacock for prize.

Quintal, (French) a hundred weight.

Quintessential, (lat.) belonging to
Quintessence, i. the purest substance extracted out of any
body, the chief force or vertue
of any thing.

Quintile, (lat.) the moneth of
July, being the fifth moneth from March.

Quintuple, (lat.) five-fold.

Quinzain, (French) a stanza or staff of 15
verses.

Quirinal hill, one of the 7 hills of
Rome, there is also a gate called Porta Quirinalis.

Quirister, see Chorister.

Quiritation, (lat.) a crying, calling or
shouting.

Quirites, a name anciently given to the Romans.

Quite claim, in Common Law, is an
acquitting of a man for
any action that he hath against him.

Quodlibetical questions, certain questions
disputed pro and con in the Schooles.

Justices of the Quorum, four Justices of
the peace in any County, whose presence is required in all
businesses of importance, their Commission beginning thus,
Quorum vos A B &c. unum esse volumus.

Quotidian, (lat.) daily, done every day.

Quotient, (lat.) a term in Arithmetick, the
number that riseth out of the divisour.

Quoyl, a term in Navigation, a rope laid up
round, one take over another.

Quoyn, a thing which Gunners set under their Ordnance to
mount them higher or let them lower.


R A

RAbbettings, a term in Navigation, the
letting in of the planks to the keel.

Rabbinical, belonging to a Rabbi or Rabbin,
i. a Doctor or Teacher among the Jews.

Rabid, (lat.) mad or raging.

Racemation, (lat.) a gathering of grapes
after the clusters are gone.

Racemiferous, (lat.) bearing clusters of grapes.

Rachel, the proper name of a woman, signifying in Hebrew a sheep.



Radegund, (Sax.) favourable counsel, a
Christian name of women.


Rade vore, (Sax.) Tapestry or
Loom-work.

Radiant, (lat.) bright, shining, or
glittering like the Sun-beams.

Radiation, a darting forth of beames.

Radical, (lat.) belonging to the root,
whence Radical moisture, the natural, and vital moisture
spread like a dew, through all parts of the body; in
Astrology a radical question, is a question propounded, when the Lord of the
ascendent, and Lord of the hour are of one nature and triplicitie.

Radication, (lat.) a taking root.

Raffinage, (French) a refining.

Raffle, (French) a kinde of Game at Dice,
also a rifling.

Raft, a kinde of Boat, or floating Vessel.

Ragounces, (Sax.) a kinde of precious
stone.

Not found in OED.



Raillery, (French) jesting, sporting, or
scoffing.

Raimund, (Germ.) a proper name,
signifying quiet; answering to the Greek Hesychius.

Rainbow, a Meteor of diverse colours,
fiery, blue, and green, when the Sunne beams are in a
Geometrical opposition to a shallow, and moist cloud.

Rally, (French) to reunite, to gather
together dispersed Troups.

Ralf, (Germ.) a proper name of men,
contracted from Rodulph, i. helpful counsell.

Ramagious, (French) wilde, belonging to
Ramage, i. boughs, or branches.

Rambooz, a kinde of compound drink.

Ramberge, (French) a kinde of swift Gally,
or long ship.

Ramist, a follower of Ramus, a
modern writer, famous for reducing many of the arts into a
handsom method and abridgement.

Ramosity, (lat.) fulnesse of branches, or
boughs.

Rampant, a Term in Heraldry, being spoken
of a beast climbing, or rearing up his fore-feet.

Rampier, or Rampert, (French) a
Term in fortification the wall of a bulwark, or fortresse.

Ramsey, a famous Abby in
Huntingtonshire,
so called as it were Rams Island; it was built in
the time of King Edgar, by his Kinsman
Ailwin, sirnamed Healf-Koning,
i. half King, and inlarged by Bishop Oswald.

Rancidity, or Rancour, (lat.)
mouldinesse, rottennesse, mustinesse; also malice, or inward
grudging.

Randal, (Sax.) a proper name, from
Ranulph, i. fair help.

Ransome, (French, contract: a
redemption) a summe of
money paid for the redeeming
of a Captive, or for the pardoning
of some hainous Crime.

Rapacity, (lat.) ravenousnesse,
extortion, greedinesse.

Rapes, certain divisions of the County of
Sussex; as Kent is divided into
Wapentakes,
these Rapes are six in all, namely of
Chicester, Arundel, Brembe, Lewise,
Pevensey and Hastings.

Raphæl, a proper name, signifying in
Hebrew the physick of God.

Rapidity, (lat.) swiftnesse, quicknesse,
hastinesse.

Rapine, (lat.) Robbery, Pillaging, a
taking a thing by open force, or violence.

Rapsodie, (Greek) a contexture, or joyning
together of divers verses, or sentences.

Rapture, (lat.) a snatching away by
violence; also an Ecstasie, or Transportment.

Rarity, thinnesse, it is by the
Phylosophers opposed
to Density, and that body is
said to be rare, whose quantity is more, and its substance lesse.

Rarefaction, (lat.) a rarefying, or
making thin.

Raskail, (old word) trash.

Raspatory, (French) a Butlers
instrument, wherewith
he chips bread.

Raspis, a kinde of fruit growing on a
shrub, called in French Framboise; as it were a wood Strawberry.

Ras-Algense, a Star in the Twin.

Ras-Alden, the head of Junonius.

Rasure, (lat.) a shaving, or
scraping.

Ratiocination, (lat.) a reasoning,
arguing, or discoursing.

Ratification, (lat.) a ratifying,
confirming, or making sure.

Rational, (lat.) reasonable indued with
reason; it is also substantively taken for a certain
Priestly attire among the Jews.

Ravage, (French) havock, spoyl, ransack.

Raucity, (lat.) hoarsnesse.

Ravenna, a famous Citie of Italie,
where anciently the Exarchs belonging to the Emperour of
Constantinople had their re­



sidence it is situate upon the Adriatick Seashore.


Ravishment, or Rape, the violent
deflouring of a woman;
also in Common-law, it is used for the taking away, either
of a woman, or an Heir in Ward.

Raunge, (Fr.) the Office of a
Raunger, who is to drive back the wilde beasts of
the Forest, as often as they Raunge out of the same into
any of the Purlues.

Ray, (French) a beam of the Sun, or any
other Star; also Metaphorically
taken for the lustre of any
glorious object. Cleopatra.


R E

Reach, a Term in Navigation, the
distance of any two
points of Land, which bear in a direct line one towards another.

Reading, the chief Town in
Bark-shire, so called from the River
Rhea, or from Brittish word
Redin, i. Fern, which
groweth thereabout in great plenty; here anciently
the Danes fortified themselves, and made a
Rampier between Kenet and
Tamis, when they
were defeated by King Aethelwolf.

Read, or Rede, (old word) councel,
advice, help.

Real, (Span.) a kinde of Spanish
Coyn, valuing about six pence of our money.

Ream, a certain measure of paper,
consisting of twenty quires.

Reasonable aid, in Common-law, is a duty
that the Lord of the fee claimeth, holding by Knights
service, or in soccage to marry his daughter, or make his son Knight.

Rebate, see Chamfering.

Rebate, a Term used among merchants, to
allow so much as the interest of any summe of money amount
to, for the time of antepayment; also a Term in Faulconry,
vide to Bate.

Rebecca, (Hebr.) fat and full, a proper
name of women.

Rebeck, an old Trot, Chaucer; also
a certain Musical instrument of 3 strings, called in Latin Sistrum, or Fidicula.

Rebellion, (Lat. as it were a rewarring) a
second resistance of such, as being
formerly overcome in battel by the Romans, had yielded themselves to their subjection.

Rebus, the expressing of any name,
conceit, motto, or devise by a picture; see Camdens Remains.

Rebutter, a Term in Law, is, when the
Donnee by virtue of a Warrantry made by the Donour repelleth the Heir.

Recalcitration, (lat.) a striking back with
the heel.

Recantation, (lat.) a revoking, or
unsaying what was said before.

Recapitulation, (lat.) a brief
Repetition, a summing up the heads of a former discourse.

Recargaison, (French) a lading of a ship
homeward, a backfraught.

Recede, (lat.) to retire, to go
back.

Recent, (lat.) fresh, new, lately
done.

Recension, (lat.) a rehearsing, reckoning
or numbring.

Receptacle, (lat.) a place fit to receive,
or contain any thing, a ware-house, or store-house.

Reception, when two Planets are in each
others dignity, then they are said to
receive one another, and it is manifold, by house, by exaltation, by triplicity,
term, or face.

Recesse, (lat.) a recoyling, or going back,
a place of recreat, or retirement.

Recheat, a certain lesson, which
Hunters wind on their Horn, when the Hounds have lost their Game.

Recidivous, (lat.) falling, or sliding
back, to the same passe as it was before.

Reciprocal, (lat.) mutual, or
interchangeable, whence Reciprocation.

Recision, (lat.) a cutting away.

Recitation, (lat.) a reciting, or
rehearsing, whence Recitative stile in Musick is a kinde of singing,
wherewith Heroick, or Dramatick Poems are rehearsed upon the stage.

Reck, (old word) to care.

Recluse, (lat.) shut up, retired,
cloyster'd up in a solitary place.

Recognisance, (Fr.) signifieth in
Common-law, a Bond of
Record, testifying from the Recognisour to the
Recognizee, a certain summe of money, which is acknowledged in some
Court of Record before a Judge, or other Officer of the Court.

Recognition, (lat.) a revising,
re-acknowledging, or calling to minde.

Recollects, a certain Order of Fryars.

Recommendation, (lat.) a commending any one
to another.

Recopilation, (Span.) a picking, or
choosing out the best from among a great many things.



Record, (French) in Common-law,
signifieth an authentical, or uncontroulable testimony in writing.


Recordation, (lat.) a remembring, or
calling to minde.

Recorder, one whom the Magistrate of a Town doth associate unto him, for his better direction in
matters of Justice, and proceedings according to Law.

Recovery, in Common-law, signifieth an
obtaining of any thing by Judgement, or Tryal of Law.

Recourse, (lat.) refuge, or retreat.

Recoyle, (French Reculeer as it
were, retrahere culum, i. to draw back the tail) to retire, or go back.

Recreant, (French) fainthearted, not
standing to ones challenge; also treacherous.

Recreation, (lat. as it were a making, or
creating anew) a refreshing, reviving, or restoring.

Recrement, (lat.) the drosse scum, or dregs
of any thing.

Recrimination, (lat.) a retorting back a
fault upon the accuser.

Rectangle, (lat.) a right, or streight
angle, or corner, which is
made by the falling of one
line perpendicular upon another.

Rectification, (lat.) a rectifying, a
making right, or streight.

Recto sur disclamer, a Writ that lieth
where the Lord in the Kings Court doth avow upon his
Tenant, and the Tenant disclaimeth to hold of him.

Rectour, (lat.) a Governour, also he that
hath the charge, or cure of any Parish Church.

Rectus in curia, he that standeth at the
Bar, and hath no man to object any thing against him.

Reculade, (French) a recoiling, or going
back, also a secret corner.

Reculver, an ancient Town in Kent,
heretofore called Regulbium, here the
Captain of the first Band of the Vetasians lay in Garrison; it is also
famous for the Palace, built by Aethelbert, King
of Kent, and the Monastery built by
Brightwald, the eight Arch-bishop of
Canterbury, from which the Town came to be called
Raculfminster.

Recuperation, (lat.) a recovering.

Recurvation, (lat.) a crooking, bowing, or
bending backward.

A Recusant, a Roman Catholick, so
called from refusing to
submit to the Discipline
of the Reformed Church.

Redamation, (lat.) a loving again.

Redargution, (lat.) a disproving, a
convincing of falsity by solid arguments.

Redborn, (signifying as much as
redwater) a Town in Hertford-shire, seated
upon the Military High-way,
commonly called Watling-street, it hath been famous heretofore
for the Reliques of Amphibalus, who suffered
Martyrdom under Dioclesian,
and who converted St. Alban to the Christian
faith.

Reddition, (lat.) a restoring, or giving
back.

Redevable, (French) being in
arrearage, or behinde in payment, whence it is used in a translate sence, for
obleiged, or beholding to. Cleopatra.

Redhibition, (lat.) the causing of any one
by Law, to take that again which he sold.

Rediculus, a certain God worshipt
among the ancient Romans, without the Porta Capena, upon occasion of
Hannibals returning from Rome, being frighted
with certain apparitions.

Redintegration, (lat.) a renewing, a
making whole again.

Redition, (lat.) a returning, or coming
back.

Redituaries, a certain Order of Fryars,
being a branch of the Franciscans.

Redolent, (lat.) yielding a sweet smell,
fragrant.

Redonation, (lat.) a giving back, that
which was taken away.

Redoubt, a Term in fortification, the
jutting out of the angles, or corners of any work.

A Redstert, a certain bird, otherwise
called a Robin Redbreast, in Latin Rubicilla.

Redshanks, the Irish-Scots, are so
called from Reuda, an Irish Captain, who anciently, by force of
Arms, seated himself in a part of Scotland.

Redubbours, those that buy Cloath, which
they know to be stollen, and turn it into some other form, or fashion.

Reduction, (lat.) a reducing, or
bringing back.

Redversies, commonly called Rivers's, the
name of an honourable Family in Cornwal, who have
been heretofore Earles of Devonshire, and Barons
of Plimpton, they are stiled in Latin Records, de Ripariis.

Redundancy, (lat.) an overflowing,
abounding, or exceeding.



Reduplication, (lat.) a redoubling, a
Rhetorical figure, called in Greek
Anadiplosis, wherein a verse, or sentence ends in the same word as the following begins.


Reentry, in Common Law, is a
resuming or taking again possession of what we had last forgon.

Reev, or Greve, from the Saxon
word Gerefa, the Bailiff of a Franchise or Manour.

To Reeve, a term in Navigation, and spoken
of ropes, signifieth as much as to put in or to put through.

Refection, (lat.) a repast or meale.

Refectory, or Refectuary, a place
in Monasteries, where the Monks and Fryars eat together.

To Refell, (lat.) to disprove by
arguments, to confute, to prove false.

Referendary (lat.) an officer who
makes report of Petitions or Requests exhibited to any
Prince, more particularly one under
the Master of Requests in France.

Reflection, (lat.) a bowing or bending
back, a beating or striking back; also by metaphor a
casting back ones minde upon things past.

Reflux, (lat.) a flowing back, an
ebbing of the Sea or any River.

Refocillation, (lat.) a cherishing,
comforting, or reviving; also a kindling or keeping warm.

Reformado, (Span.) an officer who
having lost his men, is
continued in pay as an inferiour souldier.

To Reform, a term in Faulconry, for a Hawk
is not said to prune, but to reform her feathers.

Refractary, (lat. as it were
irrefrangible, i. unbreakable) stubborn or obstinate.

Refranation, is when a Planet is
applying to another, either by conjunction or aspect, and before he comes
joyned, he becomes retrograde.

Refret, (French Refrain) the
burthen of a Ballade or Song.

Refrigeration, (lat.) a refreshing or
cooling again.

Refuge, (lat.) a flying for succour or
safety, a place of respite or succour.

Refulgent, (lat.) shining bright.

To Refund, (lat.) to dissolve or melt
again, also to pay back.

Refutation, (lat.) a confuting by
arguments, a disapproving.

Regal, (lat.) Kingly, Royal, Stately; also
a Regal signifieth a Ring or Jewel of great value.

To Regale, (French) to fare like a King, to
intertain Royally.

Regalia, (lat.) the rights and
priviledges of a King.

Regardant, (French) looking back, a term in
Heraldry.

Regarder of the Forrest, is an officer of
the Kings Forrest, who is sworn to make the regard of the
Forrest, to surview all other officers, and to inquire of
all offences, as well of Vert as of Venison, within all that ground that is parcell
of the Forrest which is called the Regard.

Regards, (French) attentive
markings or observings of men and actions. Cleopat.

Regency, (lat.) a ruling, but more
particularly the Protectourship of a Kingdom.

Regeneration, (lat.) a new-birth, a
being born again spiritually.

Regermination, (lat.) a sprouting forth or
budding again.

Regicide, (lat.) a King-killer.

Regifugium, a certain Feast celebrated by
the ancient Romans the seventh Calends
of March, on which day Tarquin and
Kingly government were banished Rome.

Regiment, a body of souldiers
consisting of 10 Companies or Troops.

Register, (lat.) a Memorial or
Record,  more particularly our ancientest Book of the
Law, containing the Original Writs of the Common Law.

Reglutination, (lat.) a glueing again.

Regrater, a word anciently used in the
Common Law for him that bought by the great, and sold by
retaile; also one that trimmes up old wares for sale, a huckster.

Regression, or Regresse, (lat.) a
returning or going back.

Regret, (French) desire, also sorrow or
reluctance.

Regularity, (lat.) order, rule, or
prescript; also a Canonical life.

Marcus Attilius Regulus, a famous
Roman, who being taken by
the Carthaginians,
had leave given him to treat about the exchange of
prisoners, upon his word given to return by such a time,
which having performed, he
was put to death with exquisite torments.

Regurgitation, (lat.) a swallowing up
again.

Rejection, (lat.) a casting off.

To Reinbosce, (Span.) to return to the
wood, to lie in ambush again.



Rejoynder, in Common Law, signifieth a second
answer made by the defendant, or an exception to a
replication: the Civilians call it Duplication.


Reister, (French) or Ruyter, 
(Dutch) a horseman (whence Swartrutter, a
horseman with black armour) also a long horsemans cloak.

Reiteration, (lat.) a saying or doing the
same thing over again, a repeating.

Relaps, (lat.) a falling back into any
sicknesse.

Relative, (lat.) having relation or
nearnesse to some other thing.

Relaxation, (lat.) a loosening, a
releasing, a setting at liberty.

Relay, a term in Hunting, a setting of
hounds in a readinesse where the Deer are likely to passe.

Release, in the Common Law, is an
instrument, whereby estates, rights, titles, entrys, actions, and other
things, are sometimes extinguished sometimes
inlarged, sometimes transferred, and sometimes abridged.

Relief, in Common Law, is a certain summe
of money that the Tenant holding by knights-service,
grandsergeantry, or other Tenure, for which homage or
regal service is due, or by soccage for which no homage is
due; and being at full age at the death of his Ancestour,
doth pay to his Lord at his entrance. Also a term in
Architecture.

Relegation, (lat.) a sending or conveying
away, a banishing.

To Relent, (lat.) to grow soft; it is also
used metaphorically for to melt into pitty or compassion.

Relevation, (lat.) a raising or lifting up
again.

Relict, (lat.) a thing forsaken or left
destitute; also the Widow of a deceased husband, is called
the Relict of such a one.

Reliquary, (French) a shrine or casket
where reliques (i. something preserved either of
the body or cloths of deceased Saints) are kept.



Reliquation, (lat.) remains, or a being in
arrearage.

Reluctation, or Reluctance, (lat.)
a striving, wrestling,
or strugling against.

Remainder, in Common Law, signifieth a
power or hope to enjoy Lands, Rents or Tenements, after
the estate of another expired.

Remancipation, (lat.) a returning back a
commodity into the hands of him of whom it was first bought.

Remembrancers, three officers belonging to
the Exchequer; the first is called the Kings Remembrancer,
who entreth in his office all recognisanses taken before
the Barons, and maketh bonds for any of the Kings debts,
or for appearance or observing
of orders, and maketh proces for the breach of them. The
second the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, who puts him and
the rest of the Justices in remembrance
of such things as are to be dealt in for the Princes
behoof. The third is the Remembrancer of the first fruits
and tenths, who taketh all composition for first fruits
and tenths, and maketh process against such as pay not the same.

Remigation, (lat.) a rowing with
oares.

Reminiscence, (lat.) a remembring, or
calling to mind.

Remisse, (lat.) slack, negligent.

Remissible, (lat.) pardonable, or to be
forgiven.

Remitter, in Common Law, is a
restitution of him
that hath two titles to Lands, unto that which is more ancient.

Remonstrance, (lat.) a declaring,
shewing, or giving of reasons.

Remora, a fish called a Sea-lamprey or
Suckstone, which stoppeth the course of a Ship; also taken
metaphorically for any delay or hindrance.

Remorse, (lat.) as it were a rebiting or
gnawing again, the sting of conscience, or troubles of
mind for former evil actions.

Remuneration, (lat.) a rewarding or
recompensing for former good turus.

Remus, the brother of Romulus, who
slew him that he might obtain the whole dominion to himself.

Rencounter, (French) an unexpected
adventure, or meeting of two adverse parties.

Renavigation, (lat.) a sailing back.

Rendevous, (a word signifying in French
render your selves) a place where souldiers are mustred.

Rendlesham, or Rendlisham, a Town in
Suffolk, anciently the Mansion house of
Redwald King of the East Saxons, who
being the first of that Kingdom that was



baptized, neverthelesse by his wifes seducement, he had
in the same Church one altar for Christian Religion, and
another for his old heathen superstition.


Renegado, (Span.) a souldier that
revolts to the enemy.

Renimed, or Runningmead, a famous
meadow in the County of Middlesex, where in the
year of our Lord 1215 the Barons of England
assembled in great numbers to claim their liberties of King John.

Renitency, (lat.) a resistance or striving
against.

Renodation, (lat.) an unknitting or undoing
of a knot.

Renovation, (lat.) a making new or fresh, a
renewing.

Rent, in Common Law, is a summe of money or
other consideration issueing yearly out of Lands or Tenements.

Renversed, (French) turned the
contrary.

Renumeration, (lat.) a numbring,
counting, or paying back.

Renunciation, (lat.) a bringing word back
again.

Renvoy, (French) a dismission or
sending back.

Repandous, (lat.) bowed or bent
back.

Reparation, (lat.) a mending or making up
again.

Repast, (French, as it were a feeding
again) a meale.

Repastination, (lat.) the altering of
grounds with often digging.

Repensation, (lat.) a recompensing, or
making satisfaction.

Repentine, (lat.) sudden, unawares,
unexpected.

Repercussion, (lat.) a beating or
striking back.

Repertitious, (lat.) found by
chance.

Repignoration, (lat.) a redeeming a pawn or
gage.

Repletion, (lat.) a stuffing, or filling
full.

Replevy, the bringing of a Writ called
replegiari facias by him that hath his cattel or
other goods distraind, and putting
in surety to the Sheriff that upon delivery of the thing
distrained, he will pursue the action against him.

Replication, (lat.) an unfolding, also a
second answering or making a reply.

Report, in Common Law, is a relation or
repetition of a case debated or argued.

Reposition, (lat.) a putting back, a
setting again in his place.

Repository, (lat.) a storehouse, or place
to keep things in, more peculiarly by the
Architects, such places as are built for the laying up of
rareties either in picture or other arts are called
Repositories.

Reprehension, (lat.) a blaming or
reproving.

Representation, (lat.) a making the
resemblance or
likenesse of any thing.

Reprise, (French) a taking back again, also
any deduction or duty paid yearly out of a Manour.

Reprisell, (French) a seizing on for a pawn
or prize. see Law of Marque.

To Reprive, in Common Law, is to take back
a prisoner from the execution or proceeding of the Law.

Reprobation, (lat.) a reproving, also a
rejecting or casting out of favour, whence a Reprobate is
taken for a wicked person
or one cast out of gods favour.

Reptitious, (lat.) stealing or creeping on
by degrees.

Repton, a Town in Darbyshire,
famous in old times, for being the burial place of King
Aethelbald, and also for the misfortune of
Burthred, the last King of the
Mercians, who
was here deprived of his Kingdom by the Danes.

Republique, (lat.) a Common-wealth or
Free-State.

Repudiation, (lat.) a refusing, a putting
away or divorcing.

Repugnancy, (lat.) resistance,
contrariety of one thing to another.

Repullulation, (lat.) a budding forth, a
springing up again.

Repumication, (lat.) a slicking, or
raizing with a pumice.

Reputation, (lat.) esteem, reckoning, or
good opinion.

Request, (French) a petition or desire,
also a Court of the same nature with the Chancery,
redressing by equity the wrongs that divers men suffer,
either by Law or otherwise, at the hands of those that are
more powerfull than themselves.

To sing a Requiem, signifieth to sing a
Masse for the eternal rest of the soules of those that are
deceased, the word Requies
signifying in Latin rest.

Resceyt, (lat. receptio) in Common
Law is an admission of a third person to plead his right
in a cause between other two.

To Rescind, (lat.) to take away, to



destroy, or repeal, whence a Rescissorian Act, is that
which makes void a former Act, or Law.


Rescissorian action, (lat.) an action that
nulleth, or maketh void.

Rescous, in Common-law, is a resistance of
lawfull authority, by taking away, or procuring the escape
of any one arrested by a Bayliffe.

Rescribendary, a certain Officer belonging
to Rome, who sets a value upon
indulgencies and supplications.

Rescript, (lat.) a writing, which is in
answer to any Letter, Petition, Writ, &c.

Research, (French) a constant
perseverance, a continual repetition of services. Cleopatra.

Resentment, or Ressentiment,
(French) a sensible feeling, or true apprehension of any thing.

Reseration, (lat.) an unlocking, or
unbolting.

Reservation, (lat.) a reserving, or
keeping in store; also in
Common-law, it is taken for
that Rent, or service, which the Granter in any Grant
tieth the Grantee to perform unto him; also Reservation,
or Reservednesse, is used in Romances for that distance
and state, which Ladies observe in their behaviour toward
those that Court them.

Resiance, (French) a mans abode, or
continuance in a place.

Residence, (lat.) the same, but more
peculiarly; it is used for the continuance of a Parson, or Vicar upon his benefice.

Residue, (lat.) the rest, or
remainder.

Resignation, (lat.) an unsealing, also a
surrendring up, but more particularly, the resigning up a
benefice into the hands of the Ordinary.

Resilition, (lat.) a rebounding, or
leaping back.

Resinous, (lat.) full of Rosin.

Resipiscence, (Latin, as it were a being
wise again) a repenting, a changing ones minde from doing foolishly.

Resistence, (Lat. as it were a
withstanding) a Term
in Philosophy, taken for the property of a solid body,
which resisteth and opposeth whatsoever comes against it.

Resolution, (lat.) in the primitive
acception, signifieth a loosening, or untying, but it is generally taken onely for
a full purpose, or intention to do any thing, perhaps,
because by untying, all knots, and hindrances are taken away.

Resonant, (lat.) resounding, ringing, or
ecchoing out aloud.

Resource, (French) a new source, a
recovery.

Respight of homage, signifieth the
forbearing of homage, which ought first of all to be performed by the Tenant that holdeth by homage.

Respiration, (lat.) a breathing, or
taking respite.

Resplendent, (lat.) shining bright, or
glistering.

Response, or Responsion, (lat.) an
Answer.

Responsory song, an Anthem, wherein they
sing by turns as it were, one answering the other.

Restagnation, (lat.) an overflowing, a
bubling up.

Restauration, (lat.) a restoring, making
new, or repairing.

Restible, (lat.) tilled every year, also
flourishing, or bearing fruit every year.

Restipulation, (lat.) a putting in a pledge
or gage for the assurance of ones answer unto an action in Law.

Restitution, (lat.) a restoring back; in
Common-law it is taken for the setting him in possession
of Lands, or Tenements, that hath been unlawfully disseised of them.

Restive, (French) unwilling, stubborn,
obstinate.

Restriction, (lat.) a holding, or
restraining.

Resuery, (French) madnesse,
sottishnesse.

Resultancy, or Result, (French) a
rebounding, or leaping
back; also the issue, or event of a businesse; also a
conclusion drawn from any thing.

Resumption, (lat.) a taking back again,
particularly a taking back into the Kings hands, as before
he had delivered to the Heir, or granted by Letters Patents to any man.

Resupination, (lat.) a lying along on the
back with the face upward.

Resurrection, (lat.) a rising again.

Resuscitation, (lat.) a raising up
again.

Retailler, (French) a seller by retail,
i. by pieces, or parcels, and not by the grosse.

Retainer, in Common-law, is taken for a
servant not mænial, but onely using his masters name, or bearing his livery.

Retaliation, (lat.) a doing like for like,
a requiting, either good, or bad.



Retardation, (lat.) a forslowing,
lingring, or staying.


Retention, (lat.) a retaining, or holding
back; in Common-law, it is meant, when a Court pronounceth
not a full arrest, or judgement, but reserves somewhat to
be afterwards ordered.

Retentive, (lat.) apt to retain, or hold
in, whence Retentive faculty, the
retaining powr of nature, which keeps in the nourishment within the body, so
long as is convenient.

Reticence, (lat.) a being silent, or
holding ones peace.

Reticle, (lat.) a little Net.

Retinacle, (lat.) that which retains, or
holds back another thing.

Retortion, (lat.) a twisting, or writhing
backward.

Retraction, (lat.) a drawing back; also a
shifting, or going off from ones word.

Retraxit, in Common-law is an
exception against one that formerly commenc't an action, and withdrew it, or was
non-suit before tryal.

Retreat, (French) a retiring, also a place
of accommodation and security.

Retribution, (lat.) a giving back, a
making recompence, or requital.

Retriment, (lat.) the drosse, or dregs of
metal, also any kinde of rubbish.

Retrive, (from the French
Retrover, to finde again) a Term in Hawking, to
spring Partridges again, after they have once sprung already; also to recover a thing given for lost.

Retroaction, (lat.) a driving
backward.

Retrocession, (lat.) a going
backward.

Retrocopulation, (lat.) a coupling
backward.

Retroduction, (lat.) a leading, or
bringing back.

Retrogradation, (lat.) a recoiling, or
going back; a Planet goes Retrogade, when it goes contrary to the succession of the signs.

Retrogression, (lat.) the same as
Retrogradation.

Return in Common-law, signifieth the return
of a Writ by Sheriffs and Bayliffs,
which is a Certificate made to the Court where the Writ
directeth him, of that which he hath done touching the
serving of the same Writ.

Reuda, a certain Irish Captain,
who by force of Arms seated himself in a part of Scotland.

Revelation, (lat.) a revealing laying open,
or discovering.

Revels, sports of dancing, masking,
comedies, &c. formerly used in the Kings house and Inns
of Court, from the French Reveiller,
to awake, because they were performed
in the night time.

Reverberation, (lat.) a reflecting, a
beating, or striking back.

Reverbitorie, (lat.) a kinde of Fornace, or
Limbeck.

Reverse, (French) a back-blow in
fencing.

Reversed, turned backward, or upside down,
a Term in Heraldry, being the abatement
of a Cote proper to him that ravishes
a Maid, or Widow, or flies from his soveraigns Banner.

Reversion, (lat.) a returning, also in
Common-law, is a possibility reserved to mans self, and
his Heirs to have again, Lands, or Tenements made over
conditionally to others, upon the failing of such conditions.

Revestiary, a place where the Church
Vestments are kept, a Vestry.

Reviviction, (lat.) a reviving, a coming
again to ones self.

Revocation, (lat.) a calling back.

Revolution, (lat.) a rowling back, the
turning back of cælestial bodies to their first point, and finishing their circular course.

Revulsion, (lat.) a plucking back, or
drawing away, in Physick it is an
evacuation of the Morbisick matter, by places opposite
to the seat of the humour.

Rewish, (Dutch) lecherous, a word
applied to the copulation of Doves.


R H

Rhabdomancy, (Greek) divination by a wand
staff, or rod.

Rhadamanthus, the son of Jupiter
and Europa, who for his severity in Justice was
faign'd by the Poets to have been one of the three
infernal Judges, the other two being Aeacus and
Minos.

Rhætia, a Countrey of Europe,
bordering upon Helvetia, and the Lake
Larius, it is divided into higher and lower
Rhetia, the inhabitants of the higher are called
Grisons of the lower Boiarii.

Rhapsodie, (Greek) see Rapsodie.

Rhedarious, (lat.) belonging to a Car, or
Coach.

Rhedarious, (lat.) belonging to a
Waggon, or Cart.

Rhesus, a King of Thrace, the son of Stry­



mon and Euterpe, he came with his white horses to
the aide of the Trojans, and was killed by
Diomed and Vlisses, with the help of
Dolon, those white horses, upon which the fate
of Troy depended, being brought away by the Greeks.


Rhetorical, (lat.) eloquent, full of
Rhetorick, i. the art of speaking well, and eloquently.

Rhinoceros, (Greek) a kinde of
Indian beast, having a horn on his nose.

Rhodus, a famous Island in the
Carpathian
Sea, formerly consecrated to the Sun, in honour of whom a
mighty Colossus
was made, 50 Cubits in length.

Rhomb, or Roumb, (lat.) a certain
Geometrical square
figure, consisting of equal sides, but unequal angles;
also a spinning wheel, also a Mariners Compasse, or Sea Chart.

Rhonchisonant, (lat.) sounding like one
that snorts in his sleep.

Rhythmical, (Greek) belonging to Rhythme,
or Meeter in verse; as also to proportion, or harmony in Musick.


R I

Rialto, a stately place in Venice,
like to our Royal Exchange.

Ribadavia, a Town in Gallicia, a
Province of Spain, from whence is brought a sort of wine much
esteemed.

Riband, is lesse then a Cost, and
contains the eighth part of a Bend.

Ribauldry, (Ital.) whoredom,
uncleannesse, or the carriage of a Ruffian.

Ribibble, (old word) a Fiddle, or
Cittern.

Richmond, q. rich mount, the chief Town of
Richmondshire; it was walled about, and fortified
with a strong Castle against the Danes, by
Allan the first Earle thereof, also the name of
one of the Kings houses in Surrey, where King
Edward the third died.

Ribolla, a kinde of strong wine, so called.

Not found in OED.



Riches, by the Hunters taken for a Company,
and so they say a riches of Marterns.

Richard, a proper name of a man,
signifying in the
Saxon tongue powerfull disposition.

Ricture, (lat.) a grinning or shewing the
teeth like a dog, also a fretting or chasing inwardly.

To Ride in Navigation, is, when a ship is
held in so fast by her Anchors, that she doth not drive
away by the tide, or winde.

Riding Clark, one of the six Clarks of the
Chancery, who takes his turn for his year to have the
controling of all Grants which passe the great Seal.

Rier County, a publick place, which the
Sheriffe appointeth for the receit of the Kings money, after the end of his County.

Rigation, (lat.) a bedewing, watering, or
sprinkling.

Rigidity, or Rigour, (lat.)
stifnesse with cold, or frost; also surlinesse, 
strictnesse, severity.

Rigel, the left foot of Orion.

Rigols, a certain Musical instrument,
called a Clericord, it comes from the French
Regalliadir, i. to rejoyce.

Not found in OED.



Ringtail, a kinde of Puttock, or Kite,
having whitish feathers about his tail.

Ringwalk, a Term in hunting, being a round
walk made by Hunters.

Riot, in Common-law, is the forcible doing
of an unlawfull act, by three, or more persons assembled
together for that purpose.

Riphæan-hills, certain Hills of
Scythia, so called from the Greek word
Ripe, i. the violent force of windes blowing from
those parts, they are also called Hyperborean
Mountains.

Ripiers, those that use to bring fish from
the Sea-coast to the inner parts of the land, it comes
from the Latin word Ripa, a Bank, or
Shore.

Risible, (lat.) subject to laughter.

Risingham, (signifying in the
Brittish tongue the Gyants habitation) a certain
Town in Northumberland, of which the old
Brittains fabulously reported, that it was
defended by their god Magon, against a Soldan, or great Prince in those times.

Rituals, certain books, which prescribe the Rites and Ceremonies of the Roman Church.

Rivage, (French) the water-side, or Sea-Coast.

Rivality, (lat.) envy between
Rivals, i. two persons loving one, and the same
woman, being a Metaphor borrowed from those that fetch water from the same river.

Rivulet, (lat.) a Brook, or little river.

Rixation, (lat.) a brawling, or wrangling.

Rizon, a Citie of Illyria, seated upon a River of the same name.




R O

Roan colour, a kinde of dark, or Chesnut colour, being most
properly spoken of a Horse.

Robert, the proper name of a man, signifying in Dutch
famous in Councel.

Robigalia, certain feasts kept in
May, by the ancient Romans in honour of
Robigus, who was worshipt as a God among them, for that he was thought to
keep the Corn from blasting.

Robiginous, (lat.) full of rust, also
blasted as Corn.

Roboration, (lat.) a strengthning, or
making strong, from Robur, i. an Oak.

Robustous, (lat.) strong as an Oak.

Roch, (old word) a Rock.

Rochester, a Citie in Kent, called in Latin Roffa,
from one Rhufus, but more anciently Durobrevis, in the year 676. it was laid waste by
Aetheldred, King of the Mercians, and many a time afterwards sacked by the
Danes.

Rochet, a kinde of fish, so called; also a kinde of surplice, or Bishops Robe.

Rod, a certain Land measure, see Pearch.

Rode, a station for ships, from the Dutch
word Reed.

Rodknights, or Radknights, certain
servitours, which hold by serving their Lord on hors-back.

Rodnet, a Net to catch Black-birds, or
Wood-cocks in.

Not found in OED.



Rodomontade, (Span.) a vain-glorious
bragging, or boasting.

Roe, or Roebuck, a kinde of Deer,
called in French la Chevrelle.

Rogation, (lat.) an asking, demanding, or
intreating, whence Rogation
week, the next week but one before Whitsunday;
so called from the duty of fasting and prayer injoyned at
that time by the Church, as a preparative to the feast of
the Ascention, it is also called Gang week, and
by some Grasse week.

Roger, the proper name of a man, from the
Dutch word Ruger, i. quiet, or Rodgar, i. strong Councel.

Rogitation, (lat.) an asking often, an
intreating earnestly.

Roiston, a Town in Hertfordshire,
anciently called Roises Crosse, from a Crosse built by Dame
Roise (as some think) Countesse of
Norfolk, but being augmented
by Eustace de Marck, it came to be called
Roiston, q. Roises Town.

The Rolls, a place appointed by
Edward the third,
for the keeping of the Rolls, or Records of Chancery, the
master whereof in the absence of the Lord Chancelour sitteth as Judge.

Rollo, a famous Captain, who with a
select Company of Danish youths going to seek out new habitations,
setled in that part of France, which is now
called Normandy, the French at last after much War were glad to
make a league with them, and to allow them quiet
possession of what they had conquered, and Rollo
marrying the daughter of Charls the simple, was
both himself baptised, and likewise
caused all his people to
imbrace the Christian faith.

Roma, the chief Citie of Italy,
and most famous of the world, built by Romulus
and Remus, the Grand-children of
Numitor, the
inhabitants of this Citie and parts adjacent, called the
Romans, were anciently a people renowned, both in warre
and peace, and masters of a great part of the world.

Romance, a feigned history from
Romant, the most
eloquent sort of French, or Roman, which hath
heretofore been used to signifie any thing written, or
expressed eloquently.

Rome, (old word) to wander, or walk up and
down.

Romescot, or Romefeoh, a certain
tribute paid to Rome, commonly called Peter-pence.

The term "Rome-feoh" is not found in the OED.



Romulus and Remus, the sons of
Sylvia, (as some suppose by Mars) the
daughter of Numitor, King of the Albans,
they were preserved from the cruelty of their Unkle
Amulius by Laurentia (of which see more
in Laurentia) Romulus having slain his brother
Remus, obtained the sole
Government of the Citie to himself; he overcame 
the Veientes (who made warre upon the Romans,
because that they wanting wives, had ravisht the Virgins
that came from Neighbouring places to see their shews
called Consualia) dedicating the spoiles to
Jupiter Feretrius; he also overcame the
Fidenates and the Sabines, whom he
caused with Titus Toetius their King, to inhabit
Rome, and to joyn into one Common-wealth with the Romans,
at length in a great Assembly at the Lake of
Caprea, a sudden Tempest arising, he vanisht
away, none knowing what became of him.



Roncevalles, anciently called Rocida
Valis, a Town of Navar, famous for the burial
of Rowland, kinsman to Charles the Great.


Rondacher, (French) he that carrieth a
Rondach, i. a Target, or Buckler.

Rondelier, (French) the same, also a
Target maker.

Not found in OED in this sense.



Rood, the same as Rod, or Pearch, also a Crosse.

Roodloft, (Saxon) a shrine, a place to put
a rood, or crosse in, or the image, or relique of any Saint.

Rorid, Roral, or Rorulent, (lat.)
dewy, bespringled with dew.

Rosamunda, the daughter of
Cunimundus, King of the Gepidæ, she was married to
Alboinus, King of the Lombards, who
having made a feast, drank a health to her out of a Cup
made of his fathers skull, for which she procured his
death by the means of Herminges, with whom she
fled to Longinus,
Exarch of Ravenna, and married him, but
afterwards being in hopes to marry Longinus, she
offered a potion to Helminges in the bath, which
was poison, which he suspecting, forced her to drink it
her self, the word signifieth in Saxon rose of peace.

Rosarie, (lat.) a place where Roses grow;
also a short prayer book, or a pair of beads, containing
150 Pater Nosters, and 150 Avemaria's.

Roscid, (lat.) the same as rorid.

Roscoman, a County of Ireland, in
the Province of Conaught.

Rose, a Christian name of divers women, the signification
well known.

Rosion, (lat.) a gnawing.

Rosse, a Countrey of Scotland,
denominated from the Brittish word Rosse, i. a heath, or place of lings.

Rostration, (lat.) a thrusting in the beak
or bill.

Rotation, (lat.) a wheeling, or moving
about like a wheel.

To say a lesson by Rote, to say it as
roundly and currently, as a wheel runs in his rote, or track.

Rotundity, (lat.) roundnesse.

Rou, (old word) ugly, froward.

Rouge, Crosse, see Pursuivant.

Roundin, a Term in Navigation, is a
letting rise the main, or foretack, and haling aft the foresheat to the cathead, and
main sheat to the cabridge-head, when the wind larges upon
the main and foresail.

Roundel, a Term in Heraldry, being the
figure of a round ball.

Roundelay, a Sheapherds song, or dance.

Roundlet, a wine measure, containing 8 Gallons and a half.

Rounds, a Term in Sculpture, the fragments of statues.

Rowland, a proper name of a man, signifying in Dutch
Councel for the land.

To Rowze a Hart, to raise him from his harbour.

Rowze, the Forresters say a rowz of Wolves;
in Faulconry a Hawk is said to rowse, not shake her self.

Rous-in, a Term in Navigation, to make a
Cable tight when it is slack upon the water.

Not found in OED.



A Routurier, (Fr.) a Pesant, or
Plough-man.

Not found in OED.



Colour de Roy, a violet colour, which is the French Kings proper colour.

Royal, (French) kingly, belonging to a
King, whence Royalties, the Rights, or Prerogative of a
King: Royal is also a Term in Hunting, see Torch Royal.


R U

Rubefaction, (lat.) a making red.

Rubet, a stone found in the head of a Toad, commonly called a Toad-stone.

Not found in OED.



Rubicon, a River of Italy, between
Rimini and Ravenna, which floweth into the
Adriatick Sea; it is now called Runcone, or Piscatello.

Rubicund, (lat.) bloud red.

Rubie, a certain red Gem shining in the dark like a spark of fire.

Rubiginous, (lat.) see Robigus.

Rubrication, (lat.) a making red, whence
Rubricative, a plaister so strongly drawing that it makes the part look red.

Rubrick, a special Title of the Law, or a
noted sentence of any book marked with red Letters; also a Calender of Saints and Festivals.

Ructation, (lat.) a belching.

Rudheath, a place in Cheshire,
where there was formerly a sanctuary for those that had
trespassed against the Law, to remain secure for a year and a day.

Rudiments, (lat.) the first Elements, or
principles of any art, or faculty, because those that come
first to be instructed are to be imagined, altogether rude and ignorant.

Ruffe, a certain kinde of fish, by some
called an Aspredo.

Rugosity, (lat.) ruggednesse, fulnesse of
wrinkles.



Ruinous, (lat.) going to wrack, falling to
decay.


A Carpenters Rule, an instrument to measure
board, or timber with.

Rumbe, see Rhombe.

Rumia, a certain goddesse among the ancient
Romans, who was said to have the care of sucking children,
from Rumi, an ancient Latin word, signifying womens paps.

To Rumidge, in Navigation, is to remove
goods, or luggage out of a ships howld, whence it is also
used upon other occasions.

Rumigeration, (lat.) a carrying tales, a
spreading a rumour, or report abroad.

Rumination, (lat.) a chewing of the cud, a
pondering in ones minde, or earnestly thinking upon any thing.

Ruminus, a sirname of Jupiter,
affording teats to every creature.

Runcina, the goddesse of weeding.

Ruption, (lat.) a breaking, or
bursting.

Rural, (lat.) belonging to the
Countrey.

Russia, a Countrey of Europe,
bordering upon Hungary toward the South.

Rustication, (lat.) a dwelling in the
Country.

Rusticity, (lat.) a Countrey Garb, or
carriage; also clownishnesse.

Rut, to desire copulation, a Term most
properly applied to Deer.

Rutilation, (lat.) a shining, glistring, or
glaring.

Ruttier, (French) a direction for the
finding out of courses by Land, or Sea; also an old beaten Souldier.


S A

SAbaoth, (from the Hebrew Scabath
to rest,) a celebration of the seventh day of the week; as
a day of rest among the Jews, in remembrance of Gods
resting from the work of the creation on that day, instead
of which the first day of the week, called the Lords day,
hath been ever observed by Christians, in remembrance of Christs
Resurrection.

Sabbatarians, those that observe the
Jewish-Sabbath.

Sabbatical, (lat.) belonging to the
Sabbath.

Sabellians, a sort of Hereticks; so called
from Sabellius their first Author, they
affirmed the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, to be one onely person, having three names.

Sable, (French) the colour black in
Heraldry; also a certain
rich furre, taken from a Russian beast, so called.

Sabrina, the name of a very fair, and
pleasant River, springing out of Plimlimmon
Hills in Wales, and taking its course through
Shropshire, Worcestershire, and several other Shires; it
is vulgarly called Severn, see Severn.

Saburrate, (lat.) to ballast a ship with
Gravel.

Sacerdotal, (lat.) priestly, belonging to a
Priest.

Saccus cum brochia, a service of finding a
sack, and a broach to the King by
virtue of a Tenure, for the
use of his Army.

Sachem, a general name for any great
Prince, or Ruler among the people of the
West-Indies.

Sack, a measure of Wool, containing 26
stone, and 14 pound.

Sacramental, (lat.) belonging to a
Sacrament, or
Oath.

Sacrificial, (lat.) belonging to a
Sacrifice, or holy
offering.

Sacrilegious, (lat.) committing
Sacriledge, i. a robbing of Churches, or violating of holy things.

Sacristie, or Sacrary, (lat.) a
Vestry, a place where the Priests Vestments, and things
belonging to the Church are kept.

Sadduces, a Sect among the Jews; so
called from Sadock their first Author, they denied the being of Angels, and
the Resurrection of the body.

Safe conduct, see Passeport.

Sagacity, (lat.) quicknesse of
understanding, or apprehension, sharpnesse of judgement, or wit.

Sagamore, a King, or Supream Ruler among the Indians.

Sagbut, (Span.) a kinde of Musical
instrument, somewhat resembling a Trumpet.

Sagination, (lat.) a cramming, or
making fat.

Sagittal, (lat.) belonging to an
Arrow.

Sagittarius, one of the 12 signes of the
Zodiack, see Chiron.

Sagittipotent, (lat.) powerfull in darts,
or arrows.

Saguntus, a Town of Valentia, a
Province of Spain, now called Morviedro, situate upon the River Ibero; it was destroyed



by Hannibal, which was the cause of the second Punick war.


Saker, a kind of Hawk, (called in Greek
Hierax, i. holy) also a great piece of Ordnance.

Saie, a kinde of stuffe to make Cloaths of,
called in Spanish Saietta.

Saint Anthonies fire, see Erysipely.

Salacity, (lat.) wantonnesse, or
inclination to Venery, perhaps from Salacia a goddesse of the water,
whom the ancients held to be the wife of Neptune,
and that she caused the fluctuation, or moving up and down
of the Sea; also the Ebbing and flowing of the Sea was
called by the Romans in old time Salicia and Venilia.

Salade, (French) a kinde of head-piece or
helmet; called also Salet.

Salamander, a kinde of little beast like a
Lizard, vulgarly believed to subsist in the hottest fire, and to quench it.

Salarie, (lat.) a servants stipend, or
wages; so called as Pliny saith from
Sal, i. Salt, both being alike necessary.

Salenæ, the ancient name of a Town in
Bedfordshire, now called Salndy, Sandy.

Salebrous, (lat.) rugged, rough,
uneven.

Saliant, (lat.) leaping, a Term in
Heraldry.

Saligot, (Fr.) a water-nut, or
Caltrop.

Salii, the 12 Priests of Mars
instituted by Numa Pompilius.

Marcus Livius Salinator, a famous
Roman Captain, Consull with
Claudius Nero, he overcame Asdrubal in
the second Punick warre.

Salique Law, a Law whereby the Crown of
France cannot fall from the Lance to the
distaffe, i. cannot be inherited by
women; it is so called, either from these words si aliqua, often
mentioned in the Law (which as some say was made by
Pharamond, others by Philip the fair) or
else from the River Sala, near unto which the
Francks anciently inhabited.

Salisbury, the chief Citie of
Wiltshire, risen up out of the ruines of a very
ancient Town called Sorbiodunum, and by vulgar Latinists
Sarum, and Sarisburia, this place is famous
for a stately Minster, built here in the reign of King
Henry the third, by Richard Poor, then
Bishop of Salisbury; this Cathedral hath as many
windows as there are dayes in the year, as many pillars as
there are hours in a year, and the gates are answerable in
number to the 12 moneths.

Salivation, (lat.) a fluxing, or drawing
humours out of the mouth by spettle.

Salligot, (French) a kinde of fruit,
called water Nuts.

Sallow, (latin Salix) the Goats
willow-tree.

Sally, to issue out of a besieged Town,
from the Spanish word Salir.

Salmacis, a Fountain of Caria,
near Halicarnassus;
so called from Salmacis, a Nymph, who falling in
love with Hermaphroditus,
the son of Mercury and Venus, when she
could by no other means draw him to her love, she leapt
into the Fountain, and
imbracing him, prayed unto the gods that they might grow
into one, whereupon they immediately became one person,
having both Sexes; also at the prayers of
Hermaphroditus the Fountain contracted this
quality, that who ever entred
into it, were transformed into both Sexes, and called
Hermaphrodites.

Salmoneus, a King of Elis, the son
of Aeolus, who aspiring to be a god, drove his
Chariot over a brazen bridge, which he had made, that he
might imitate Thunder, at which Jupiter inraged,
struck him down to Hell with a Thunderbolt.

Salomon, a proper name, signifying in
Hebrew peaceable.

Salsamentarious, (lat.) belonging to salt
things, brine, or pickle.

Salsure, (lat.) a salting, seasoning, or
powdering.

Saltation, (lat.) a dancing, or
leaping.

Saltimbanco, (Ital.) a Mountebank, or
Quacksalver.

Saltire, a Term in Heraldry, see Sautoir.

Salvatel Vein, see Vein.

See OED "salvatella."



Salubrity, (lat.) wholsomnesse, or
healthfulnesse.

Salutatory, (lat.) a place where people
stand to salute great men.

Salutiferous, (lat.) bringing health, or
safety.

Samaria, a Countrey of Palæstine,
bordering upon Judæa.

Sambenito, (Span.) a Coat of course
sackcloth, in which Pænitents are
reconciled to the Church.

Sambuke, a Musical instrument,
called also a Dulcimer; also a warlike Engine.

Samonds, the sirname of a very ancient family
of Barons, who heretofore had their chief habitation at Bromham in Wilt­



shire, they are stiled in Latin Records de Sancto Amando.


Samos, the name of two Islands, the one
near Ionia over against Ephesus, sacred
to Juno, anciently called Parthenia, the other in the bay of Ambracia, over against Epirus, anciently
called Cephalenia.

Samothracia, an Island of the
Aegæan Sea, not far from Thrace,
heretofore called Dardania.

Samplar, corrupted from Examplar,
a pattern or coppy.

Sampson, a proper name, signifying in Heb.
there the second time.

Samuel, another proper name,
signifying in Heb. placed of God.

Sanable, (lat.) to be healed or
cured.

Sanchia, a Christian name of divers women
from the Latin Sancta, i. holy.

Sanctification, (lat.) a sanctifying,
hallowing, or making holy.

Sanctimony or Sanctity, (lat.) the
profession of holinesse.

Sanction, (lat.) a decreeing, enacting, or
establishing, any Law or Ordinance.

Sanctuary, (lat.) a sanctified or holy
place; also a place priviledged by the Prince for the
safeguard of offenders lives, founded upon the great
reverence which the Prince beareth unto the place
whereunto he granteth such a priviledge.

Sanctum Sanctorum, the innermost and
holiest place of the Jews Temple where the Arke was kept.

Sandal, a kind of pantofle or slipper; also
a pretious sort of Indian wood.

A Sandapile, (lat.) a coffin or beer to
carry dead bodies on.

Sandarach, a kind of red painting,
otherwise called Orpine or red Arsenick.

A Sand-bag, in Etching or Graving, is that
on which they use to turn their plate.

Sanglant, (French) bloody, or imbrued with
blood.

Not found in OED.



Sanglier, (French) a Bore of five years
old.

Sanguin, or Sangnineous, (lat.)
full or abounding with blood; also of a
complexion where that
humour is predominant;
also in Heraldry it is taken for a kind of ruddy or murrey
colour.

Sanguinolent, (lat.) bloody or
cruel.

Sanhedrim, (Heb.) the Supream
Council or Court of
judicature among the Jews, consisting of the high Priest
and 70 Seniors or Elders who were to consult
about the greatest matters
of the Commonwealth,
both Ecclesiastical and Civil.

Sanity, (lat.) health, soundnesse.

Sanjacks, the Governours of Cities
among the Turks.

Sanicle, a kind of herb called
self-heal.

Sank fin, (from the French words
Sang, i. blood, and fine, i. ended) a
finall end of any lineal race or descent of kindred.

Saphæna vein, see vein.

Saphick verse, a kind of verse consisting
of a trochee, spondee, dactyle, and two trochee's, and
having at the end of every three verses an Adonic which
consists of a dactyl and spondee. This kind of verse was
first invented by Sapho a famous Poetesse of
Mitylene.

Saphire, a kind of Gem or pretious Stone of
an azure colour.

Sapidity, or Sapor, (lat.)
savorinesse, well season'dnesse, pleasantnesse of taste or
savour.

Sapience, (lat.) wisdom or prudence.

Sapphick, see Saphick.

Saraband, (Ital.) a kind of Lesson or Air
in Musick going with a quick time.

Sarah, a proper name of a woman
signifying in Heb. Mistresse or Dame.

Sarcasm, (Greek) a bitter jest, scoff, or
taunt.

Sarcell, the pinion of a Hawk.

Sarcenet, a kind of thin Taffata.

Sarcination, (lat.) a loading with packs or
fardells.

Sarconia, (Greek) a bunch of flesh growing
upon the nose.

Not found in OED.



Sarcophage, (Greek) a certain stone wherein
dead bodies being inclosed, do consume away within a short
time; also a Tomb or Sepulchre.

Sarcotick, (Greek) breeding new
flesh.

Sarculation, (lat.) a weeding or
plucking up of weeds,
whence the time that Countrymen weed their corn in is
vulgarly called Sarcling time.

Sardanapalus, the last King of
Assyria, against whom for his luxury and
effeminacy, Arbaces, the Satrap of Media and
Belochus of Balylon rebelling,
transferred the Empire to Media and
Babilonia. Sardanapalus,
as soon as he saw himself in danger, throwing himself
and all his riches into a burning Pyre, which



he built for that purpose.


Sardel, or Sardine, a kind of fish
called a pilcher.

Sardinia, an Island in the
Ligustick Ocean, so called from Sardus
the son of Hercules, who planted himself here.

Sardonick laughter, an immoderate and
deadly laughter, from the herb Sardon, which being eaten causeth it.

Sardonyx, a kind of Gem or pretious Stone
of a dark or blackish colour, being also called a Corneol
or Onyx of Sardinia.

Sarmatia, a very large Country,
reaching from the borders of Germany and the River Vistula, as far
as Hircania, and is divided into Sarmatia,
Europæa, and Sarmatia Asiatica.

Sarmentitious, (lat.) belonging to branches
or twigs.

Sarpedon, a King of Lycia, he was
the son of Jupiter by Laodamia the
daughter of Bellerophon, and going to help the
Trojans was killed by Patroclus, and carried out of the field
by Apollo at Jupiters command.

Sarplar, or Serplath, a quantity
of wool consisting of 80 Tod, each Tod being two stone,
and each stone 14 pound.

A Sarse, a sive of hair.

Sarsaparilla, the root of a certain tree
called Smilax Peruviana.

Sassafras, the wood of another
Indian tree very useful in Physick.

Satanical, belonging to Satan, i.
the Devil, from the Hebrew word sitnath, i.
hatred.

It Sate me sore, (old word) it touch't me
greatly.

Satellite, (lat.) a Yeoman of the Guard,
also a Catchpole.

Satiety, (lat.) fullnesse, glutting, whence
satiation, a filling or cloying.

Satisdation, (lat.) a putting in bail or
surety.

Satisfaction, (lat.) a satisfying or
making amends; also a taking great content or pleasure in any thing.

Satorious, (lat.) belonging to sowing or
sowers.

Satrap, (Greek) a title anciently given to
the chief Governour of any Province under the King of Persia.

Saturity, (lat.) the same as
Satiety.

Saturnals, (lat.) Feasts dedicated to
Saturn, an ancient heathen deity, the son of
Coelus and Vesta, who married his sister
Ops and cut off the genital members of his father
Coelus, and threw them into the Sea, out of the
froth of which sprung Venus, from thence called
Aphrodite, he sought to devour all his male
children, wherefore Ops as soon as she was
delivered of Jupiter, and Juno at a
birth, she gave him instead of Jupiter a great
stone wrapt up in swadling-clouts, which he devoured; next she
brought forth Neptune, whom she concealed, as
also Pluto and Glaucus whom she had at a
birth; He was overthrown by his brother Titan who
made war against him for the Kingdom, and shut up him and
his wife in prison, whence he was delivered by his son
Jupiter, against whom also making war himself,
he was driven out of his Kingdom, and fled into
Italy to Janus whom he taught Husbandry
and the use of the Vine. Saturn is also the name
of one of the 7 Planets, the slowest in motion and of the
melancholiest influence; also among Chymists 
it is taken for lead.

Satyre (from Satyrus) a certain
deity of the Wood, much spoken of by ancient Poets,
resembling in the upper part of their bodies the shape of
a man, in the lower part, of a goat, and being all over
hairy, (from Satyra) a kind of sharp and
invective Poem full of taunting expressions against any person or thing.

Satyrical(lat.), bitter invective,
taunting, or scoffing.

Sauciation, (lat.) a wounding.

Saucidge, (in French Saucisse) a kind of pudding made of
meat chopped very small.

Savine, a kind of herb so called,
because it was had in great veneration among the
Sabines an ancient people of Italy.

Saultoir, or Sautoir, (French) a
term in Heraldry, being a figure resembling St. Andrews crosse.

Saunders, a kind of spice or sweet wood,
called in Latin Santalum.

Saws, (old word) sayings.

Saxony, a Country of Germany,
lying between the Rivers Albis and
Rhine, whose inhabitants anciently under the
conduct of their Queen Angela vanquisht Brittany and called it England.

Saxifrage, (from the Lat. Saxum i.
a stone, and frangere, i. to break) a kind of
herb so called because it breakes the stone in the kidney.




S C

Scabious, (lat.) scabby or mangy.

Scabrous, (lat.) rough, rugged,
unpolished.

Scævity, (lat.) left-handednesse,
unluckinesse.

Scævola, see Mutius.

Scalary, (lat.) belonging to a scale or
ladder, but in Geometry scale is also
taken for a measure proportionable to the draught.

Scalion, a kind of Plant otherwise
called an Onion, or Chibbol, or young Cive.

Scaldis, a river of the Low Countries
running by Antwerp, called in Dutch
Scheldt.

Scallop, (Span. Chalupe) a
ship-boat, called also a shallop; also a kind of fish
called in Latin Pecten.

Scalp, the hairy part of the head, which
encompasseth the skull; it is called in Greek
Pericranium.

Scalper, or Scalping Iron, (from
the Lat. Scalpere, i. to scrape or scratch) a
Chirurgions Instrument to scrape or cleanse wounds withall.

Scamander, see Xanthus.

Scammony, a kind of herb otherwise called
purging Bindweed.

Scandalous, (lat.) giving scandal,
i. offence, ill example, or occasion of other mens sinning.

Scandalum Magnatum, signifieth in Common
Law, a wrong done to any of the Nobles of the land, as
Prelates, Dukes, Earles, &c.

Scanderbeg, a name attributed to George
Castriot, the son of John Castriot Prince of
Epirus and Albania, who having been
brought up by Amurath the second, the Turkish
Emperour, at last caused Epirus and
Macedonia to revolt and valiantly kept
Croia against a mighty power of the
Turks, which caused Amurath to die
rageing mad.

Scandia, or Scandinavia, a great
Island in the North Ocean, near ajoyning to the Continent
of Russia, it was anciently
called Beltia or Basilia.

Scapular, (lat.) belonging to the
shoulders; whence Scapulary a Monks hood or cowl reaching down to the shoulders.

Scar, an old word, signifying a steep rock,
whence Scarborow Castle in
Yorkshire is denominated, as it were a Burgh upon the Scar or steep Rock.

Scarabee, (lat.) a kind of fly commonly
called a beetle.

Scarf, a term in Navigation, when the end
of one timber is let into the other very close and even,
or as they term it wood and wood.

Scarification, (lat.) a launcing a sore, or
making an incision.

Scariole, a kind of herb otherwise
called broadleaved endive.

Scarpe, a term in Fortification, the
slopenesse of the wall; also in Heraldry it is the resemblance of a scarf worn by Commanders in the field.

To Scathe, to hurt, from the Dutch word
Schæd, i. damage.

Scaturiginous, (lat.) overflowing, or
running over.

Scavage, or Shewage, a kind of
toll or custom exacted of Merchants by Mayors or Bailiffs
of Towns for wares shewed to be sold within their
Precincts which are forbidden by Statute.

Scavenger, (from the Dutch word
Scaven, i. to pare away) an officer that makes
clean the streets and pares away the dirt.

Scedasus, a certain rich Boeotian
whose two daughters Hippone and Milesia
were ravished in his absence, and afterwards thrown into a
Well and drowned, whereupon he killed himself for grief.

Sceleton, (Greek) the whole structure of
the bones of a mans body, the flesh, veines, and muscles
being taken away.

Scellum, or Schellum, (Dutch) a
rogue, villain, or vagabond.

Scenical, (lat.) belonging to a Scene,
i. the changing of persons in every Act of a
Comedy or Tragedy; also the forepart of a Stage or Theater.

Scenography, (lat.) a term in
Perspective, the
model or description of a Scene, or any work presented
with its shadows.

Sceptical, (Greek) contemplative, whence
Scepticks are a sort of
Philosophers who
onely consider and contemplate
of things without determining any thing.

Sceptriferous, (Latin) bearing a
Scepter.

Schediasm, (Greek) a sudden
invention.

Schedule, (lat.) a little leaf, bill, or
scrowl of paper.



Scheme, (Greek) the form, or outward draught of
any thing.


Schirrus, a hard swelling without pain, yet
not without sense.

Schiph, (Latin Scapha) a
ship-boat, whence Schipper, or Scipper, a Sea-man, or Mariner.

Schisme, (Greek) a cleaving, rending, or
dividing in two, but more peculiarly a division, or
separation in the Church, caused
by a dissenting in opinion.

Schismatical, inclining to schisme.

Scholastick, (Greek) belonging to a School,
or Schollar.

Scholiast, (Greek) a Writer of a
Scholy, i. a short exposition upon any Author.

Sciagraph, (Greek) a platform, or
description of a
house, with the contrivance of every room.

Sciater, (lat.) a certain instrument made
use of for the better designing. out the situation of a Citie.

Not found in OED.



Sciatica, (lat.) the Gout in the hip.

Science, (lat.) knowledge, skill, or learning.

Scilcester, a Town in
Northumberland, by some thought to have been the
same with that, which in old time was called
Cilurnum; here Ethwald, King of the Northumbers
was treacherously murthered by Sigga a Noble-man.

Scintillation, (lat.) a sparkling.

Sciolist, (lat.) one that maketh much stir
with a little knowledge, a smatterer in learning.

Sciomanty, (Greek) a divining by
shadows.

Scion, (from the latin word
Scindere. i. to divide) a grasse, or tender shoot.

Scipio, the name of several famous
Romans, as Scipio
Africanus, the son of Cornelius,
he overthrew the Carthaginians in Spain,
taking new Carthage, afterwards wafting over his
Army into Africa, he utterly defeated
Hannibal in a mighty battel; Scipio
Aemilianus, the adopted son of Africanus,
who demolish't new Carthage,
and Numantia in Spain, and was killed by
a conspiracy of the Gracchi; Scipio Nasica, a man
very eloquent, skilfull in the Law, and much beloved of the people, by whom he was
called Corculum; Scipio the father in Law of
Pompey the Great; first succesfull,
afterwards unfortunate in the wars against Cæsar.

Scire facias, a Writ Judicial, to call a
man to shew a cause unto the Court from which it is sent,
why execution of a judgement
passed should not be made.

Sciron, a famous Pirate about
Megara, who was slain by Theseus.

Scirrous, (Greek) belonging to a
Schirrus, i. a
hard swelling in the body without pain.

Scissure, (lat.) a cutting, cleaving, or
dividing asunder.

Scitament, (lat.) a pleasant witty
passage in discourse.

Sclavonia, a Countrey joyning
Westward upon the Adriatick Sea, divided
into Istria, Carinthia, Croatia, Carnia, and Martia; Slavonia
vulgarly called Windishmark.

Scolopender, (Greek) a kinde of
venemous Worm, by some called an Ear-wig; also a certain fish, which having
swallowed a hook vomiteth
up its entrails, and rid of it, sucketh them in again.

Scom, (Greek) a mocking, scoffing, or
scurrilous jest.

Sconse, (Dutch) a Term in
fortification, a block-house, or chief fortresse, whence Metaphorically it
is taken for the head.

Scopulous, (lat.) Rocky, full of Rocks.

Scorbutical, (lat.) belonging to the
Scorbute, i. a disease called the Scurvy.

Scordium, a kinde of Herb, growing
plentifully in Cambridgeshire, called in English Water-germander.

Scorpion, a kinde of venemous Serpent, also
the name of one of the 12 signs of the Zodiack; also a kinde of warlike Engin.

Scot and Lot, a customary
contribution laid upon all subjects, according to their
ability: Escot signifying in French a Symbole, shot, or
reckoning.

Scotal, where an Officer doth keep an Ale-house without the
Forrest, under colour of
his Office from Scot and Ale, i.
paying the shot for Ale.

Scotomy, (Greek) a Vertigo, or
dizzinesse in the head,
which causeth a dimnesse in the eyes.

Scovel, see Malkin.

Scout, (in Dutch showt) an Officer
of an Army appointed to discover an Enemies designs.

Screation, (lat.) a spitting.

Screkingham, a Town in
Lincolnshire, where Alfrick the second Earle of Leicester was slain by Hubba, a
Dane.

Scribe, (lat.) a Writer, Notary, or
Srivener; also an Expounder of the Law among the Jews.



Scriptorian, (lat.) belonging to writing, or
writers.


Scruple, or Scrupulosity, (lat.) a
doubting, or nicenesse
in point of conscience; also scruple is the third part of
a dram, i. seven grains and a half, troy weight.

Scrutation, (lat.) a searching, or
inquiring.

Scrutiny, (lat.) the same.

Sculpture, (lat.) a graving, or carving.

Scurrility, (lat.) offensive jesting, or scoffing.

Scut, (a Term in Hunting) the tayl of a
Hare, or Cony.

Scutchion, see Escotchion, also
the bud of a Tree cut off for inoculation.

Scutiferous, (lat.) bearing a sheild, or
buckler.

Scuttle, a square hole cut through the
hatch, or deck of a ship, to go down by into any room.

Scyld, (Saxon) debt, or default.

Scylla, the daughter of Nysus,
King of Megara, which being besieged by
Minos, King of Creet was betrayed into
his hands by Scylla, who falling in love with
Minos, cut off her fathers purple lock (upon
which the fate of the Citie depended) and sent it to him;
but afterwards seeing her self despised, and dying for
grief, she was turned into a Partridge, and Nisus
into a Hawk; also the daughter of Phorcus, who
falling in love with Glaucus, was envied by
Circe, who poisoning the water wherein she used
to bath her self, the lower part of her body became
altogether like the grinning of Dogs; whereupon she threw
her self headlong down the next præcipice, and was
transformed to a Rock over against Charybdis.

Scyllas, one so skilfull in diving, that he
regained a great quantity of gold and
silver, which had been lost in a shipwrack.

Scymitar, see Semitar.

Scythia, the most Northern Countrey of the
world, divided into Europæa and Asiatica; it was so called from Scythes
the son of Hercules by one that was half a woman,
and half a viper; it is at this day called Tartarick.

Scytale, (lat.) a kinde of secret way of
writing; also a kinde of Serpent, also a field Mouse, called an Ermine, or a shrew.


S E

Seasnapple, a kinde of Shell-fish, called
in Latin Cochlea veneris, i. Venus shell.

Seax, a kinde of sword, anciently in use
among the Saxons.

Sebastocrator, (Greek) a great Officer in
the ancient Constantinople Empire, from
Sebastos, i. Honourable, & Crator, powerfull.

Sebastian, a proper name, signifying in
Greek reverend, or Majestical.

Sebesten, a kinde of Assyria
plumb, called in Greek Myxaria.

Secandunum, the ancient name of a Town in
Warwick-shire, now called
Seckinton,
where Athelbald, King of the
Mercians, was in
a Civil war slain by Beared, who usurping the
Kingdom, was soon after slain himself by Offa.

Secant, (a Term in Geometry) is a line
drawn from the Center through one
extream of the given Arch,
till it meet with the Tangent raised from the Diameter, at the other extream.

Secation, (lat.) a cutting.

Secession, (lat.) a separating ones self, a
departing from any side, a revolting.

Seclusion, (lat.) a shutting forth, a
putting out of doors.

A Second in surveying, is the tenth part of
a prime, and contains one inch, and 49 of 50 parts of an inch.

Second deliverance, a Writ that lieth after
the return of Cattel replevied, for the repleving of the same Cattel again, by reason of some default in the party
that replevied.

Secondary, (lat.) the second man in any
place, he, who is next to any Chief, Officer, as Secondary of the fine Office, &c.

Secondine, (lat.) the after-birth, or skin
wherein an Infant is wrapt, while it is in the womb.

Sectary, (lat.) one of a Sect, a follower
of new opinions in matters of religion.

Section, (lat.) a cutting, or dividing;
also a certain division in a Chapter.

Sector, a Mathematical instrument,
consisting of two right lines, containing an Angle at the Center, and of the
circumference assumed by them.

Secular, (lat.) belonging to an age, or the
space of an hundred years, whence
secular playes were certain Games among the Romans performed every hundred
years; also a secular Priest, one who is conversant in the
world, and not tied to a Monastical life.

Secundary, see Secondary.

Secundation, (lat.) a secunding,
forwarding, or making prosperous.



Securiferous, (lat.) bearing a hatchet, or axe.


Sedation, (lat.) a quieting, or
asswaging.

Sedentarie, (lat.) sitting much, studious,
unactive.

Sediment, (lat.) the dregs, or lees of any
thing setling, or sinking down to the bottome.

Sedition, (latin as it were feorsum
itio, i. a going apart) a stirring up to rebellion or
discord, a raising a faction, or mutiny.

Seduction, (lat.) a seducing, or leading
out of the right way.

Sedulity, (lat.) diligence.

See, (old word) a seat.

Seeling, in Navigation, is the sudden
tumbling of a ship to one side, or other, when the wave of the Sea is past from under her.

Segmentation, (lat.) a dividing into
Segments, i. small parts, or pieces of any thing.

Segnity, (lat.) sluggishnesse, or
sloth.

Segregation, (lat.) as it were a setting
apart from the flock, a severing, or parting.

Sejant, (French) sitting upright, a term in
Heraldry.

Sejanus, a great favorite of
Tiberius the Roman Emperour, of whom he was so
highly esteemed, that he had the chief management of state
affairs, but at last by reason of his pride and ambition he came to a miserable end.

Seignorage, (French) a prerogative of the
King, whereby he challengeth allowance for gold and silver, brought in the Masse to the exchange for Coin.

Seignorie, (French) dominion, or
Jurisdiction; also a Mannour, or Lordship.

Seimours, the sirname of an ancient and
honourable family, stiled in Latin Records de Sancto Mauro, in whom continue to this day the titles of
Vicount Beauchamp, and Marques of Hertfort.

Seisin, in Common-law, is the possession of
Lands, or inheritance.

Sejunction, (lat.) a severing, or putting
asunder.

Seker, (old word) in like manner.

Sela, or Selah, an Hebrew word,
used in several of Davids Psalms; being as some
think a pause, or resting time in Musick.

Sele-graving, a Term in Sculpture, or the
art of graving, being that which is done in steel or
copper, that which is done in wood, is called graving in flatstich.

Not found in OED but see "seal," n. 2, 8.



Selenite, a certain stone wherein there is
a white spot, which increaseth and
decreaseth, according to the course of the Moon.

Seleucus, one of the Captains of
Alexander the
Great, who after Alexanders death possessed
himself of Syria, where he reigned twenty years.

Selimus, the ninth Emperour of the
Turks, who added Aegypt and
Arabia to the Turkish Empire.

Selion, a ridge of land lying between two
furrows.

Sellander, a kinde of disease in a horse.

Sellengers, contracted from St.
Legers, a sirname of great note and antiquity, stiled in Latin Records de Sancto Leodegaria.

Sellarie, (lat.) a place where benches, or
forms are set.

Semblance, (French) a likenesse,
seeming, or outward appearance.

Semele, the daughter of Cadmus,
King of Thebes, who being got with Childe by Jupiter, brought forth Bacchus.

Sementation, (lat.) a bringing forth
seed.

Semicircular, (lat.) in fashion of a half
Circle.

Semicolon, a half Colon, or Member, being a
point in writing, or printing, thus marked (;)

Semidole, (lat.) a pipe, or measure,
containing half a Tun.

Seminary, (lat.) a seed-plot, or Nursery of
young Plants; it is also Metaphorically taken for a
School, or Colledge, which is a Nursery of learning.

Semination, or Sementation, (lat.)
a sowing, or bringing forth seed.

Seminifical, (lat.) producing seed for
generation.

Semipedal, (lat.) consisting of half a foot
in measure.

Semiquadrate, an Aspect consisting of 45
degrees.

Semiquintile, an Aspect consisting of 36.
degrees.

Semiramis, a famous Queen of the
Assyrians, the
wife first of Mænon præfect of Syria,
afterward of Ninus, whom she made away, and
succeeded in the Kingdom,
she much inlarged the bounds of her Empire, and built a
wall of brick about the Citie of Babylon, and as
some say, she died in an expedition into India,
against Staurobates.

Semitar, or Scymitar, a kind of a
short Persian sword, being also much in use
among the Turks.



Sempiternal, (lat.) everlasting,
perpetual, without end.


Semuncial, (lat.) belonging to a
semunce, i. half an ounce.

Senatorian, (lat.) belonging to a
Senatour, or to a Senate, i. a Supream Council
of a Nation, a Parliament.

Sendal, (French) a kind of Cyprus
silk, Greek Sidon.

Seneca, a famous Philosopher born in
Corduba, a City of Andalusia, a Province
of Spain, he caused himself to bleed to death for
fear of Nero who was his schollar.

Senescal, or Seneschal, (French) a
Marshall or Steward.

Senescent, (lat.) growing old,
waining.

Sengreen, a kind of herb, otherwise called
Houseleek, in Latin Sedum, also Sempervivum, i. alwayes green.

Senie, the leaf of a medicinable herb which
purgeth cholerick and melancholick humours.

Seniour, (lat.) elder.

Sensiferous, (lat.) bringing sense or
feeling.

Sensory, (lat.) an organ of the
sense.

Sensuality, (lat.) a pleasing or
indulging to the sense, a satisfying the carnal appetite.

Sententious, (lat.) full of sentences,
i. grave or wise sayings.

Sentiment, (French) sensiblenesse,
apprehension, also
passion or a tender feeling of the effects of love. Cleopatra.

Sentinell, (French) a Military Scout or
Watchman, from the Latin Sentire, i. to perceive,
because he is to perceive and look narrowly into the enemies designs.

Senvie, a certain plant called in
Latin Sinapis, of whose seed mustard is made.

Separation, (lat.) a setting apart, a
putting asunder; also when
two Planets have been in partile aspect or conjunction, and part from it.

Separatory, (French) a Chirurgions
Instrument wherewith to pick splinters of bones out of a wound.

Sepiment, (lat.) a fence, pale, or
hedge.

Seplasiary, (lat.) a compounder or
seller of sweet ointments;
also a nice effeminate man.

Seposition, (lat.) a setting apart, a
putting asunder.

September, so called being the seventh moneth from March.

Septempedal, (lat.) containing seven foot
in measure.

Septenary, (lat.) the number 7.

Septennial, (lat.) of seven years
space.

Septentrional, (lat.) belonging to the
North.

Septimestre, (lat.) of seven moneths
space

See OED "sept-."



Septuagenary, (lat.) belonging to the
number of 70.

Septuagesimal, (lat.) the same, also
belonging to Septuagesime, Sunday.

The Septuagint translation of the Bible, 
the most original and authentick
Translation of it by the 70 Elders of the Jews at the appointment of
Ptolomæus Philadelphus King of Egypt.

Septuncial, (lat.) containing 7
ounces.

Sepulchral, (lat.) belonging to a
Sepulchre or Grave.

Sepulture, (lat.) a burying, or interring
in the ground.

Sequele, (lat.) a following, a conclusion
or consequence of any thing.

Sequence, (lat.) a following of things in
order, one just after another.

Sequestration, (lat.) a separating a thing
in controversie from the possession of both those that
contend for it. But it is now commonly taken for a seizing
upon the rents of Delinquents estates, for the use of the
Common-wealth.

Seraglio, (Ital.) the Grand Signors Palace
at Constantinople.

Serain, (French) the fresh evening air;
also a mildew or damp vapour.

Seraph, a Turkish coin of gold.

Seraphical, celestical, bright, divine,
like a Seraphim or one of the highest order of Angels.

Seraphis, a kind of Serpent anciently
worshipt by the Aegyptians.

Not found in OED.



Serenade, (French) an evening-song sung by
a Lover under his Mistresses window.

Serenity, (lat.) clearnesse of the skie,
fair weather.

Serge, a kind of woollen cloth, called in
Italian Sargia, in Dutch Rasch.

Sergeanty, see Petty Sergeanty,
and Grand Sergeanty.

Sergreant, a Griffin so termed in
Heraldry.

Sericated, clothed in silk, which is called in Latin Sericum.

Series, (lat.) an order, row.



Sermocination, (lat.) communing, or holding a
discourse.


Serosity, (lat.) the thinner or waterish
part of the masse of blood.

Serotine, (lat.) late, done about the
evening time.

Sense not found in OED.



Serpentary, a kind of herb called
vipers-grasse.

Serpentine, (lat,) belonging to serpents or
snakes; whence Serpentine verses, those that begin and end
with the same word.

Serpet, a kind of basket.

Serred, (lat.) sawed, also (from the French
Serre) compact, joyned close together.

See OED "serr," v.



Sertorius, a famous Roman Captain who took
part with Marius and Cinna,
after Scylla, returning from the Mithridatick War, had got
possession of Rome, he fled into Spain,
and being chosen Captain by the Lusitanians
overthrew the Romans in several battles, at last having
stoutly defended himself
against Pompey, he was slain by Perpenna
as he sate at supper. Diana
is said to have attended him in all his designs, in the
form of a Hart.

Servile, (lat.) belonging to a servant,
slavish; whence Servitude, slavery or thraldom.

Serviteur, (French) a serving-man or
waiter, also a poor schollar in the University.

Seselie, (Greek) a kind of plant
otherwise called Hartwort.

Sesostris, a King of Aegypt, the
son of Moeris, he indeavoured to make a
navigable River out of the Mediterranean into the Red Sea.

Sesquipedal, or Sesquipedalian,
(lat.) containing a foot and a half in measure.

Sesquitertian, (lat.) containing a third
part over and above another thing.

Session, (lat.) a sitting; Sessions are
more particularly taken for a quarterly sitting of
Justices in Court upon their Commission.

Sesterce, (lat.) an ancient coin among the
Romans containing 4 denarii, which value about a half
penny of our money; the Sesterce was commonly marked with
this Character H-S.

Sestain, (French) a stanza consisting of 6
verses.

Sethin, see Sittim.

Setigerous, (lat.) bearing bristles.

Setterwort, a kind of herb so called from
settering, i. curing of cattel.

Settwall, a kind of herb growing near
walls, called also Valerian.

Severance, in Common Law, is the singling
of two or more that joyne in one Writ.

Severians, a kind of Hereticks that
condemned Marriage and eating of flesh.

Severity, (lat.) gravity, strictnesse,
sournesse, or austerenesse.

Severn, a famous River of England,
in Latin Sabrina, so denominated as
Geffrey of Monmouth affirmeth from a
Virgin so called, who was here drowned by the meanes of
her Step-mother Guendolen.

Sevocation, (lat.) a calling aside, a
drawing apart.

Sewar, he that cometh before the meat of
any great personage, and placeth it upon the table; also a
gutter which carrieth into the Sea or any River.

Sewel, a term in Hunting, being a thing set
to keep a Deer out of any place.

Sexagism Sunday, the Sunday before
Shrove-Tuesday.

Sexennial, (lat.) of six years
continuance.

Sextant, (lat.) a kind of coin of a very
small value; also a weight of two ounces by some called Obolus.

Sextary, (lat.) an ancient Roman
measure, containing in liquid things somewhat
more than a pint, in dry things 24 ounces or 2 pound Roman, a pound and a half aver du pois.

Sexten, contract from Sacristian, an
officer that looks to the Church and keeps the Priests Vestments.

Sextile, (lat.) the moneth August,
being the sixth from March, or an aspect
consisting of 60 degrees, thus character'd *.

Sextule, (lat.) the sixth part of an ounce,
also a land-measure.

Sextuple, (lat.) sixfold, or containing any
thing 6 times over.


S H

Shallop, see Scallop.

Shafment, a kind of measure containing an
handbreadth.

Shaftsbury, a Town in Dorcetshire, so
called from the Churches spire-steeple, such as they
anciently termed Scheafts, in Latin Septonia.
This place is famous for Aquila (some say a
reall Eagle, others a Prophet so called) who foretold that the
Brittish Empire, after the Saxons



and the Normans should return again to the
ancient Brittains.


Shamois, see Chamois.

Shamsheer, a kind of sword among the
Persians somewhat like a Scymitar.

Shapournet, a term in Heraldry, being a
resemblance of that kind of hood which in French
is called Chaperon.

Shash, see Turbant.

Shaw, (Persian) a King.

Sheen, or Shene, (old word)
bright-shining.

To Shend, (old word) to blame.

Sherbet, a kind of pleasant drink, much in
request among the Turks and Persians.

Shiloh, (Heb.) a Saviour, it is a word used
in the Scripture for our Saviour Christ.

Not found in OED.



Shingles, (from the Latin scinder,
i. to cleave) lath's or slates to cover houses with; also
(from cingere, i. to gird) a certain disease
which causeth a rednesse in the brest, belly, or back.

Shireev, (Saxon) a Questor or Prefect of a
County or Shire, of whose office and authority see Lord
Cooks reports.

Shoares, a term in Navigation, pieces of
timber set to bear up any other from sinking or falling.

Shoud, a certain Magistrate among the
Turks.

Shrew, a kind of field-mouse which doth
great hurt to cattel; whence the word Shreud, i. leud or curst.

Shrewsbury, the chief Town of
Shropshire, anciently called Schroesbury, for that it was a
Thicket of shrubs upon a Hill; it is called in the
Brittish tongue Ymwithig from
Mewithaw, which is as much as
Placentia or Plaisance, in regard that for the pleasantnesse
of the situation, the Princes of Wales chose it
in times past for their chief Seat. Here Edrick
Streona Duke of the Mercians lay in wait for
Prince Afhelm, and
slew him as he rode on hunting. This Town is also commonly
called Salop, and in Latin Salopia.

Shrift, (Saxon, from the Latin
Scrinium, i. the
inward brest) auricular confession;
whence Shrovetide among the Catholicks is the time of
shriving or confessing of their sins.

Shrine, (lat. Scrinium) a chest or
cabinet; also the same as Roodloft.


S I

Sib, (Saxon) Kindred; whence
Gossip is commonly used for a Godfather, i. a kin in God.

Sibilation, (lat.) a hissing.

Sicambri, an ancient people of
Germany inhabiting on either side the
Rhine. Some think them to be the same with those
which at this day are called Gueldrois, onely of
a larger extent, haply possessing
also that part which is called Zutphany.

Siccity, (lat.) drouth, drynesse.

Sicily, an Island in the
Mediterrean Sea, so called from Siculus
the son of Neptune; it was of old called Trinacria.

Sicle, (Heb. Shekel) a weight of
Silver or Gold, containing 4 drachms, or 384 grains.

Sidelays, (a term in Hunting) when the dogs
set upon a Deer by the way as he passes.

Not found in OED.



Sidemen, the same as Questmen, see Quest.

Siderated, (lat.) blasted or planet-struck.

Sidereal, or Siderean, (lat.)
belonging to Stars.

Siderite, a Loadstone, from the Greek word
Sideron, i. Iron; also a kind of plant so called.

Sidneys, the sirname of a very
honourable Family, whose chief seat is Pensherst in Kent;
they derive themselves from William de Sidney
Chamberlain to King Henry the second; but the
flower and chief glory of this Family, was that most
accomplisht Gentleman Sir Philip Sidney, who
valiantly fighting before Zutphen in
Gelderland, lost his life.

Sidon, a City of Phoenicia, so
called from the plenty of fish which is there, Sidon signifying in the Phoenician
tongue, a fish.

Sigalion, see Harpocrates.

Sigillar, (lat.) belonging to a seal or
sealing.

Sigles, (lat.) initial letters which by
abbreviation are put for whole words, as S. P. Q. R.
Senatus Populusque Romanus.

Signature, (lat.) a signing, marking, or
sealing; also the resemblance of any Plant or Mineral unto
a mans body, or any of the parts thereof.



Signiferous, (lat.) bearing an Ensign or
Standard.


Silentiary, (lat.) an Usher, one that makes
room, or keeps silence.

Silerie, see Cilerie.

Siliceous, (lat.) flinty, full of flint, of
a flinty substance.

Silures, an ancient name given to the
people of South-Wales.

Similar, (lat.) like, or of the same
substance; whence
similar parts of the body, are those which are altogether
composed of the same substance.

Similitude, (lat.) likenesse.

Simon, a proper name, signifying in Heb.
obedient.

Simoniacal, (lat.) belonging to
Simony, i. a buying or selling Church-livings; so
called from Simon Magus, who would have bought
the gift of the Spirit for money of the Apostles.

Simonides, a famous Lyrick Poet of
Thessaly, of such an exact memory, that when
divers men were killed by the fall of a house, and were so
disfigured they could not be known, he could exactly tell
who every one of them was by the order in which he had
observed them to have been placed.

Simous, (lat.) having a flat nose.

Simplist, (French) one that understands the
nature of Plants and Drugs.

Simulacre, (lat.) an Image, Picture, or
Idol.

Simulation, (lat.) a faigning,
counterfeiting, or
making a resemblance of any thing.

Simultaneous, (lat.) bearing a private
grudge or inward malice toward any one.

Sincerity, (lat.) purenesse,
uprightnesse, plain-dealing.

Sine, (lat.) a Mathematical term used in
Astronomy and Surveying, and signifies
the angle of meeting between the
minute and the degree, it
being a right line falling perpendicularly from one
extream of the given Arch upon the Diameter drawn to the
other extream of the Arch.

Singeries, (French) apish tricks.

Single, a term in Hunting, the taile of a
Buck, Roe, or any other Deer.

Sinister, (lat.) belonging to the left
side; also unlucky, unfortunate; also unhandsome or dishonest.

Sinister aspect, is according to the
succession of the Signs.

Sinister point, in Heraldry, is the place
in an Escutcheon near the left corner of the chief. The
Sinister base point, is under it at the lower part of the Escutcheon.

Sinon, the son of Sisyphus and
grandchild of
Autolycus, the thief, he went with
Vlisses to the wars of Troy, and
betrayed that City to the Grecians by the means
of the Trojan Horse.

Sinoper, see Cinnabar.

Sinople, a kind of red lead, so called from
Sinopis a City of Pontus; it is`
vulgarly called Ruddle.

Siphack, (Arab.) the inner rim of the
belly, joyned to the cawl, where the
entrailes are covered.

Si quis, (lat. i. if any one) a
bill stuck upon a wall or post, to proclaim any thing that is lost.

Sirens, certain Sea-deities, three in
number, Parthenope, Ligea, and Leucosia,
the daughters of Achelous and Calliope,
having their upper part like maids, and their lower parts
like fishes; they used by the sweetnesse of their voices
to allure Mariners to the rocks and cause them to be cast
away: which Vlisses foreseeing, stopt the ears of
his associates with soft wax, and caused himself to be
bound to the mast of the ship; whereupon they
seeing themselves contemned, cast themselves headlong into the Sea.

Sirius, a star in the mouth of that
constellation which
is called Canicula or the Dog, which
toward the latter end of Summer
casts forth a vehement and raging heat; whence the
Dog-dayes derive their name.

Sirocco, (Ital.) a Southeast wind.

Sisamnes, a Judge whom Cambyses
caused to be flead for bribery, and his skin to be hung
upon the Tribunal.

Sisken, or Sirkin, a little bird,
other wise called a Finch, in Greek Acanthis or Ligurinus.

Sisley, see Cicely.

Sisyphus, the son of Aeolus, who
was slain by Theseus for his robberies, and is
faigned by the Poets to rowl a great stone in Hell up to
the top of a mountain, which still falls down again and
makes an endlesse labour.

Site, or Situation, (lat.) the
seat or standing of any house or building.

Sitient, (lat.) thirsting.

Sitomagus, the ancient name of a Town in
Northfolk, now called Thetfort; this



Town was sack't by the Danes, in the year 1004.
for the recovery whereof Bishop Arfast removed
his Episcopal See from Elmham hither.


Sittim, or Sethim, (Hebr.) a
certain wood growing in Judæa, of which the Ark was made.

Sixain, see sestain.

Size, a Term used among the Schollars in
the University of Cambridge, signifying so much
bread, or beer set upon any of their names in the buttery book, as amounts to the
value of a farthing.


S K

Skeg, in Navigation, is that little part of
the Keel, which is cut slaunting, and is left a little
without the stern post.

Skinker, (Dutch) a filler of drink, a
Cup-bearer, or Butler.

Skuppers, the holes close to the decks,
through the ships side, whereat the water runs forth of
the ship from the decks.


S L

Slay of a Weavers Loom, a certain
instrument, having teeth like a Comb, it comes from Slægen Dutch,
i. to strike.

Slego, a County of Ireland in the
Province of Connaght.

Slockster, (Dutch) a plagiary, or one that
inticeth away mens servants.

Slot, the print of a stags foot, a Term in
Hunting.

Slough, (old word) a Ditch.


S M

Smalt, a kinde of blue colour used in
painting.

Smaragd, a precious stone of a green
colour, otherwise called an Emerald.

Smectymnuus, the title of a certain book; so
called from the first letters of those
Ministers names that composed it.

Smegmatick, (Greek) belonging to Soap, of a
scouring faculty.

Smeth, a certain oyntment to take away hair.

Smilas, the name of a fair Virgin, who
falling in love with Crocus, and being
despised by him pined
away, and was turned into a plant of that name, called in
English a Kidney-bean.

Smired, (Sax.) anointed.

See OED "smear," v..



Smoterlich, (old word) snout-fair.

Smyrna, a Citie of Ionia, watered
by the River Milete, built as some think by
Smyrna the Amazonian, who possessed
Ephesus in this Citie most conclude
Homer was born.


S N

Snakeweed, a kinde of plant, otherwise
called Adderswort.

Snapdragon, a plant called in Latin Antirrinum; also a kinde of Hobgoblin.

Snaphaunce, a Firelock, a kinde of Gun that
strikes fire without a match.

Suette, (a Term in Hunting) the fat of all
sorts of Deer.


S O

Soccage, a certain Tenure of Lands by
inferiour husbandry services, from the French Soc, i. a Plough-share.

Sociality, (lat.) fellowship,
company.

Socinians, a certain Sect that deny the
Divinity of Christ, first spred by Faustus
Socinus of Siena.

Socome, a Term in Common-law,
signifying a custome of
grinding at the Lords Mill.

Not found in OED.



Socord, (lat.) sluggish, idle,
slothfull.

Socrates, a famous Athenian
Philosopher, the son
of Sophronius a statuary and Phanareta a
Midwife, he was approved by the Oracle the wisest of men,
at length being condemned to death by the
Magistracy, he had a
Hemlock potion given him to drink, which he took with much
constancy and patience.

Sodality, (lat.) fellowship, brotherhood or
society.

Sodomitical, (lat.) belonging to
Sodomy, i. buggery, or unnatural lust.

Sokmans, those Tenants that hold by
Soccage Tenure.

Solace, (lat.) comfort, or delight.

Solar, (lat.) belonging to Sol, i.
one of the seven Planets, Apollo, or the Sun.

Solarie, (lat.) a yearly pension paid to
the Prince to live free from publick
businesse; also a
yearly rent paid for a house from Solum, i. the ground, or floor.

Not found in OED but cf. "solar," n. 1.



Soldures, among the old Gauls,
were such as vowed friendship to any, and to take part
with them in their good, or bad fortunes.

Not found in OED.



Soleated, (lat.) shod, having on shooes, or
sandals.

Solegrove, an old name for the moneth of
February.



Solemnity, a Pomp, or Ceremony
performed yearly, from
the Latin Solum, i. alone, and annus, i. a year.


Solicitation, (lat.) a moving to do a
thing.

Solicitude, (lat.) care, anguish of
mind.

Solidation, (lat.) a making firm, or
solid.

Solifidian, one that depends upon faith
alone without works.

Solifuge, (lat.) a certain venemous
animal, found chiefly in
the silver Mines of Sardinia.

Soliloquy, (lat.) a talking, or discoursing
with ones self alone.

Solitude, (lat.) lonelynesse,
privatenesse.

Solivagant, (lat.) wandring alone.

Sollar, (lat.) an upper roof of a house,
the story next the tiles.

Soloecisme, (Greek) a speaking contrary to
the rules of Grammar, from Soli, a
barbarous people of Pamphilia.

Solon, one of the seven wise-men of
Greece, he made excellent Laws for the government
of Athens, and abolished those of Draco;
afterwards he flying his Countrey,
went first into Aegypt, next to Cyprus:
Lastly to Cræsus of Lydia, see Cræsus.

Solstitial, (lat.) belonging to the Solstice,
or Sunstead, i. 
the time when the Sun being in Capricorn, the
dayes & nights are at the longest, which is about the
midst of June.

Solve, (lat.) to loosen, or undo, whence
Solution a loosning, or undoing; also a resolving a doubt.

A Sommer, vide a Summer.

Somniferous, (lat.) bringing, or causing
sleep.

Sonorous, (lat.) sounding, or making a loud
noise.

Sontage, a Tax of fourty shillings laid
upon every Knights fee.

Not found in OED.



Sontick, (lat.) hurtfull, or
noysome.

Sophia, a proper name of a woman,
signifying in Greek wisdom.

Sophisme, (Greek) a cunning evading
Argument, or Oration; whence Sophister, a suttle caviller in words.

Sophistication, (lat.) a falsifying,
counterfeiting, or adulterating.

Sophronia, (Greek) prudent and
temperate, a Christian name of several women.

Sophy, (Arab. Tzaophi, i. pure and
holy) the Monarch of Persia is so called.

Sopition, (lat.) a laying to sleep.

Soporation, (lat.) the same.

Soporiferous, (lat.) bringing sleep.

Sorb, (lat.) a kinde of fruit, called a
Service.

Sorbition, (lat.) a supping.

Sorbonists, the Divines of a Colledge in
Paris, called the Sorbone, from one Robert de
Surbonne, who was the founder of it.

Sorcory, or Sorcelery, (French) a
kinde of witchcraft, or inchantment, perhaps
derived from the Latin Sortilegium.

The term "sorcelery" is not found in OED.



Sordet, or Sordine, (French) a
pipe put into the mouth of a Trumpet, to make it sound lower.

Sordid, (lat.) foul, filthy, sluttish; also
base, or dishonest.

A Sore, or Sore-el, a Male fallow
Deer of three year old.

A Sorel colour, a kinde of a brownish, dun,
or dark red.

Sorites, (Greek) a kind of a Syllogism,
consisting of divers propositions heaped together.

Sororcation, (lat.) a swelling, or becoming
round, and embossed like a young Virgin's breasts.

Sorority, (lat.) sisterhood.

Sortilegie, (lat.) a divination by
lots.

Sortition, (lat.) a casting of lots.

Sospitation, (lat.) a keeping safe and in
health, a preserving from danger.

Sote, (old word) sweet.

Sothale, a kinde of intertainment made by
Bayliffs to those of their hundred for their gain; it is
also called Filctale.

Not found in OED.



Sothernwood, a kinde of plant, called in
Latin Abrotonum.

Sothfast, (Sax.) true, faithfull.

Soulack, a great Officer among the Turks.

Not found in OED.



Source, (French) a spring-head; also a rise, or beginning of any
thing from the Latin word Surgere to arise.

Sourd, (lat.) deaf.

Sourdet, see Sordet.

Sous, a kinde of French Coin,
valuing about a penny.

Southhampton, or South-Anton, the
chief Citie of Hantshire, so called as being
situate on the South-side of the River Test, named in times
past Anton; some think it to be the same with
that Town, which Antonine calleth
Clausentum, from the Brittish
Cladh-Henton, i. the Haven of
Henton, in the wars between King
Edward the third, and Philip Valoise,
it was burnt to the ground by the French, out of the ashes



whereof immediately sprung up the Town which is now in being.


Sown, a word proper to the Exchequer,
signifying as much as to be leviable, or possible to be gathered.

Sownder, a term used by Hunters for a
company of wild Bores, as a herd for Deer.


S P

Spade, (lat.) gelded.

Spadiceous, (lat.) of a bright bay colour,
from Spadix the branch of a Date-tree.

Spagyrical, (lat.) belonging to
chymical operations.

Spahy, (Persian Espawhee) a
Turkish Horseman compleatly armed.

Spaid, a term used by Hunters, a red male
Deer of three years old.

Sparsion, (lat.) a sprinkling.

Sparta, a famous City of
Peloponnessus, built by Spartus the son
of Phoroneus, or as some say, by Sparta
the daughter of Eurotas; it is otherwise called
Lacedæmon.

Spartacus, a Thracian gladiatour
or swordplayer, who with Chrysus and
Oenomaus, broke
out of Capua, got together an Army of slaves, and
overthrew Clodius, Glaber, Lentulus, and
Cassius; thereby making
himself very formidable to the Romans;
at last he was put to flight by
Crassus,
but afterwards making head again,
was vanquisht and slain.

Spasmatical, (Greek) troubled with a Spasm,
i. a cramp or shrinking in of the sinews.

Spathule, or Spat, (lat.) an
instrument wherewith Chirurgians spread their
plaisters; it is also called a splatter or slice.

Spatiation, (lat.) a walking at length, or
in a large compasse.

Species, (lat.) a different kind or form of
any thing; in Logick it is reckoned one of the 5 Predicables.

Specifical, (lat.) special, distinguishing
the species or kind.

Specification, (lat.) a signifying,
declaring, or manifesting.

Specious, (lat.) beautiful to the sight,
fair to behold.

Spectacle, (lat.) a publick or solemn
shew.

Spectator, (lat.) a beholder, or looker
on.

Spectre, (lat.) a frightful apparition, a
vision, ghost, or spirit.

Speculation, (lat.) a spying or watching,
also a contemplating or considering.

Spel, (Sax.) a word or saying; also
vulgarly used for a charm.

Spelt, a kind of corn growing in some parts
of the World, called in Latin Zea.

Sperage, a kind of plant called in Latin Asparagus.

Spermatical, (Greek) belonging to sperm,
i. the natural seed of any living creature.

Sperma Ceti, see Parmaceti.

Speustick, (Greek) done or made up in
haste.

Sphacelism, (Greek) a kind of ulcer or
dangerous inflammation.

Sphærical, (lat.) belonging to a sphere,
i. a round globous figure, commonly
taken for the round compasse of the Heaven.

Sphæromachy, (Greek) a playing at bowls or
tennis.

Sphinx, the name of a certain Monster that
kept anciently near Thebes, proposing a riddle to
all passengers that came that way, and none being able to
unfold it, she destroyed them all: at last
Oedipus coming
that way and expounding it, she threw her self headlong down a rock for grief.

Spiciferous, (lat.) bearing eares of
corn.

Spicilegy, (lat.) a gleaning, a gathering
eares of corn.

See OED "spici-".



Spigurnells, a word now out of use,
anciently the sealers of
the Kings Writs were known by that term, which office
together with the Sergeancy of the Kings Chappel, John
de Bohun, the son of Franco resigned unto
King Edward the first.

Spinal, (lat.) belonging to a
Spine, i. a thorn, prickle, or sting; also the backbone.

Spinosity, (lat.) a being full of spines or
thorns.

Spinster, a Law term, being
appropriated to unmarried women in all deeds, bonds, and evidences.

Spintrian, (lat.) inventing new actions of
lust.

Spiracle, (lat.) a breathing-hole, a place
through which smoak may have a vent.

Spiral, (lat.) belonging to a pyramid or
spire-steeple.



Spiration, (lat.) a breathing or
exhaling.


Spiritualities, the profits which a Bishop
receiveth from his spiritual living.

Spissitude, (lat.) thicknesse or
grossenesse.

Spitter, see Brocket or Pricket.

A Spittle-house, (Ital. Spedale)
see Hospital.

Spleget, the same as Pleget.

Splendid, (lat.) bright, cleer, shining,
glorious.

Splenetick, (lat.) troubled with a
disease or ill humours in
the spleen or milt, i. a Bowel in the left side
under the midrife, over against the liver.

Spoliation, (lat.) a robbing or spoiling;
also a Writ that lieth for one incumbent against another,
when the right of patronage
cometh not in debate.

Spondee, (Greek) a foot in a verse,
consisting of two long syllables.

Spondyles, (Greek) the vertebres or turning
joynts of the back-bone.

Spongious, (lat.) full of holes like a
sponge, which is a kind of plant-animal growing under the sea-rocks.

Sponsal, or Sponsalitious, (lat.)
belonging to a spouse.

Sponsion, (lat.) a bargain or promise; but more especially relating
to Marriage.

Spontane, (lat.) done willingly,
unconstrained, or of ones own accord.

See OED "spontal."



Sporades, certain Islands that lie
scattered up and down in the Carpathian Sea.

Spraints, a term among Hunters, the dung of
an Otter.

Spray, (old word) a
bough or sprig.

Spretion, (lat.) a contemning,
despising, or scorning.

Sprights, a sort of short or flight arrows.

Spring-tides, see Neap-tides.

Springal, (Dutch) a stripling or
youngman.

Spume, (lat.) foam, froth, or scum.

† Spurcidical, (lat.) speaking
filthily or uncleanly.

Spurious, (lat.) baseborn; also
counterfeit.

Spurkets, a term in Navigation, the spaces
between the futtocks by the ship sides fore and aft, above and below.


S Q

Squadron, (French) a certain number of
souldiers formed into a square body

Squalid, (lat.) unclean, sluttish,
ill-favoured.

Squamigerous, (lat.) bearing scales
scaly.

Squill, (lat.) a kind of plant otherwise
called the Sea-onion.

Squinancy, or Squincy, a kind of
disease which causeth a swelling in the throat, called in Latin Angina.

Squinanth, (lat.) a kind of plant
otherwise called the Sweet-rush.


S T

Stability, (lat.) stablenesse, firmnesse,
surenesse.

Stabulation, (lat.) a standing of cattel in
a stable or stall.

Stade, (lat.) a furlong, or the eighth part
of an Italian mile, which consisteth of a thousand paces.

Stafford, the chief Town of
Staffordshire, called in ancient times Betheny, where
Berteline, a holy man led an Eremites
life; it hath a Castle on the south bank of the River
built in the year 914  by King Edw. the Elder.

Staggard, (a term in Hunting) a red male
Deer of 4 years old.

Stagira, a Town in Macedonia,
where Aristotle was born; whence that
Philosopher is called the Stagirite.

Stainand colours, in Heraldry, are
tawney and murrey.

Stallage, (French) in Common Law,
signifieth money paid for setting of stalls in Markets or Faires.

Stallion, (Ital.) a horse kept for
mares.

Standard, (French) the chief Ensign of an
Army, belonging to the King or General;
also the standing measure of the King or State, to which
all other measures are framed.

Stanford, in Saxon Steanford, a Town
in Lincolnshire, situate upon the River
Welland; it is so called as being built of
rough stone, Stean signifying in the Saxon
tongue a stone. In this Town, under the reign of King
Edward the third, an University
was instituted, and publick profession
of Arts began to flourish; but this Academy continued
not long, it being soon after provided by oath, that no Stu­



dent in Oxford should publickly professe at
Stanford to the prejudice of Oxford.
There is also another Stanford situate upon the
River Avon in Northamptonshire.


The Stannaries, (lat.) the Mines or
Tin-works in Cornwall. see Lodework.

Stanza, (Ital.) a certain number of verses
commonly called a staffe, at the ending of which the stroph is concluded.

Staple, a City or Town where the
Merchants by common order carry their commodities,
for the better utterance of them by the great.

Staple-Inne, see Inne.

Star-chamber, (so called from a
Chamber in Westminster beautified with Stars, wherein this
Court was first kept) a Court consisting of the members of
the Kings Council, wherein are controverted all matters in
which appeal is made from subjects to their Prince.

Start, applied to a Hare, when you force
her to leave her seat or form; for then you are said to start a Hare.

Starrulet, (diminutive) a little Star.

Stasiarch, (Greek) a Captain or chief
Ringleader in any tumult or sedition.

Stater, (Greek) a certain ancient coin,
valuing about two shillings in silver, seventeen shillings in gold.

Staticks, (Greek) a mechanick Art, treating
about weights and measures.

Station, (lat.) a standing-place; also a
bay or rode for ships.

Station-staff, an instrument used in
Surveying, being a streight pole divided into feet, inches, and parts of inches, from the bottom upward.

Stationary, is when a Planet stands still and moves neither backward nor foreward.

Statuary, (lat.) a Graver of Statues or
Images.

Statumination, (lat.) an
underpropping or setting up.

Statute, (lat.) signifieth in Common Law, a
Decree or Act of Parliament.

Statute Merchant, and Statute
Staple, are certain bonds made between Creditor and
Debtor, in the form of a Statute, and acknowledged before
the Mayor and chief Warden of any City, and two Merchants
assigned for that purpose.

Statute Sessions, are certain petty
Sessions or Meetings in every hundred.

Steccado, (Span.) the lists, a place rail'd in for the beholding of
any famous Combat.

Stede, (old word) place.

Stedship, (old word) firmnesse or
surenesse.

To Steer, in Navigation, is to govern the
ship with the helm; also by metaphor to govern or manage any affair.

Stellar, (lat.) belonging to a star.

Stellation, (lat.) a blasting.

Stelliferous, (lat.) starry, bearing
stars.

Stellion, (lat.) a little beast, so called
from certain little spots upon its skin, almost in the fashion of stars.

Stellionate, (lat.) deceit, cousenage,
counterfeiting any kinde of merchandize.

Stemme, (Greek) the stalk of any herb or
flower; also a stock, linage or pedigree.

Stenography, (Greek) the Art of
short-writing.

Stentorian voice, a roaring loud voice,
from Stentor a Greek, whose voice was as loud as 50 mens voices together.

Stephen, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Greek a Crown.

Stercoration, (lat.) a dunging or
covering with dung.

Sterility, (lat.) barrennesse.

Sterling, see Easterling.

Stern, the aftermost part of a ship; also
among Hunters the taile of a Greyhound is so called, as
also the taile of a Woolf.

Sternutation, (lat.) a sneezing.

Sterquilinious, (lat.) belonging to a
dunghil.

Stesimbrotus, the son of
Epaminondas, a famous Theban Captain, he
was put to death by his father for fighting against the
enemy contrary to his command.

Stews, (from the French word
Estuve, a Hot-house) brothel houses or places
where women prostitute their bodies for gain.

Sthenelus, a famous Captain in the wars of
Troy, the son of Capaneus and Euadne.

Sthenobæa, the daughter of
Jobatas King of the Lycians, and the
wife of Prætus King of the Corinthians,
who receiving a repulse from Bellerophon,
complained to her husband, as if he would have offered
violence unto her.

Stibium, a kind of Mineral whereof there is
great plenty in Darbyshire Mines; it is commonly called Antimony.



To Stigmatize, (Greek) to brand, or mark with a
hot Iron.


Stilletto, or Steletto, (Ital.) a
sharp pointed Dagger, or Ponyard.

Stillatory, (lat.) dropping, or distilling;
also a place to put a Still, or Limbeck in.

Stillicide, (lat.) a dropping from the eves
of a house.

Stillyard, a place in London,
where in old time the Merchants of Haunse and
Almain used to reside; it is so called as it were
Steel-yard, because Steel used to be sold there.

Stimulation, (lat.) a provoking, moving, or
stirring up.

Stipation, (lat.) a guarding, or
invironing about.

Stipendial, or Stipendiary, (lat.)
serving for wages, or hire, paying tribute.

Stipone, a kinde of sweet compounded drink
used in hot weather.

Stiptical, (Greek) stopping, or binding a
wound, used in Physick.

Stipulation, (lat.) a solemne Covenant made
by ordinary words in the Law.

Stiricide, (lat.) a dropping of Isicles
from the eves of a house.

Stirling, a County in the Southpart of Scotland.

Stoaked, a Term in Navigation, when the
water cannot come to the Well, by reason that ballast, or
something else is got into the limber holes.

Stoccado, (Span.) a prick, stab, or thrust
with a weapon.

Stoical, (Greek) belonging to, or of the
humour of the stoicks, i. a certain Sect of
Philosophers at Athens, they were so
called from Stoa,
i. a Porch, because Zeno their first founder
taught in a Porch of the Citie.

Stoke, a Village in
Nottinghamshire, where Sir John de la
Pool, Earle of Lincoln
pretending a title to the Crown of England, was
overthrown in a great pitched
battel, and slain.

Stole, (Greek) a long Robe, or
Garment of honour, among
the ancient Romans it is
now more especially taken for a Priestly Ornament.

Stolidity, (lat.) foolishnesse, fondnesse,
dulnesse, blockishnesse.

Stomachous, (lat.) angry,
disdainfull.

Stomatick, (Greek) having a sore
mouth.

Stone of Wool, see Sarplar.

Stonefaulcon, a kind of Hawk that builds
her Nest in Rocks.

See OED "stone", n..



Stonehenge, a wonderfull Pile of stones
upon Salisbury plain, erected within the Circuit
of a Ditch, in manner of a Crown in three ranks, one
within another, whereof
some are 28 foot high, and seven foot broad, upon the
heads of which others lie overthwart with Mortises; so as
the whole frame seemeth to hang; it is termed by the old
Historians Chorea Gigantum, i. the Gyants dance.

Stooming of Wine, a putting baggs of herbs,
or other infusions into it.

Stork, a kinde of bird, so called from the
Greek word Storge, i. natural
affection, because of the care which is observed
in these kinde of birds toward their Parents, when they grow old.

To Stow, a Term in Navigation, to put any
victuals, or goods in order in the hold of a ship.

Stounds, (old word) sorrows, dumps.

Stours, (old word) shocks, or
bronts.

Strabisme, (Greek) a looking a
squint.

Strage, (lat.) a felling of Trees, a great
ruine, or fall of any thing; also a great slaughter in an Army.

The Strake of a wheel, the Iron
wherewith the Cartwheel is bound.

Straineth, a Term in Faulconry they say,
the Hawk straineth, and not snatcheth.

Strangurie, (Greek) a certain disease,
wherein the Urine is voided drop by drop, and with great
pain; it is vulgarly called the Strangullion.

Strappado, (Ital.) a certain kinde of
punishment inflicted on Souldiers for some hainous
offence, by drawing them up on high with their arms tied backward.

Stratagem, (Greek) a policy, or subtle
invention in war.

Strath, an old Brittish word,
signifying a Vale, or Dale, whence are derived the names
of several places, as Strathdee, i. the Vale of
Dee, Strathearn, the Vale of Earn.

Stratiotick, (Greek) belonging to
Souldiers, warlike.

A Streight, a narrow passage at Sea, between two Lands.

Stremeworks, see Lodeworks.

Not found in OED.



Strenuous, (lat.) stout, valiant,
hardy.

Streperous, (lat.) jarring, making a
noise.

Stricture, (lat.) a gathering, or
cropping of fruit; also a
spark that flies from red hot Iron.



Strident, or Stridulous, (lat.) making
a creaking noise.


Strigilation, (lat.) a currying of a
Horse.

Strigment, (lat.) the filth, which is wiped
off from the body, or any part of it.

To Strike sayl, a Term in Navigation, to
pull down the sayls, in token of respect to another ship.

Stromatick, (Gr.) belonging to
strewings, or any thing that is spread upon the ground.

Strond, or Strand, a shore, or
street lying upon the Sea, or River side.

Structure, (lat.) a building, frame, or
Fabrick of any thing.

Strumatick, (lat.) troubled with a Strume,
i. an Impostume, or swelling in the neck.

Studious, (lat.) seriously bent upon a
thing, musing, or meditating, intent upon books, or study,
whence formerly Academies
were called Studia, i. studies, as the study of
Oxford, &c.

Stultiloquy, (lat.) a speaking, or talking
foolishly.

Stupefaction, (lat.) a making stupid,
i. dull, sencelesse, astonished, or dismaid.

Stupration, (lat.) a committing a
rape, a deflowring a Virgin.

Stygian, (lat.) belonging to the River
Styx, i. a Fountain near Nonacris in
Arcædia, whose
waters are of a nature so vehemently
cold, that nothing but the hoof 
of a Mule is able to contain them; the Poets fained it to
be a River of Hell, and that the most solemne Oath, which
the gods swore by, was by the waters of
Styx.

Stylo Novo, the new computation of time,
according to the Gregorian account, as Stylo
veteri is the computation, according to the Julian account.

Styptick, or Styptical, (lat.) of
a stopping, or binding quality.


S U

Suada, a certain goddesse among the Romans
called the goddesse of eloquence, as Pitho was among the Greeks.

Suasory, (lat.) apt to perswade, or
exhort.

Suaviation, (lat.) an amorous
kissing.

Suaviloquy, (lat.) a sweet, or pleasant
manner of speaking.

Suavity, (lat.) sweetnesse.

Subaction, (lat.) a bringing under, or
subduing; also a kneading.

Subagitation, (lat.) a driving to and fro;
also a solliciting, also a knowing a woman carnally.

Subalbid, (lat.) whitish, inclining to
white.

See OED "sub-".



Subaltern, (lat.) taking turns under
another.

Subaudition, (lat.) a hearing a little, a
perceiving somewhat.

Subclavicular Vein, see Vein.

Subcutaneous, (lat.) being under the
skin.

Subdial, (lat.) being under the sky, or in
the open aire.

Subdititious, (lat.) put under, or laid in
the room of another.

Subdolous, (lat.) somewhat crafty, or
deceitfull.

Subduction, (lat.) a bringing, or
leading under; also a leading away, or withdrawing.

Subject, (lat.) cast, or brought under;
also in Logick, it is taken substantively for that
substantial body, to which any quality adheres; also the
matter which any art, or science treats of.

Subingression, (lat.) a subtile, or
undiscerned entring into.

Subitaneous, (lat.) done suddenly, or
hastily.

Subjugætion, (lat.) a bringing under the
yoke, a subduing.

Subjunctive, (lat.) joyning under.

Subhastation, (lat.) an ancient manner of
selling things among the Romans, which were confiscate to
the publick use, namely under a Spear, or Javelin.

Sublation, (lat.) a taking away.

Sublevation, (lat.) a lifting up; also a helping, or easing.

Subligation, (lat.) a binding, or tying
underneath.

Sublimation, (lat.) a raising, or
carrying up on high; also
a Chymical operation
wherein dry exhalations ascending upward, stick to the
sides of the Alembick.

Sublimity, (lat.) heighth.

Sublition, (lat.) a plaistering, or
daubing underneath, in
painting it is the grasing, or laying the ground colour under the perfect colour.

Submersion, (lat.) a plunging under
water.

Submission, (lat.) a sending under;



also a submitting, yielding, or humbling ones self.


Subordinate, (lat.) placed, or appointed
under another.

Suborn, (lat.) to prepare, instruct, or set
any one on upon the bearing false witnesse, or any other
mischievous design.

Subpedaneous, (lat.) set under foot, used
as a footstool.

Subpæna, a Writ to call a man into the
Chancery, upon such case onely as the Common-law faileth in; also a Writ for the calling in of witnesses to
testifie.

Subreptitious, (lat.) see Surreptitious.

Subrision, (lat.) a smiling.

Subrogation, (lat.) see Surrogation.

Subsannation, (lat.) a mocking, jeering, or
scoffing.

Subscription, (lat.) a writing
underneath, a setting
ones name at the bottom of a Letter, Bond, or Indenture.

Subsidence, (lat.) a setling to the
bottome.

Subsidiary, (lat.) sent to the aid,
succour, or assistence of
any one.

Subsidie, a Tax, or Tribute assessed by
Parliament, after the rate of four shillings in the pound
for Lands, and two shillings 8d. for goods.

Subsortition, (lat.) a choosing by lot,
after others have chosen.

Substitution, (lat.) a putting in the place
or room of another.

Substraction, (lat.) a drawing a lesser, number out of a greater.

Substruction, (lat.) a Term in
Architecture, an underbuilding, a laying the foundation
of an Aedifice.

Subsultation, (lat.) a leaping
under.

Subterfluous, (lat.) flowing under.

Subterfuge, (lat.) an evasion, or
cunning shift; also a safe
retreat, or refuge.

Subterraneous, (latin) being under
ground.

Subtiltie, (lat.) craft, cunning, whence
subtilties, quirks, or witty sayings.

Subventaneous, (lat.) lying under the
winde.

Subversion, (lat.) an overturning, or
overthrowing.

Suburbian, (lat.) belonging to the
Suburbs of a Town, or Citie.

Succedaneous, (lat.) succeeding, or
coming in the room of another.

Succedent houses, second, fifth, ninth, eleventh.

Succentour, (lat.) vulgarly
Sincantour, See Incentour.

Succenturiation, (lat.) a Term in War, a
recruiting a filling up the number of Souldiers wanting in
any Company, or Troup.

Succernation, (lat.) a bolting, or sifting
of Meal.

Succiduous, (lat.) tottering, ready to
fall.

Succinct, (lat.) fenced, or girt about;
also brief, or short.

Succinous, (lat.) belonging to
Succinum, i. Amber.

Succollation, (lat.) a bearing on the
shoulders.

Succubus, (lat.) see Incubus.

Succulent, (lat.) juicy, full of
juice.

Succussation, or Succussion, (lat.) a violent jolting,
or shaking.

Suction, (lat.) a sucking.

Sudation, (lat.) a sweating, whence
sudatory, a stew, or hot-house.

Sudorifick, (lat.) bringing, or causing
sweat.

Suecia, a Kingdom of Europe, lying
on the North of Germany, anciently inhabited by
the Goths, the chief Citie of which is called
Stockholm.

Suffarraneous, or Subfarraneous,
(lat.) being under another servant; it being an ancient
custome among the Romans, that the chief servant took his
portion of Corn from the master, the under servant from him.

Suffection, (lat.) a putting under, or in
the room of another.

Suffition, (lat.) a perfuming by casting
perfumes upon hot Coales.

Sufflamination, (lat.) a stopping the
wheels of a Coach, or Cart, with an Instrument called a
Sufflamen, or Trigger.

Sufflation, (lat.) a puffing up, a making to swell with
blowing.

Suffocation, (lat.) a choaking, stifeling, or stopping up of the
breath.

Suffossion, (lat.) an undermining, or
digging under.

Suffragation, (lat.) a giving suffrage,
i. ones vote or voice in favour of any
person or design.

A Suffragan, is one who hath a voice in
Ecclesiasticall causes, and executes the office of a
Bishop, but hath not the title.



Suffumigation, (lat.) a fuming or
smoaking underneath; in
Physick it is taken for a conveying a fume into the body
from under a close-stoole.


Suffusion, (lat.) a pouring or spreading
abroad; also a disease in the eye called a pin and web.

Suggestion, (lat.) a prompting or
putting into ones mind.

Sugillation, (lat.) a beating black and
blew; allo a reproaching or slandering.

Suhit, see Gazul.

Not found in OED.



Sulcation, (lat.) a making furrows.

Sulphureous, (lat.) full of sulphur or
brimstone.

Sultan, or Soldan, among the Turks
is taken for a King or Prince.

Sultana, or Sultanin, a kind of
Turkish coin of Gold, valuing about seven
shillings six pence.

Sumach, or Sumack, a kind of
rank-smelling plant with a black berry
wherewith Curriers use to dresse their cloth.

Sumage, (from the French word
Somme, i. a burden,
or seam, which in the Western parts signifieth a
horse-load) a toll for carriage on horseback.

Summary, (lat.) a briefe gathering together
of the whole matter in few words.

A Summer, in Architecture, is a great piece
of timber or beam which supporteth the building.

Summity, (lat.) the highest part, or top of
any thing.

Superable, (lat.) to be overcome or
vanquisht.

Sumpter horse, a horse that undergoes the
burthen of things convenient for a journey, from the Latin
Sumptus, charges or expences.

Superaffusion, (lat.) a shedding upon, a
pouring on the top.

Superannuation, (Ital.) an out-living, or
growing out of date.

Superbiloquent, (lat.) speaking
proudly or haughtily.

Superchery, (lat.) wrong, injury, an
outragious assaulting.

Supercilious, (lat.) having great
eyebrows; also of a sour
countenance, severe in carriage.

Supereminence, (lat.) excellence, or
authority above others.

Supererogation, (lat.) a performing more
good works than a man is bound to do:  a term in
Theology.

Superfætation, (lat.) a second
conceiving before the first young is brought forth, a breeding of young upon
young, as Hares and Conies do.

Superficiary, (lat.) he that builds a house
upon another mans ground, and payes quit-rent.

Superficies, (lat.) the surface or
uttermost part of any
thing. In Geometry it is defined to be a magnitude
consisting of lines having onely length and breadth
without profundity.

Superfluity, (lat.) excesse, an
over-abounding, more than enough.

Superjection, (lat.) a casting upon.

To Superinduce, (lat.) to bring or draw one
thing over another.

Superintendent, (lat.) an Overseer.

Superiority, (lat.) a being Superiour,
i. higher, set above or over others.

Superiour Planets, those that are above the
Sun.  ♄ ☾ ♃ ☉.

Entity references for Saturn, Jupiter, the Sun, and the waning moon (?) are taken from 




Superlative, (lat.) highest advanc't; in
Grammar Superlative degree is the highest degree
of comparison.

Supermeation, (lat.) a flowing or
passing over.

Supernal, (lat.) coming from above.

Supernatation, (lat.) a swimming over, or
upon.

Supernatural, (lat.) being above nature or
natural cause.

Superscription, (lat.) a writting over or
on the out side of any thing.

To Supersede, (lat.) to omit, to
leave off, to let passe.

Supersedeas, a Writ signifying a
command to stay the doing of that which in appearance of Law were to be done.

Superstition, (lat.) over-scrupulousnesse
in Religion, over much ceremony in divine worship.

Supervacaneous, (lat.) more than, just, or,
serveth for common use, needless, vain, unnecessary.

To Supervene, (lat.) to come upon on a
sudden or unexpected.

To Supervive, see Survive.

Supine, (lat.) lying with the face
upward; also negligent or carelesse.

Suppedaneous, (lat.) see Subpedaneous.

Suppeditation, (lat.) a supplying,
ministering, or affording what is needful.

Suppilation, (lat.) a pilfring, or
stealing underhand.

To supplant, (lat.) to plant or set
under, also to deceive or beguile.

Supplement, (lat.) a supplying the which



is defective, a filling up a place that is
vacant or empty.


A Suppliant, (French) a petitioner or
humble suiter.

Supplication, (lat.) a petitioning or
making an humble request.

Supplice, (lat.) punishment or
corre­
cion.

Supplosion, (lat.) a making a noise by
stamping with the feet.

Supposititious, (lat.) laid in the place or
room of another.

Suppository, (lat.) put under; also in
Physick it is used substantively for any solid composition
put up into the body to make it soluble.

To Suppresse, (lat.) to presse under, to
stifle or keep down.

Suppuration, (lat.) a ripening of a bile or
imposthume, a gathering or resolving into matter.

Supputation, (lat.) a pruning of trees;
also a counting or casting up.

Supremacy, (lat.) a being Supreme,
i. highest in power and authority.

Surannation, (lat.) the same as
Superannuation.

A Surbating, (French) a beating or
galling on the soles of ones feet.

To Surcease, (French) to give over.

Surcharge, (French) charge upon charge, or
load upon load.

A Surcharger of the Forrest, he that
commons with more beasts than a man hath right to common withal.

A Surcingle, (French) an upper girth or
girdle.

Surcoat, (French) a coat of Armes to wear over armour.

Surcrew, (French) an over-growing; also
advantage, amends, over-measure.

Not found in OED but see "surcrease," n.



Surculation, (lat.) a pruning of trees, a
cutting off Surcles, i. young graffs, shoots, or sprigs.

Surdity, (lat.) deafnesse.

Surge, a wave, from the Latin
Surgere, i. to rise.

Sureby, a Port Town in Yorkshire,
which some think to be the same with that
ancient Town called by
Antonine Ευλίμενον Gabrantovicorum,
and by the Latins Sinus portuosus
& salutaris, each of these names implying as much
as, sure or safe Haven.

Surface, (French) the same as
Superficies.

Surkney, a kind of white garment like a rotchet.

To Surmount, (French) to excell, to
overcome.

To Surpasse, (French) the same.

Suria, the name of a certain goddesse to
whom an altar was anciently erected at Melkrig in
Northumberland by Licinius Clemens a
Captain under Calphurnus Agricola,
Lieutenant to Augustus.

Surplusage, (French) signifieth in
Common Law, a superfluity
or addition more than needeth, which is a cause sometimes
that the Writ abateth.

Surprizal, (French) a sudden
assaulting or setting
upon, a coming upon a man unawares.

Surquedry, (old word) pride,
presumption.

Surrejoynder, (French) a second defence of
the Plaintiffs action, opposite to the Defendants
rejoynder. The Civilians call it
Triplication.

A Surrender, in Common Law, is an
instrument or writing, signifying a
Tenants consent or
agreement to yield and give up his lands to the possession
of him that hath the next immediate remainder or
reversion.

Surrentum, a Town of Campania in
Italy, built by the Greeks, anciently
called Petræ Sirenum.

Surreptitious, (lat.) taken deceitfully, or
by stealth.

Surrogation, (lat.) an appointing as
Deputy in the roome of another.

To Survive, (French) to out-live; whence a
Surviver in Common Law, is taken for the longer liver of two joynt­
-tenants.

Susan, the proper name of a woman,
signifying in Heb. Lilly.

Susception, (lat.) an enterprising or
undertaking a thing.

Susceptible, (lat.) plyable, apt to receive
any impression.

Suscitation, (lat.) a raising, quickning or
stirring up.

Suspension, (lat.) a hanging up; also a
being in doubt or uncertainty: in
Common Law it is taken for
a temporal stop of a mans right.

Suspiral, (French) a breathing-hole, a vent
or passage for air; also a spring of water, passing under
ground to a Conduit.

Suspiration, (lat.) a fetching a deep
sigh.

Susurration, (lat.) a whispring, or
muttring.



Sutherland, the name of a Countrey in the
North-part of Scotland.


Sutorious, (lat.) belonging to a
Shoomaker.

Suture, (lat.) a seam, or sewing
together, a fastning
together of bones. There are three remarkable Sutures in
the head, the Coronal, Lamdoidal, and Sagittal.


S W

Swainmot, (Sax.) a Court of
Freeholders within the
Forrest kept by the Charter
of the Forrest thrice a year.

Swallows-taile a term among
Architectours and Carpenters, a fastning together
of two pieces of timber so strongly, that they cannot fall asunder.

Swan, a celestial Constellation.

Swart ruiter, see Ruiter.

To Sweep, a Hawk after she hath fed, is
said to sweep, not wipe her beake.

Swepe, a certain instrument with
crossebeams, to draw water with.

Swilpough, a Dilling, or child born when
the Parents are old.

Swink, (old word) labour.

Swithin, a proper name, signifying in the
Saxon tongue, very high. There was a Bishop of
Winchester famous for holinesse
called St. Swithin.


S Y

Sybaritical, dainty, wanton, effeminate,
from the Sybariæ, the inhabitants of the City
Sybaris, a people advanced to that height of
luxury and voluptuousnesse, that they had their horses
taught to dance to the sound of the Flute, by which means,
the Crotoniatæ who waged war with them, bringing
pipers along with them into the field, made their horses
to fall a dancing; whereupon they rushed in among them,
broke their ranks, and utterly overthrew them, and
destroyed their City.

Sybill, (Heb.) divine doctrine, a
Christian name of divers women.

Sybilline, (lat.) belonging to the
Sybills, who were certain women that prophesied
concerning the birth of our Saviour Christ; they were
thought to be ten in number, the Persian, Cumæan,
Lybian, Delphian, Erythræan, Samian,
Hellespontian, Phrygian, Tiburtine, Cuman.

Sycomore, (Greek) a kind of fair tree,
abounding in many parts of Aegypt,
partaking partly of the
Fig-tree, partly of the Mulberry.

To Sycophantise, (Greek) to play the
sycophant, i. a parasite, flatterer, or tale-bearer.

Syderation, (lat.) a blasting. Syderation, in Physick is when
not onely the solid parts but the bones also are corrupted.

Sylla, a famous Roman Captain, who brought
Jugurth in chaines to Rome, overcame
Mithridates, broke the tyranny of Cinna,
and banished Marius: afterwards being made
Dictatour, he became Tyrannical
himself, till at last the Commonwealth
being setled, he retired to Puteoli,
where he lived a private life.

Syllabical, (Greek) consisting of
syllables.

Syllogistical, (Greek) belonging to a
Syllogisme, i. a kind of argumentation wherein
some things being granted, there follows necessarily a
conclusion different from those things which were granted.

Sylvanectum, a Town of Picardy in
France, now called Senlis.

Sylvanus, the son of Valerius, by
his daughter Valeria Tusculanaria, he was called
the god of the Woods, and by some thought to be the same with Pan.

Sylvatical, or Sylvestrious,
(lat.) woody, full of trees, belonging to Woods or Forrests.

Symbolycal, (Greek) belonging to a Symbol,
i. a sign or token, a secret note, a short or mysterious sentence.

Symmachy, (Greek) a joyning in war
against a common enemy.

Symmetry, (Greek) a due proportion of each
part in respect of the whole

Sympathetical, (Greek) having a
sympathy, i. a natural agreement or consent in mutual affection or passion.

Symphoniacal, (Greek) belonging to
Symphony, i. consent in Harmony, agreement in tune or time.

Symposiast, (Greek) the Master or
Overseer of a Feast or Banquet.

Symptomatical, (Greek) belonging to a
Symptome, i. an accident or effect, accompany in any disease, as the Ague doth the headach.

Synagogical, (Greek) belonging to a
Synagogue, i. a Congregation or Assembly.

Synalæpha, (Greek) a contraction of two
vowels into one.

Syncategorematical, (Greek) a term in



Logick, having no predicamental or self-signification.


Synchronical, (Greek) being or done
together at the same time.

Syncope, (Greek) a figure wherein a letter
or syllable is taken out of the
middle of a word; also in
Physick it is taken for a certain disease which causeth a sudden decay of the spirits.

Synchrism, (Greek) a kind of liquid or
spreading ointment.

Synchronism, (Greek) a hapning of two
things at the same time.

Syncope, a sudden or hasty decay of the
strength caused by a disolution of the natural heat.

Syndick, (Greek) one that hath
Commission to deal in the affairs of the Common-wealth, a Controller or Censor.

Syndrome, (Greek) a concourse,
meeting or running together.

Synecdochical, (Greek) belonging to the
figure Synecdoche, i. a taking a part for the
whole.

Syneresis, or Synæresis, (Greek)
the same as Synalæpha.

Syngraph, (Greek) a deed or writing signed
with ones own hand.

Synodical, (Greek) belonging to a
Synod, i. an Assembly or meeting together of Ecclesiastical persons, to
consult about the affairs of the Church.

Synonimous, or Synonimal words,
(Gr.) several words having all the same
signification.

Synople, (French) a term in Heraldry,
signifying Green.

Synopsie, (Greek) a brief summing up of
things contained in a large Treatise.

Syntagme, (Greek) an ordering,
disposing, or placing of things together.

Syntax, (Greek) the same; also in Grammar
it is taken for a joyning together
of the several parts of Speech in an orderly construction.

Synteresie, (Greek) a remorce, or sting of
conscience.

Syntheme, (Greek) a watch-word; also an
intricate sentence; also the same as Diploma.

Syracuse, the chief City anciently of the
Isle of Sicily, where the Poet Theocritus was born.

Syria, a Region of Asia, by some
divided into Syria, Assyria, Coelosyria, and Leucosyria.

Syrinx, an Arcadian Nimph, one of
the Naiades, who flying from the violence of
Pan, was turned into a reed, of which
Pan made his pastoral pipe, which for her sake he
much delighted to play upon.

Syrtes, two dangerous creeks in the
Lybian Sea, called the greater Syrtis
and the lesser Syrtis.

Systatique, (Greek) compacting,
ordering, or placing together.

Sysigie, (Greek) a conjunction, a
joyning or coupling together.

Not found in OED.



System, (Greek) a composing, or
putting together; also a Treatise or body of any Art or Science, also the compasse
of a Song.

Systole, (Greek) a contraction or
drawing together; also in
Physick it is taken for that motion of the pulse which
compresses the heart and arteries as Diastole dilates them; also a
making short a long vowel.


T A

St. TAbbs, or St. Ebbes, a Town in
the Bishoprick of Durham, otherwise called
Ebbechester, from Ebba, a Virgin of the
blood Royal of the Northumbers, who for the great
opinion that was conceived of her Sanctimony, was
Canonized among the Saints.

Tabefaction, (Greek) a melting,
corrupting, or
consuming.

Tabellary, or Tabellion, (lat.) a
Scrivener or publick
Notary; also a Letter-carrier.

Taberd, (Sax.) a jerkin or coat without
sleeves; also a Heralds coat of Arms in service.

Tabernacle, (lat.) a Booth, or little Shop;
also a Pavilion or Tent for War. There was anciently among
the Jews a certain holy Structure so called, which was
made to remove up and down from place to place.

Tabernarious, (lat.) belonging to
Taverns or Shops.

Tabid, (lat.) wasting or pining
away.

Tabitha, the proper name of a woman,
signifying in Hebrew Roebuck.

Tabouret, (French) a little stool to sit
on.

Tabularious, (lat.) belonging to
writings, evidences or
accounts.

Tabulation, (lat.) a fastning together of
planks or boards, a making a floor.

Taces, (in French Cuisseaux)
armour for the thighs.



Tachos, a King of Aegypt, who for
jeering at the short
stature of Agesilaus, was the cause of the
breach of the league between
them, and of the losse of his own Kingdom.


Tachygraphy, (Greek) the art of swift
writing.

Tacite, (lat.) silent.

Taciturnity, (lat.) a being silent, a
holding ones peace.

Tackle, a Term in Navigation, the small
ropes of a ship.

Tacticks, (Greek) books treating of the
ordering of Souldiers in an Army.

Taction, (lat.) a touching.

Tænarum, a Promontory in the
Countrey of
Lacædemon, near which is the Den where
Hercules ascended, when he brought
Cerberus out of the deep.

Tages, the Grand-child of Jupiter,
and son of Genius, he is said to have taught the
Hetrurians the art of divining, when he was a boy
of twelve year old.

Tagliacotius, a famous Chirurgion of
Bononia, who could put on new noses.

Tagus, a river of Portugal famous
among the ancients, for its gravel resembling Gold.

Taile, in Common-law, is a kinde of
inheritance in fee, when a man holdeth certain Lands to
him, and the Heirs of his body Lawfully begotten, and is
taken opposite to
fee-simple.

Tainct, a little red coloured insect,
being a kinde of Spider that
infesteth Cattel in the
Summer time.

Takel, (old word) a Feather, or
Arrow.

Talaries, (lat.) the winged shooes, which
the Poets faigne that Mercury wore.

Talent, (lat.) a certain weight of silver,
differing in value, both among Hebrews and Greeks.

Tales, (lat.) i. such like) it is
used in Common-law, for a supply of men
empannell'd upon a
Jury, and not appearing,
or chalenged as not indifferent.

Talismannical,  belonging to
Talismans, (Arab.) i. images, or figures
made under certain constellations.

Tallage, or Tailage, (French) a
Tax, Tribute, or Imposition.

Tallion, see Lex Talionis.

Tally, or Taley, (from the French
Tailler, i. to
cut) a score, or stick of wood divided into two pieces,
for the keeping of a reckoning between two parties.

Talmudical, belonging to the Talmud,
i. a certain book compiled by the Rabbins,
containing the Law, Ceremonies, and
Religious Rites of the Jews.

Talus, a sisters son of Dædalus,
he found out the use of the saw, by seeing the Jawbone of
a Serpent, and invented the Potters wheel, but was at
length treacherously
slain by his Unkle, who envied his art and ingenuity.

Tamarinds, a kind of Indian fruit
somewhat like a
Damascene, much used in Physick.

Tamarisk, a kinde of shrub, having a red
bark, and a leaf like heath.

Tamerlane, a Scythian, who invaded
the Dominion of the Turks, with a vast
multitude of men, and
having overthrown and taken Bajazeth, the
Emperour of the Turks, he led him up and down all
Asia in an Iron Cage, he was, as some say, at
first a Swinheard, but by a full gale of
fortune, was blown up
into the Imperial Thrown.

Tamesis, the chief River of
England, which from the confluence of
Tame, and Isis, two Rivers, which
meeting together, joyn into one stream, thenceforth
assumes a name compounded of them both.

Tampoy, a kind of pleasant drink, much used
in the Moluccoes.

Tampoon, or Tampkin, a small piece
of wood serving for a bung, or stopple to a piece of Ordnance.

Tamworth, a Town so called from the River
Tame, and the Saxon word Weordh, which
signifieth a Barton, Ferm-house, or River Island;
it is situate partly in Warwick-shire,
partly in Stafford-shire, and was anciently the
chief residence of the Kings of the Mercians.
this Town after it had suffered much by the
Danish Wars, was repaired by Aethelfleda, Lady of the
Mercians; also Edith King Eadgar's sister founded here
a Religious house for veiled Virgins.

Tanacles, certain instruments of torment
like pincers.

Tanet, an Island in Kent, so
called, as some vainly imagin ἀπο τὄ 
θανατὄ,
i. from the death of Snakes, here the
Saxons first seated themselves, but were
vanquish't with a great slaughter at Stovar;
neverthelesse,
afterwards at Whipped-fleet, a place so called
from Whipped, a Saxon there slain,
Hengist overthrew the Brittains,
and put them to flight.

Tangent, (lat.) a Mathematical Term used
chiefly in Astronomy, and signifies, a



right line perpendicular, to the Diameter drawn by the
one extream of the given Arch, and terminated by the
Secant, and drawn from the Center through the other
extream of the said Arch.


Tangible, (lat.) that may be toucht.

Tanistry, a certain ancient custome in
Ireland, whereby he that had most powr, or policy
inherited in any principality, or Lordship; it comes from
the Saxon word Thane, i. a Nobleman.

Tantalus, an ancient King of
Phrygia, the son of Jupiter by the Nymph
Plotis, he inviting the gods to a feast, killed
his son Pelops, and set before them to eat, for
which he was condemned to this punishment
in Hell, namely to stand up to the chin in water, and to
have pleasant apples hang over his head, and yet to be
neither able to eat nor to drink, whence a man that is
brought near to happinesse, and yet deprived of it, is
commonly said to be Tantaliz'd.

To Tap, vide, to Beat.

Taphus and Telebus, the sons of
Pterelas, the son of Neptune and
Hippothoe, the daughter of Nestor; their
Successours, the Taphii,
and Teleboæ inhabited the Taphian, or
Echinades Islands, see Amphitryon.

Tapinage, (French) a lurking, or lying
secret, whence Tapissant, lurking, or
squatting, a Term in
Hunting.

Taprobane, an Island in the Indian
Sea, 1000 mile long, and 625 mile broad, now called
Sumatra.

Taratantarize, (Greek) to imitate the sound
of a Trumpet, which seemeth to expresse the word
Taratantara.

Tarantula, a kinde of venemous
Creature, abounding in
Tarantum, a Citie in the Kingdom of
Naples, which casteth forth a sting, onely
curable by the sound of Musick.

Tardigrade, (lat.) going a slow
place.

Tardity, (lat.) slownesse, or
delaying.

Tarentum, a Citie of Magna Græcia
in Italy, built by Tarentus the son of
Neptune, and
augmented by Phalantus, a
Lacedæmonian.

Tarpawling, a Term in Navigation, a piece
of Canvasse that is all tarr'd over to lash upon a deck,
or grating, to keep the rain from soaking through.

Tarpeia, a vestal Virgin, the daughter of
Tarpeius, she betrayed the Roman Capitol
to the Sabines, desiring for a reward what ever
they carried upon their right Arms, whereupon they all
threw their sheilds upon her, and pressed her to death.

Tarquinius Priscus, the son of
Demaratus a
Corinthian, who by the perswasion of his wife
Tanaquil went to Rome, where by
insinuating himself into the favour of Ancus
Martius, he at length obtained the Kingdom.

Tarquinius Superbus, the seventh King of
the Romans, whose son Tarquinius Sextus ravishing
Lucretia, the wife of Tarquinius
Collatinus, was the cause that kingly
Government was utterly
expelled out of Rome.

Tarracon, a famous Citie of
Arragon, anciently called Tarraconia, a
Province of Spain.

Tarrasse, see Terrasse.

Tarsus, a famous Citie of Cilicia,
where St. Paul was born, which Citie together
with Anchialus are said to have been built in one
day, by Perseus the son of Danæ.

Tartarean, (lat.) belonging to
Tartarus, i. a
deep place in Hell often mentioned
by the Poets.

Tartaria, a large Countrey of
Asia, containing Sarmatia, Asiatica, the
two Scythia's and Cataia.

Tarter, the Lees of Wine; also a kinde of
Gravelly-stone, growing in the inside of Wine
vessels.

Tasck, an old Brittish word,
signifying as much as Tribute, from whence haply cometh
our word Task, which is a duty, or labour imposed
upon any one.

Tassel, (French) 
a Term in Falconry, the
Male of any Hawk.

Titus Tatius, a Captain of the
Sabines, who after great Wars with the Romans, at
length concluding a peace with them, was received as a
sharer in the Government.

Tavistoke, or Teavistok, a Town in
Devonshire; so
called from the River Teave, it hath been famous
in times past, for the Abbey built by
Ordolph, the son of Ordgare,
Earle of Devonshire, in the year 961. he being
admonished, as some say by a Vision from Heaven; this
Abby was destroyed
by the Danes, but afterwards
flourish'd again, and in it Lectures were instituted
of the English Saxon tongue.

Tawnton, or Thonton, a Town in
Somersetshire;
so called as it were a Town watered
by the River Thone, here
Ina King
of the West-saxons, built a Castle, which
Desburgio his wife rased to the ground, after she
had expelled from thence Eadbritch,
King of the South-saxons.



Taurine, or Taurean, (lat.) belonging
to a Bull.


Taurinum, a Citie by the Alps in
Piedmont,
vulgarly called Turin.

Taurus, a very great ridge of mountains,
stretched out a mighty length through divers Countreys,
and called by several names; as Imaus, Parapomisus,
Circius, Taurus, Caucasus, Sarpedon,
Ceraunius, &c. also the name of one of the twelve
signes of the Zodiack, the word signifying in
Latin a Bull.

Tautologie, (Greek) a repeating of one
thing several times over in different
expressions.

Taximagulus, a petty King of Kent,
one of those that opposed Julius Cæsar, when he
made War with the Brittains.

Taygetus, a very steep Hill by the Citie of
Sparta.


T E

Team, or Theam, (Sax.) a Royalty
granted by the Kings Charter, to a Lord of a
Mannour.

Teasels, a kind of Plant, called in Greek
Dipsacus, in Latin labrum
veneris.

Technical, (Greek) artificial, done by
Art.

Tectonick, (lat.) belonging to a
building.

Tedder, a tying of any beast in a roap,
that he may graze within a certain compasse.

Tediferous, (lat.) bearing a Taper, or
Torch.

Tegea, a Town in Arcadia, whose
inhabitants having
great Wars with the Phæneatæ;
it was decided in a Duel between the three sons of
Therimachus for the Tegeans,
and the three sons of Demostratus for the
Phæneatæ, like that of the Horatii and
Curiatii.

Tegment, (lat.) a covering, or
cloathing.

Teifidale, a Countrey in the South-part of
Scotland, so called as it were a Dale, by the
River Teif.

Telarie, (lat.) belonging to a Weavers
Web.

See OED "telar," a..



Teliferous, (lat.) carrying, or bearing
darts.

Tellers of the Exchequer, four Officers
appointed to receive all monies due to the King, and to
give a Bill to the Clark of the Pell to charge him
therewith.

Telamon, the son of Aeacus, King
of Salamis, he
was the first that got upon the Walls of Troy,
when Hercules besieged it, whereupon he gave him
Hesione the daughter of Laomedon.

Telegonus, the son of Vlisses and
Circe, who slew his father at Ithaca not
knowing him, afterwards
going into Italy he built
Tusculum.

Telephus, the son of Hercules, and
the Nymph Auge, who being exposed to the Woods by
his Grand-father, was brought up by a Hart, afterward
becoming King of Mysia, he was wounded by
Achilles, whom he denied passage through his
Countrey going to the Wars of Troy, but at length
was cured by the same dart that wounded him.

Telescope, (Greek) a certain
Mathematical
instrument, by which the proportion of any thing is
discerned at a great distance.

Tellus, the goddesse of the earth, and
oftentimes taken for
the earth it self.

Temerity, (lat.) rashnesse,
unadvisednesse.

Tempe, certain pleasant fields in
Thessaly, five miles long, & six miles broad,
watered by the River Pencus,
which makes them so ever green and flourishing, that all
delightfull places are
by Metaphor called Tempe.

Temperament, (lat.) a moderate and
proportionable mixture of any thing, but more peculiarly
of the four humours of the body.

Temperance, (lat.) moderation and
abstinence, a
restraining the violence of a mans affections, or
passions.

Temperature, (lat.) the same as
temperament.

Tempestivity, (lat.) seasonablenesse, due
or convenient time.

Templars, or Knights of the Temple, see in
Knight.

Temporaneous, or Temporary, (lat.)
belonging to time done
suddenly, or a certain
time.

Temporalities of Bishops, such Lands, or
Revenues as are added to Bishops Sees by great persons of
the Land.

Temporize, to live according to the times,
to comply with the times.

Temulency, (lat.) drunkennesse.

Tenacity, (lat.) an aptnesse to keep, or
hold fast.

Tenderlings, a Term among Hunters, the soft
tops of Deers Horns, when they begin
to shoot forth.

Tendons, (lat.) certain small ligaments, or
chords, in which the muscles do end.



Tendrells, the young branches of a tree, and
chiefely of a vine.


Tenebres, certain divine Services
performed among the
Catholicks some dayes of the week before Easter Sunday, in
representation of our Saviours Agony in the Garden, there
being put out, of the 15 lamps which they light, one at
the end of every Psalm they repeat, untill all the lights
are extinguished.

Tenebrion, (lat.) one that lurks in the
night to pilfer or steal; also a night-spirit.

Tenebrosity, (lat.) darknesse or
obscurity.

Tenedos, an Island in the Aegæan
Sea, between Lesbos and the Hellespont,
hither the Greeks retired while the Trojans
received the great horse.

Tenerity, (lat.) tendernesse or
softnesse.

Tenne, a kind of tawny colour, a term used
in Heraldry.

Tenon, a term in Building, a piece of a
rafter put into a mortisehole to bear it up.

Tenor, (lat.) the effect or purport of any
thing; also a rule or proportion; also one of the five
parts in Musick.

Tensil, (lat.) easie to be bent or stretcht
out.

Tensity, (lat.) stiffnesse, or a being
stretched out hard.

Tent, among Jewellers, is that which they
put under table Diamonds when they set them in work; it
signifieth also a Pavillion,
also a Chirurgions Instrument to search wounds
with.

Tentation, (lat.) a tempting, trying, or
proving.

Tentorian, (lat.) belonging to a Tent or
Pavillion.

Tenuity, (lat.) smallnesse, thinnesse,
slendernesse; whence Tenuation, a making thin or
slender.

Tenure, in Common Law, is the
manner whereby Tenants hold
Lands of their Lord.

Tepefaction, (lat.) a making
lukewarm.

Tepidity, (lat.) lukewarmnesse.

Tercera, one of the Isles which the
Spaniards call Acores.

Terebinthine, (lat.) belonging to
Terebinth, i.
the Turpentine-tree; as also a certain Gum issuing out of
that tree.

Terebration, (lat.) a boring
through.

Tereus, see Philomela.

Tergeminous, (lat.) three born at a birth;
also threefold.

Tergiversation, (lat.) a turning ones back,
a flinching or withdrawing; also a non-suit in Law.

Terminals, (lat.) certain Feasts made in
honour of Terminus, an ancient god
among the Romans, called the
god of bounds, because after the banishment of
Saturn, he used to decide the controversies of
Husbandmen falling out about the limits of their
grounds.

Termination, (lat.) a limiting, ending, or
bounding.

Ternary, or Ternion, (lat.) the
number three.

Terra Lemnia, an exceeding red earth of the
Island of Lemnos, digged from a red hill.

Terra Samia, a kind of white, stiff, and
tough earth, from the Isle of Samos.

Terra Sigillata, (lat.) a kind of earth
much used in physick, so called because it used to be sent
from the Isle of Lemnos sealed.

Terræ filius, (lat.) one that is allowed
to make lepid or jesting speeches at an Act at
Oxford.

Terraqueous, (lat.) composed of earth and
water together.

Terrar, (lat.) a survey of the whole
quantity of acres in any mans land.

Not found in OED in this sense.



Terrasse, (French) a Bullwark of earth;
also an open Walk or Gallery on the top of an house.

Terrene, or Terrestrial, (lat.)
earthy, belonging to the earth.

Terretenant, in Common Law, is a land
tenant, or he that hath a natural and actual possession of
land which is otherwise
called occupation.

Terrisonant, (lat.) sounding
terribly.

Territory, (lat.) lands that belong to the
jurisdiction of any State, City, or Common-wealth.

Terse, (lat.) neat, clean, polite.

Tertiation, (lat.) a dividing into three,
also a doing any thing the third time.

Tesserarious, (lat.) belonging to a
Tessera, i. a die; also a signal or
watchword.

Testaceous, (lat.) made of tile, brick,
sherd, or the shell of a fish.

Testamentarious, (lat.) belonging to a
Testament, i. a mans last Will, which is of two
sorts, either in writing or nuncupatory.

Testation, (lat.) a witnessing.



Testator, (lat.) a bearer of witness; also he
that makes a Will and Testament.


Testicular, (lat.) belonging to the
Testicles or
Stones.

Testif, (old word) wild-brained,
furious.

Testification, (lat.) a proving by
witness.

Testudineous, (lat.) belonging to, or like
a Testude, i. a Tortoise-shell; also an Engine of
War used among the ancients.

Tetchie, (old word) froward,
peevish.

Tethys, the goddess of the Sea, the
daughter of Coelus and Vesta, and the
wife of Neptune.

Tetrachord, (Greek) an instrument of four
strings.

Tetragonal, (Greek) quadrangle, or having
four angles.

Tetragrammaton, (Greek) the ineffable Name
of God Jehovah, among the
Hebrews so called, because it consisteth of four Hebrew letters.

Tetraptote, (Greek) a term in
Grammar, a Noun declined
with four Cases.

Tetrarch, (Greek) a Prince or Ruler of a
fourth part of a Kingdom.

Tetrastick, (Greek) an order of four
verses.

Tetrasyllabical, (Greek) consisting of four
syllables.

Tetricity, or Tetritude, (lat.)
fournesse, or severity
of countenance.

Teucer, a King of Troy, the son of
Telamon and
Hesione.

Teuthras, a King of Cilicia and
Misia, the son of Pandion, he had 50
daughters who were all got with child by Hercules
in one night.

Teutonick, (lat.) belonging to an
Almain or
German, so called as some think from
Tuisco the son of Mercury.

Tewkesbury, a Town in
Glocestershire, called by the Saxons
Theoc'sbury, by the Latins Theoci curia,
from one Theocus who here led an Hermites life.
Here was fought that memorable battle between the Houses
of York and Lancaster, where King
Edward the fourth had the Victory, and Prince
Edward the onely son of King Henry the
sixth was killed in a barbarous manner: this Town is also
famous for making of woollen cloth, and the best
mustard.

Textile, (lat.) woven or knit.

Texture, (lat.) a weaving or
knitting.


T H

Thalassiarch, (Greek) a Supream officer at
Sea, an Admiral.

Thalassion, (lat.) a Nuptial Song, from
Thalassius the god of Marriage Rites among the Romans.

Thales, an ancient Greek Philosopher,
reckoned among the seven Wisemen. He is said to have first
found out Geometry, and the motion of the Sphears.

Thalestris, a Queen of the
Amazons, who went thirty dayes journey to
Alexander the
Great, and was according to her request got with child by him.

Thane, (Sax.) a Nobleman or
Magistrate, called
also Thingus or Thegne.

Thavies Inne, see Innes of
Chancery.

Theano, the wife of Metapontus
King of Icaria, she, wanting children of her own,
brought up two twins the sons of
Neptune and Menalippe the daughter of
Desmontes; but
afterwards bringing forth two sons of her own, which were
likewise twins, and seeing her husbands affections
inclining more to Menalippe's sons, than to her
own, she was much troubled, and as soon as her sons came
of age, she set them on to kill their supposed brethren;
but Neptune their father coming to their aid,
they killed the sons of Theano, which as soon as
she came to hear, she killed her self.

Theatral, (lat.) belonging to a Theater,
i. a place where publick Shews or Playes are exhibited.

Theatins, an order of Religious
persons instituted by
John Peter Caraff Bishop of Theate in
the Kingdom of Naples.

Thebæ, or Thebes, vulgarly called
Stibes, the chief City of Thebais in
Aegypt, built by King Busiris, and
called also Hecatompylos,
from its hundred gates; also a City of Boeotia
built by Cadmus.

Theftbote, (Sax.) a maintaining a thief, by
receiving stollen goods from him.

Themis, the daughter of Coelus and
Terra, who flying the Nuptialls of
Jupiter, was
ravisht by him in Macedonia; she was worshipt as
the goddesse that first taught men right and justice, and
had an ancient Oracle in Boeotia.

Themiscyra, a Region bordering upon
Cappadocia, and watred by the River
Thermodon, having also its chief City of the same
name.

Themistocles, a famous Athenian
Captain,



who fortified the Pyræum, and overcame the
Persians at Salamina; but afterwards
being banished his Country, he was
intertained by
Xerxes and made Captain of an army against the
Athenians, whereupon he drank Oxes blood and
poisoned himself, that
he might neither be ingratefull to the King, nor fight
against his Countrymen.


Theodamas, a King of Chaonia,
against whom Hercules made war, because he
denied him provisions when
he came to Dryope with Dejanira and his
son Hyllus, and having got the Victory he slew
Theodamas,
carrying away his son Hylas whom he alwayes had
in very great esteem.

Theobald, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Saxon, bold over the people.

Theodolite, a certain Mathematical
Instrument, chiefely
used in Surveying, consisting
of the Planisphere, Geometrical square, Quadrant, and
Scale.

Theodom, (Sax.) servitude.

Theodoricus, a King of the East
Goths, who having overcome
Odoacer,
was Crowned King of Italy, and reigned there 33
years; also the name of a King of the Gaules, who
with his favorite Ebroinus was deposed, and
Childerick set up in his room: the word
signifieth in Dutch, rich in people.

Theodorus, a proper name of several famous
men, the word signifying in Greek a gift of God.

Theodosia, a Christian name of women, answering to Theodorus
or Theodosius in men.

Theodosius, the name of two famous
Emperours of
Constantinople, the first the son of the Emperour
Gratian, the second the son of Arcadius
and Eudoxia,
he had wars with the Persians, Vandalls, and
Hunns.

Theogonie, (Greek) the generation of the
gods.

Theological, (Greek) belonging to
Theology, i.
Divinity or discourse of God and Divine things.

Theomachy, (Greek) a warring or
fighting against God.

Theomagical, (Greek) belonging to
Divine Magick, or the
wisdom of God.

Theomancy, (Greek) a divination by calling
upon the names of God.

Theophilus, a proper name of a man,
signifying a friend or
lover of God.

Theorba, (Ital. Tiorba) a Musical
Instrument, being a
kind of base Lute.

Theorematick, (Greek) belonging to a
Theoreme, i. an axiom or undoubted truth of any
Art.

Theorie, (Greek) the contemplation or study
of any Art or Science without practice.

Therapeutick, (Greek) healing or
curing.

Theraphim, (Heb.) an Image made in the form
of a man.

Theriacal, (Greek) belonging to Treacle,
i. a Medicine against poison, made of the flesh
of a wild beast.

Thermometre, (Greek) a certain
Instrument whereby one
may guesse at the change of weather, a
weather-glasse.

Thermopylæ, a long ridge of mountains in
Greece, at whose streights Leonidas the
Spartan King with 300 Lacedæmonians
stoutly fighting, were all cut off by
Mardonius the Persian.

To Thesaurize, (Greek) to treasure or heap
up riches.

Theseus, the son of Aegeus King of
Athens, he
overcame the Amazonians, and brought away their
Queen Hippolyte, on whom he begat
Hippolytus, he slew the Minotaur at
Creet, and brought away
Ariadne and
Phædra the daughters
of Minos, the last of whom he took to wife. He
overthrew three famous
theeves, Sciron, Procrustes,
and Schinis; Lastly he went down with
Pirithous into Hell to fetch away
Proserpina.
See Pirithous.

Thesis, (Greek) a general argument or
position.

Thessalia, a Region of Greece
lying between
Boeotia and Macedon, it was anciently called
Pelasgicus, from Pelasgus, Aemonia, from King
Aemon, Pyrrhæa from Pyrrha the wife of Deucalion.

Thetford, see Sitomagus.

Thetis, the daughter of Nereus and
Doris, whom Jupiter being about to have
married, was disswaded by Prometheus, so that she
married Peleus the son of Aeacus, to
whom she brought forth Achilles.

Thiller, a horse which is put under the
Thills, i. the beam of a Cart or Wain, called in
Latin Temo.

Thole, (lat.) a term in Building, the
scutchin or knot in the midst of a timber vault, also a
place in Temples where Donaries
are hung up.

Thomas, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Hebrew,
deep, or, as some say, twinne.

Thomyris, a Queen of Scythia, who



inraged that Cyrus had slain her son
Spargapises
in a battle, recollected all her
forces, overthrew his
Army, and slew him, and putting his head in a tub of
blood, said in an upbraiding manner, Fill thy self with
the blood for which thou hast thirsted.


Thon, a King of Canopus, who
falling in love with Helena, was slain by
Menelaus.

Thongcaster, a Castle in
Lincolnshire, commonly called Castor, in
Brittish Cæregary,
it took the name from the same occasion
as Byrsa a Castle of the
Carthaginians;
for Hengist obtaining so much ground in this tract, of
Vortigern, as he could measure out with an
Oxehide, cut the hide out into very small laners, which we
commonly call Thongs, and therewith measuring out the
ground, built upon it this Castle.

Thor, a certain Idol worshipped by the
ancient Saxons, thought to be the same with
Jupiter, or the god of Thunder; whence
Thursday took its denomination.

Thoracique, (lat.) belonging to the stomack
or brest.

Thorp, an ancient Saxon name, for a Village
or Country Town.

Thowles, the small pins which they bear
against with their Oares when they row.

Thracia, a Country of Europe,
lying on the East of Macedonia, now called
Romania.

Thrasonical, (Greek) insolently
boasting.

Thrasybulus, an Athenian exile,
who freed the City from the oppression of the thirty Tyrants.

Thrave, a certain quantity of corn
containing 4 shocks,
each shock consisting of six sheaves.

Threnody, (Greek) the singing of a Threne,
i. a mourning or funeral-Song.

To Threpe, (Sax.) to affirm.

Thrilled, or Thirled, (Sax.)
killed.

Thridborough or Thirdborough, a
word used in some old Acts, for a Headborough or
Constable.

Throb, (Sax.) the vehement beating or
panting of the heart.

Thrones, see Angel.

Thucydides, an elegant Greek Historian who
writ the Peloponnesian war.

Thule, an Island on the north of
Scotland, now
called Island.

Thummim, see Vrim.

Thuriferous, (lat.) bearing
Frankincense.

Thyestes, the son of Pelops and
Hippodamia,
and the brother of Atreus. see Atreus.

Thymætes, a Trojan, who marrying
Arisbe the daughter of Priamus, had a
son born on the same day with Paris, and because
the Augurs had foretold that one born that day
should be the destruction of Troy, Priamus
commanded that both the children
should be slain; but Paris being
saved by his mother,
Thymætes son was onely
killed, for which he bearing a revenge in his mind, was
the first that caused the Trojan horse to be let
in.

Thymick vein, see vein.

Thymomancy, (Greek) a kind of
presaging from a mans
own hopes and fears.

Thyrse, (Greek) a stalk or stem of any
herb, or a trunchion wrapped with Ivy, which was anciently
used by the Bacchides
in the Feasts of Bacchus.


T I

Tiara, a certain ornament for the head used
anciently among the Persians; whence some think
our word Tire to be derived.

Tibial, (lat.) belonging to a Pipe or
Flute.

Tibicination, (lat.) a playing on a
Pipe.

Tiercel, (French) the same as
Tassel.

Tierce, (French) a certain liquid
measure containing the
third part of a Pipe which is two Tuns.

Tiercet, (French) a stanza or staff of
three verses.

Tigrine, (lat.) belonging to, or like a
Tiger.

Timariots, certain souldiers among the
Turks, who out of conquered lands have a certain portion
allowed them during term of life, to serve on
horseback.

Timbers of Ermine, a term in Armory or
Blazon, the rows or ranks of Ermine in the Noblemens
Capes.

Timbrel, (Dutch Trommel) a kind of
musical Instrument, by some called a Taber.

Timidity, (lat.) timerousnesse,
fearfulnesse.

Timochares, one that belonged to
Pyrrhus King of Epirus, who would have



covenanted with Fabricius the Consul,
to have poisoned Pyrrhus, but
Fabricius disdaining
so great a basenesse revealed the intention to Pyrrhus.


Timocracie, (Greek) a certain
Government, wherein
the richest men bear sway.

Timoleon, a famous Corinthian
Captain, who at the request of Dion, the
Syracusian freed Syracuse from the
Tyranny of Dionysius.

Timon, a sowr Athenian, who shund
and hated the company of all men.

Timotheus, the son of Conon an
Athenian Captain, who had his statue erected in
the Market place, for the great victory he
obtained over the
Lacedæmonians,
it being also a proper name of many men,
signifying in Greek an
honourer of God.

Tincel, a kinde of Cloath composed of silk
and silver, glistering like starers, or sparks of fire,
from the French Estincelle, a sparkle.

Tincture, (lat.) a staining, or dying; also
a Term in Heraldry, signifying a variable hew of
Arms.

Tinmouth, see Tunnocellum.

Tinniment, (lat.) a tingling, or
sounding of
metals.

Tintamar, (French) a kind of clashing, or
gingling noise.

Tintinnation, (lat.) a ringing like a
bell.

Tiresias, a Theban Sooth-sayer,
who being struck blinde by
Juno, received in recompence
thereof the gift of Prophesie from Jupiter, see Ovid. Metamorph. l. 3.

Tissue, (French) a kind of Cloath, of
silver woven.

Titanick, belonging to Titan, i.
the son of Cælus and Vesta, and the
brother of Saturn,
he is by the Poets oftentimes taken for the Sun.

Tithing, a company of ten men, with their
families joyned together in a society,
the chief whereof is called a Tithing man.

Tithonus, the son of Laomedon,
King of Troy, with whom Aurora falling
in Love, snatch't him up into her Chariot, and
carried him into
Aethiopia, where she had Memnon by him,
being at length grown very old, he was changed into a
Grassehopper.

Titillation, (lat.) a tickling, or pleasant
itching.

Title in Law, is a lawfull cause to claim a
thing, which another man hath, he
having no action for the
same.

Titubation, (lat.) a stumbling.

Titular, (lat.) belonging to a title,
having a title.

Tityus, the son of Jupiter and
Elara, the daughter of Orchomenus; he,
for indeavouring to
force Latona, was slain by Apollo, and
cast down into Hell, where a Vulture is said continually
to gnaw upon his Liver, which grows again as fast as it is
devoured.


T L

Tlepolemus, the son of Hercules
and Astioche, he was of a vast stature and
strength, and raigned over three Cities in
Rhodes, at last he was slain by
Sarpedon, in the
Trojan war.


T M

Tmolus, a Mountain near Sardes in
Lydia, out of which
riseth the River Pactolus,
famous for its Golden Sands.


T O

Tobacco, a certain Plant, whose smoak taken
in pipes, is generally in much request;
it was first brought into these parts out of the
Indies, by Sr. Francis Drake, and is so
called as some say, from an Island of that name.

Tobias, a proper name of a man,
signifying in Hebrew
the Lord is good.

Tod, of Wool,  see Sarplar.

Toll, a liberty to buy, and sell within the
Precincts of a Mannour; also Tribute, or Custome.

Toletum, or Toledo, the chief City
of new Castile in Spain, begirt with a
strong Wall, and a hundred and fifty little Towers.

Tolsey, a kinde of Exchange, or place where
Merchants meet in Bristow.

Toman, a kinde of Persian
Coyn.

Tomarus, a mountain in Thesprotia,
where there are a hundred Fountains.

Tome, (lat.) a part, or volume of a
book.

Tomin, a certain weight among
Jewellers, weighing
about three Carrats.

Tonical, (lat.) belonging to a Tone, or
Accent.

Tonitruation, (lat.) a thundring.



Tonnage, a Custome due for
merchandize brought,
or carried in Tuns.


Tonsils, (lat.) certain kernels at the root
of the tongue.

Tonsorious, (lat.) belonging to trimming,
or barbing.

Toparch, (Greek) a Governour, or
Ruler of any place.

Topaze, a kinde of precious stone, of a
Gold, or Saffron colour.

Topical, (Greek) belonging to Topicks,
i. a part of Logick treating of places of
invention.

Topography, (Greek) a particular
description of any
place.

Torce, a Term in Heraldry, see
Wreath.

Torch Royal, a Term in Hunting, the next
start in a Stag's head growing above the Royal.

Torcularious, (lat.) belonging to a Vine
presse.

Torcular vein, see Vein.

Tormentill, a kinde of Plant, called in
English Setfoil, good against gripings of the
guts.

Torminous, (lat.) troubled with
Tormins, i.
gripings of the Belly.

Tornado, (Span.) a sudden, or violent storm of ill weather at
Sea.

Torosity, (lat.) brawninesse, or fulnesse
of flesh.

Torpedo, (lat.) a kind of fish of that
stupefying quality,
that if any one touch it with a long pole, it benums his
hand.

Torpid, (lat.) num, also slow, or
dull.

Torquated, (lat.) wearing, a Chain, or
Collar.

Titus Manlius Torquatus, the son of
Manlius, surnamed
the Imperious, he overcame the Gaul that challenged the
stoutest of the Romans to fight with him, and took off his
Golden Chain, whence Torquatus became a name to
him and all his family, he caused his sonne to be beheaded
for fighting against his command;
notwithstanding he
had obtained the victory, whence Manlian severity
became a proverb.

Torrefaction, (lat.) a parching,
scorching, or
roasting.

Torrent, (lat.) a strong stream, or
violent floud running down
a Hill.

Torrid, (lat.) burning, or parching.

Torsion, (lat.) a wresting, or wringing of
any thing.

Torteauxes, (French) a sort of round
figures in Heraldry, by some called
wastells.

Tortuosity, (lat.) a winding, or crooking
in and out.

Torvity, (lat.) sowrnesse, crabbednesse, or
grimnesse of Aspect.

Totality, (lat.) the whole sum of any
number; also the whole, or intire part of any
thing.

Totilas, a King of the Goths, who
overcame the Romans, and
took most of the imperial Cities.

Tournement, (French) a revolution,
turning, or changing;
also a justing, or tilting.

Tournois, a kinde of French Coyn,
valuing the tenth part of
a penny.

To Tow, a Term in Navigation, to drag any
thing a stern a ship in the water.

Towton, a Town in York-shire,
where in the year 1461. a mighty pitch't battel was fought
between the 2 houses of York and
Lancaster, where 30000 men were left dead upon
the place, but the victory fell to York.

Towrus, when a Roe desires copulation, he
is said to go to his Towrus, (Term of Hunting.)

Not found in OED.



Toylet, (French) a kinde of bag to put
night-cloaths in.


T R

Trabal, (lat.) belonging to a beam.

Tracasserie, (French) a needlesse
hurrying, or restlesse
travelling up and down.

Traces, among Hunters, signifieth the
foot-steeps of wild beasts.

Tract, (lat.) a continued line, a long
road; also a discourse drawn in length. Tract is also the
footing of a Boar, (Term in Hunting.)

Tractable, (lat.) gentle, or easie to be
managed, or ordered.

Tractate, (lat.) a handling, or treating of
any thing, a treatise.

Tradition, (lat.) a delivering; also a
bequeathing any Doctrine to posterity from age to age.

Traduction, (lat.) a translating, or
conveying from one
thing, or place to another;
also a defaming, or slandering.

Tragecomoedie, (Greek) a play that is half
Tragedy and half Comedy.

Tragedian, or Tragediographer, (Greek)
a writer of Tragedies, i. a sort of
Dramatick Poetry, or
Stage-play, representing murthers, sad and mournfull actions, and



setting forth the highest and noblest sort of persons.


Tragical, (Greek) belonging to
Tragedies, sad, blondy,
disastrous.

Tragelaph, (Greek) a stone-buck, or
Goat-hart; so called, because it is
begotten between a Goat and a Deer.

Tragematopolist, (Greek) a
Comfitmaker, a seller
of Preserves and Confections.

Trajection, (lat.) a passing, or
conveying over.

Tralucencie, (lat.) a being through clear,
a shining through.

Tramontane, (Ital.) Northward, or
beyond the Mountains from
Italy.

Tranquillity, (lat.) calmnesse, quietnesse,
stillnesse.

Transaction, (lat.) a finishing, or
dispatching any
businesse.

Transalpine, (lat.) being beyond the
Alps.

Transcendent, (lat.) surpassing,
exceeding, or
excelling.

Transcript, (lat.) that which is written
out from an Original.

Transcurrence, (lat.) a running over
quickly.

Transduction, the same as
Traduction.

Transfiguration, (lat.) a transforming, or
changing out of one shape into another.

Transfix, (lat.) to run through any thing
with a Dart, Sword, or any other sharp weapon.

Transfretation, (lat.) a passing over a
River, or crosse the Sea.

Transfusion, (lat.) a powring out of one
thing into another.

Transgression, (lat.) a going beyond ones
bounds, a committing a Trespasse, or Crime.

Transjection, (lat.) see Trajection.

Transition, (lat.) a passing from one thing
to another, in Rhetorick it is a part of an Oration,
wherein they passe from one subject to another.

Transitory, (lat.) soon passing away,
fading, or
perishing.

Translation, (lat.) a changing from one
thing, or place to another, a turning out of one language
into another; also when a light Planet separateth from a
more weighty one, and presently applieth to one more
heavy.

Translucid, (lat.) the same as
Transparent, shining
through.

Transmarine, (lat.) being beyond the
Seas.

Transmeation, (lat.) a passing through, or
beyond.

Transmew, (old word) to change.

Transmigration, (lat.) a removing ones
habitation from one place to another.

Transmission, (lat.) a conveying through, a
sending from one place to another.

Transmutation, (lat.) a changing from one
thing to another.

Transome, in Architecture, is an
overthwart beam, or
brow-post.

Transparent, (lat.) to be seen
through.

Transparency, a Term in Heraldry, vide
adumbration.

Transpiration, (lat.) an evaporating,
exhaling, or breathing
forth.

A Transport, or Transportation, a
carrying over the Seas,
or any River; also a sudden trance, or rapture of
minde.

Transposition, (lat.) an inverting, or
changing the order of things.

Transsylvania, a Countrey lying beyond the
Carpathian Mountains, now called
Sibemburghen,
which together with Servia and Wallachia
were heretofore called Dacia.

Transubstantion, (lat.) a converting, or
changing of one substance into another, more especially
among the Papists; it is taken for the bread in the
Sacrament, being changed
into the body of Christ.

Transvection, (lat.) a carrying
over.

Transvers, (lat.) acrosse, or
overthwart.

Transvolation, (lat.) a flying over.

Trapezium, a figure consisting of some
unequal sides, and as many un-equal
angles.

Trave, (French) a Term in Architecture, a
trevise, or little room.

Traverse, (French) to go acrosse, or
overthwart, in Common-law, it signifieth to deny any point
of the matter wherewith
one is charged; also in Navigation it is taken for the way
of a ship, in respect of the points whereon they
sayl.

Traverses, (French) turnings and
windings; it is also
taken figuratively for troubles
and vexations. Cleopatra.

Travested, (French) shifted in apparel,
disguised.

Traumatick, (Greek) belonging to
wounds.

Treasure trove, mony which being found in
any place, and not owned, belongeth to the King.

Treated, (French) handled, also
intertained.



Tredeale, an Aspect of 108. d.


Tree-nells, in Navigation are certain pins
made of the heart of Oak, wherewith they fasten all the
planks unto the Timbers.

Trellis, (French) a Lattice, Grate, or
Crosse bar.

Tren, (French) a certain instrument,
wherewith Marriners kill fish.

Not found in OED.



Trenchant, (French) sharp, also
bowing.

Trentalls, (French) obsequies, dirges, or
funeral songs.

Trepan, a kinde of Chirurgions
instrument.

To Trepan, or Trapan, (Ital.
Trapolare) to
intrap, or insnare, but more especially
in that manner, which is used by Whores and
Ruffians.

Trepidation, (lat.) a trembling.

Trestle, a Trevet, or Stool with three
feet.

Triacle, a kind of Antidote against
poison, called in Latin Theriaca.

Triangular, (lat.) made in the fashion of a
Triangle, i. a figure having 3 angles, or
corners.

Triarchie, (Greek) a government by
three.

Triarians, (lat.) one of the Orders of the
Roman Souldiers, who were divided into Principes,
Hastati, Triarii, and Velites.

Tribe, (lat.) a kindred, family, or
company dwelling in the
same Ward.

Tribunal, (lat.) a Judgement-seat.

Tribune, (lat.) an Officer of great
Authority among the
Romans, of which there were two sorts, Tribunus
Plebis, i. a Tribune
of the people, and Tribunus Militum, i. a
Tribune of the Souldiers.

Tributary, (lat.) paying Tribute,
i. money exacted
out of mens Estates.

Trica, the hair of
Berenice.

Tricennial, (lat.) of 30 years.

Tricliniary, (lat.) belonging to a dining
Room, or Parlour.

Tricornous, (lat.) having 3 horns.

Trichotomy, (Greek) a dividing into 3
parts.

Trident, (lat.) a three forked
instrument, but more
peculiarly it is taken for that Mace, which the Poets
faign to have been born by Neptune, as an Ensign of his
command.

Tridentine, (lat.) belonging to
Trent, a Citie in the Countrey of
Tyrol.

Triduan, (lat.) continuing three
dayes.

Triennial, (lat.) continuing three
years.

Triental, (lat.) a Vessel containing half a
pint, or the third part of a Sextary.

Trieterick, (Greek) done every 3
year.

Trifarious, (lat.) divided into three, or
done three manner of wayes.

Trifole, (lat.) a kinde of Plant, called
three-leaved grasse; also a resemblance of that Plant in
Heraldry.

Triform, (lat.) having three forms.

Trifurcous, (lat.) three forked.

Trigamist, (Greek) having three
wives.

Trigeminous, (lat.) three brought forth at
a birth; also treble, or threefold.

Trigliph's, (Greek) a Term in
Architecture, or
Masonry, being certain Compartiments,
or Borders graven like three furrow's.

Trigonal, (Greek) having three angles, or
corners.

Trillo, (Ital.) a gracefull shake, or
trembling of the voyce in singing.

Trimenstruous, (lat.) of three
moneths.

Trinacria, the ancient name of the Island
of Sicily, called also Triquetra, from
its three Promontories Lilybæum,
Pachynum, and Pelorum.

Trine, (lat.) belonging to the number 3. an
Aspect of 120 d. thus marked Δ.

Trinitarians, (lat.) a sort of Hereticks
that deny the Mystery of the Trinity.

Trinity, (lat.) the number three; also the
distinction of three persons in the Unity of the
Godhead.

Trinobantes, a certain people anciently
inhabiting the East part of the Brittish
Island.

Tripontium, the ancient name of a Town in
Northamptonshire, implying as much as a Town that
hath three Bridges, and therefore it seemeth to be the
same with that Town which is commonly called
Torcester, which is cut through by three special
channels, which have three several Bridges over
them.

Trinodal, (lat.) having three knots.

Trinquet, (French) the highest sail or
top-gallant of any ship; it is also taken metaphorically
for any gay trifling thing.

Triobolur, (lat.) as it were worth but three half pence, vile, little
set by, or esteemed.

Triours, in Common Law, are such as are chosen
by the Court to examine whe­



ther a challenge made to any of the Pannel be just or no.


Tripartite, (lat.) divided into three
parts.

Tripedal, or Tripedaneous, (lat.)
containing three foot
in measure.

Triplicity, (lat.) a being treble or
threefold; whence
Triplication, a trebling.

Tripode, (Greek) a stool, or any thing that
standeth upon three feet.

Tripoly, a kind of Plant by some called
Turbit, by others blew Camomile; also a stone which being
reduced to powder, is made use of by Lapidaries to polish
their Jewels.

Triptote, (Greek) a term in
Grammar, being a Noun
declined with three Cases.

Tripudiation, (lat.) a tripping on the toe
in a Dance.

Trireme, (lat.) a Gally with three oares on
each side.

Mercurius Trismegistus, a famous
Egyptian in
ancient times, who was both a great Philosopher, Priest,
and King.

Trisulk, (lat.) three furrowed.

Trisyllabical, (Greek) consisting of three syllables.

Trite, (lat.) worn, old, made common with
much use.

Tritheites, (Greek) a sort of
Hereticks which held the
Trinity to be divided into
three distinct Godheades.

Triticean, (lat.) made of wheat.

Tritis, the immunity of a man
dwelling in the Forrest
from his attendance therein.

Triton, a Sea Deity, the son of
Neptune and Salacia, faigned by the
Poets to have been the Trumpeter of
Neptune.

Trituration, (lat.) a threshing of
Corn.

Trivial, (lat.) scattered in the
highway, common, little
esteemed or valued, from trivium, a place where
three wayes meet.

Triumphal, (lat.) belonging to a
Triumph, i. a
solemn shew at the return of a General from some noted
Victory. see Ovation.

Triumvirat, (lat.) an ancient
Magistracy in
Rome, wherein three men had an equal
authority.

Trochisk, (Greek) a certain medicinal
composition made of powders, and formed round in fashion
of a little wheel.

Troglodytes, a people anciently
inhabiting the farthest
part of Aethiopia, of a fierce salvage nature
dwelling in caves, and feeding upon raw flesh.

Troilus, the son of Priamus and
Hecuba, who venturing to fight with
Hercules, was slain by him.

Tromperie, (French) deceit, or
cousenage.

Trophy, (Greek) any thing set up in token
of victory.

Trophonius, a certain Prophet
inhabiting a Cave,
called the Trophonian Den, into which who ever
entred, became incapable
of laughter. In this Cave there was an Oracle of
Jupiter, who was thence called Jupiter
Trophonius.

Tropical, (Greek) belonging to a Trope,
i. a kind of Rhetorical figure.

Tropicks, (from the Greek word
trepein, i. to
turn) two imaginary circles of the Sphear, being the
utmost bound, of the Suns course; the one is called the
Tropick of Cancer, the other the Tropick of
Capricorn.

Trosque, the same as
Trochisk.

Troy weight, in measuring, is an
allowance of 12 ounces
onely to the pound.

Trover, in Common Law, is an action against
him who having found another mans goods, refuseth to
deliver them upon demand.

Trowel, (French) an Instrument used by
Masons to dawbe mortar withal.

Truand, (French) a vagabond or lazy
loytring fellow, a common beggar.

Truchman, see Drogoman.

Trucidation, (lat.) a cruel
murdering.

Truculent, (lat.) of a cruel, rough, or
threatning countenance.

Trullissation, (lat.) a plaistering with
mortar.

Truncation, (lat.) a lopping, maiming, or
cutting short.

Trunck, (lat.) a stock, stem, or body of a
tree; also a mans body having the head, arms, and legs cut
away.

Trutination, (lat.) a weighing or
ballacing; also a
strict examining or considering
well of a thing.


T U

Tube, (lat.) the pipe through which the
marrow of the backbone runneth; also any long pipe through
which water or other liquid
substance is conveyed.

Tuberous, (lat.) having wenns or fleshy
bunches; also full of swellings.



Tubicination, (lat.) a sounding of a Trumpet,
Pipe, or Cornet.


Tubulation, (lat.) a making hollow like a
pipe.

Tudiculation, (lat.) a bruising or
pounding with Smiths
hammers.

Tuel, among Hunters, the fundament of any
beast.

Tuition, (lat.) a protecting, guarding, or
safe keeping.

Tulipant, a Shash or Wreath worn by the
Indians instead of a Hat.

Tullia, the daughter of Servius
Tullius, who being married to Tarquinius
Superbus, incited her Husband to kill her Father,
that he might injoy the Kingdom himself.

Tullus Hostilius, a warlike King of the
Romans, who was the first that ordained tribute and custom
and most of the Ensigns of
authority used among the Romans,
as the Sella curulis, toga picta, and
Prætexta.

Tumbrel, a certain Engin for the punishing
of scolds, called
also a cucking-stool.

Tumefaction, (lat.) a causing to
swell.

Tumid, (lat.) puft up or swollen.

Tumour, (lat.) a swelling or rising of the
flesh.

Tumulation, (lat.) a burying or
intombing.

Tumultuary, (lat.) done in haste,
suddenly, or without
advice.

Tun, a certain liquid measure
containing 252
gallons.

Tunicle, (lat) a little coat; also a
membrane or thin skin,
covering any part of the body: there are four especially
which cover the eye, the Corneal or
Horny, the Uveal, the
Vitreal or glassy, and the Christalline, and to each of
these there are foure humours answerable.
And four that cover the cods, the Scrotum, the
Erythroides, the Epididymis,
and one other which is called Dartos.

Tunnocellum, the ancient name of a Town in
Northumberland, by Camden thought to be
the same with that which we now call Tinmouth, q
the mouth of the River Tine, where the first
Cohort Aelia Classica was in pay for Sea-service.
This Town hath a very strong Castle, which Robert
Mowbray Earle of Northumberland holding
against King William Rufus, was therein closely
besieged and taken prisoner.

Turbant, a certain Wreath or Ornament for
the head used among the Turks and other Oriental Nations
instead of Hats; it is made of a shash or whole piece of
linnen called Telbent, and the Turbant it self is called
by the Turks Saruck.

Turbary, an interest to dig turfs upon a Common.

Turbervills, the sirname of a very
considerable Family,
who have had their ancient
habitation at Bere in Dorcetshire; they
are stiled in Latin Records, De
Turbida Villa.

Turbination, (lat.) the fashioning of a
thing small at the bottom, and broad
above like a top.

Turbineous, (lat.) belonging to a storm or whirl-wind.

Turbith, a kind of plant called Tripoly;
also a red Mineral, which being beaten to powder, is used
in physick.

Turbot, a kind of fish called in Greek
Rhombus.

Turbulent, (lat.) busie, troublesome,
sedicious.

Turgescence, (lat.) a swelling up, or
growing big.

Turgid, or Turgent, (lat.)
swelling, rising, puft
up.

Turgy, (in Greek Theurgia)
a conference with good
Angels; it is also called
white Magick.

Turingia, a Country of Saxony,
once a Kingdom, now a Landgraviat; it lyeth upon the
Rivers Sala and Werra, and hath the
Hercynian Wood on the North: the chief City of
this Country is called Erdfordia.

Turneament, see Tournement.

Turnsole, a kind of colour used in
painting.

Turpentine, (Greek terebinthina) a
kind of Gum or Rosin distilling from the Larch
tree.

Turpitude, (lat.) filthinesse, basenesse,
sordidnesse.

Turriferous, (lat.) bearing Towers.

Tuscane work, in
Architecture, one
of the five sorts of pillars. see Corinthian.

Tuscia, a Country of Italy, lying
between the Rivers
Tiber and Macra; it was anciently called Tyrrhenia,
from Tyrrhenus the son of Alys; also Hetruria and Toscany, from
Tusculus (as some say) the son of Hercules.

Tutelary, (lat.) having the guard,
custody, or protection,
of any thing.

Tutia, a Vestal Virgin, who being
accused of incest, would
not fly to any man for her absolution, but putting a
sive in­



to the River Tybur, prayed to Vesta that
if she were free, she might have power to carry water in
it to her Temple, which was immediately performed.


Tutie, (lat.) the dust or foile of brasse,
growing together into a kind of stone which is much used
in physick.

Tutilina, a certain goddesse among the
Romans, who was said to have the care and protection of
Corn.

Tuisco, a certain Idol adored by the
ancient Germans, thought
by some to be the same with Mercury: from this
Idol Tuesday took its denomination, and the
people were called Duytsh people.


T W

Twibil, (Dutch) a Carpenters
Instrument to make
mortise-holes withal.

Twilight, (Dutch) the time betwixt day and
night, the dusk of the morning or evening.

Twight, (Sax.) pulled.

To Twyer, (Sax.) to sing.

Not found in OED by see "twire", v.




T Y

Tybur, a City not far from Rome,
built as some say by Catillus the
Arcadian the Admiral of Euander;
others by Tyburtus the grandchild of Amphiaraus:
it is now called Tivoli.

Tydeus, the son of Oeneus King of
Caledonia, he
having slain his brother Menalippus,
fled to Adrastus, whose daughter
Delphile he married; afterwards being sent by
Polynices to his brother Eteocles, King
of Thebes, he overcame all his guests at several
Combats; whereupon at his return they set 50 young men to
lie in wait for him under the command of Mæon
the son of Aemon, and Lycophon the son
of Autophonus, who were all slain by him
except Mæon, whom
he sent back to carry news of the others deaths: at length
he was mortally wounded by one Menalippus a
Theban.

Tymætes, a great Prophet, the son of
Priamus and Aristia.

Tympanist, he that playeth upon a
Tymbrel, Taber, or Drum,
called Tympanum.

Tympany, (Greek) a kind of disease wherein
the body becomes swollen up with wind, a dropsie.

Tyndarus, a King of Oebalia, whose
wife Leda brought fourth two egges, in one
whereof was contained Pollux and Helena,
in the other Castor and
Clytemnestra.

Type, (Greek) See Typical.

Typhoeus, the son of Titan and
Terra, a Gyant of a very vast bignesse, who
going to make War with Jupiter, was by him struck with Thunder.

Typhon, a King of Aegypt, who
killing his brother Osiris, and cutting him into
several pieces, dispersed him through
divers Countreys.

Typical, (Greek) bearing a Type,
i. an example, figure, likenesse, or shadow of any thing.

Typographer, (Greek) a Printer.

Tyrannicide, (Greek) the killing of a
Tyrant, or cruel Governour.

Tyrconel, a County of Ireland, in
the Province of Vlster.

Tyre, a famous Citie of Phoenicia,
anciently called
Sarra, which in the Phoenician
language signifieth a fish, that place abounding with a
kind of shell-fish, the liquour whereof coloureth of a
purple dye.

Tyro, a Thessalian Virgin, the
daughter of Salmoneus and Alcidice,
after the death of her own mother, she was very harshly
dealt with by her mother in law Sidero, she being
got with child by Neptune (who lay with her in
the shape of Enipeus, with whom she was in love)
brought forth twins, Pelias and Neleus,
and afterwards being married to her Uncle
Cretheus, she brought forth Aeson,
Amythaon, and Pheres.

Tyrociny, (lat.) an apprentiship, or new
beginning in any Art or Faculty; but more peculiarly
Military discipline, from Tyron, a rawe young
souldier, one newly entred into the Art of war.

Tyrrheni, a people inhabiting
Tuscia or Tyrrhenia, being that part of
Italy which lieth upon the Sea, called from
thence the Tyrrhen Sea.


V A

VAcation, or Vacancy, (lat.) a
being at leasure, or ceasing from businesse. It is also
commonly taken for that time which is between one Tearm
and another.

Vaccary, in divers Statutes is taken for a
place to keep Cows in; also a certain compasse of ground
within the Forrest of Ashdown.



Vacchoris, an ancient King of Egypt,
who relinquisht all his riches and state, to live a
private austere life.


Vacillation, (lat.) a wavering,
tottering or
inconstancy.

Vacive, (lat.) void, empty.

Vacuity, (lat.) emptinesse,
voidnesse.

Vacuna, a certain goddesse among the
ancient Romans, to whom the Husbandmen
sacrificed at such times as they
rested from their labours.

Vadimony, (lat.) suretiship.

Vafrous, (lat.) crafty, or subtile.

Vagabond, (lat.) a wandering beggar, or
idle fellow.

Vagation, (lat.) a straying or
wandering up and
down

Vagination, (lat.) a sheathing.

To Vail-bonnet, to strike sail in token of
submission; also to put off ones Hat, or give any sign of
respect.

See OED "vail", v.



Vaire, a term in Blazon, being a Fur
composed of 4 distinct colours, i. argent, gules,
Or, and sable.

Valasca, a certain Queen of the
Bohemians, who
having made a conspiracy to shake off the dominion of men,
raised a great Army of women, and having
overcome the men, reigned
a good while like a Queen of the Amazons.

Valdombreux, a certain religious Order of
men instituted by Gualbert a Florentine,
who betook himself to a private studious life in a place
called Valdombre, or the shady Vale.

Valect, see Valet.

Valdo, a certain pious man, who was the
first institutour of the Waldenses in
Piemont.

Valentine, a certain Roman Bishop, in
remembrance of whom every fourteenth day of
February is solemnized; about which time birds
choose their mates; whence ariseth the custom of choosing
Valentines upon that day.

Valentinians, a sect of Hereticks
instituted by one
Valentinianus.

Valerius, the name of divers famous men
among the Romans, the chief whereof was called
Valerius
Publicola, who Triumphed
over the Veientes
and the Sabines, and because having built him a
house in a very strong place, he was suspected of
affecting Tyranny, he caused his house to be pulled
down.

Valet, (French) the Groom of a
chamber; also a young
Gentleman under age.

Valetudinary, (lat.) sickly, also Subst. an
Hospital, or place to keep sick people in.

Validity, (lat.) strength, power, for
e.

Valtorts, the sirname of a very noble
Family, who had their ancient residence at
Saltash in Cornwall; they are stiled in
Latin Records, De valle torta.

Vambrace, or Vanbrace, (French) a
Gantlet.

Vancurriers, or Vauntcourers,
(French) forerunners.

Vandelbiria, the ancient name of a place in
Camebridgeshire, so called for that in times past
the Vandalls or Danes, there encamped
themselves with a Trench and Rampire; it is thought to
have been the same with that which is now called
Wandlesbury.

Vaniloquence, (lat.) a talking or babling vainly.

Vantguard, (French) the foremost part of an Army in battle.

Vantrarius, a corrupt Latin word, used as a
Law-term onely upon this occasion, Sir Richard
Rockesly, held Lands at Seaton by Sergeanty to be Vantrarius
Regis donec perusus fuerit
Pari solutarum pretii 4d. i. e.
to be fore-footman to the King at some certain time,
e. g. when he goeth into Gascoign,
until he had worn out a pair of shooes prized 4d.

Not found in OED but see "vauterer."



Vapid, (lat.) casting forth an ill smack or
savour.

Vaporation, (lat.) an exhaling or
sending forth of vapours,
i. certain fumes or smoake drawn out of the earth
by the heat of the Sun, and easily resolvable into
water.

Vapulation, (lat.) a being scourged or
beaten.

Variegation, (lat.) a beautifying with
various colours.

Varnish, is that wherewith a picture is
rubbed over to make it shine and have a glosse; there is
also a ground or varnish
which is laid upon a plate that is to be etched.

Varry, (French) in Heraldry is a
mixture of argent and
azure together.

Varry cuppy, a term also of Heraldry,
signifying a Fur of cups; it is also called Varry
tassa, or Meire.

Varvells, (French) little rings of silver
about hawks legs, having the owners name ingraven on
them.

Vasiferous, (lat.) carrying a
vessel.

Vassal, in Common Law is he that
holdeth land in fee of his Lord; it is also



taken for a Slave, or Inferiour Servant.


Vastation, (lat.) a wasting, or
destroying.

Vastity, (lat.) excessive bignesse,
hugenesse, or vastnesse of stature.

Vatican Hill, one of the seven Hills of
Rome, whereon there standeth a famous Palace and Library,
built by Pope Sixtus the fourth.

Vaticination, (lat.) a prophesying, or
telling of things to come.

Vavasours, or Valvasours, those
that in degree are next unto Barons.

Vaudevil, (French) a Countrey
ballade, roundelay, or song, it is also called a Virelay.

Vauntlay, in Hunting, is the setting of
Hounds in a readinesse, where the chace is to
passe.

Vawmure, an ancient word, signifying a
Bulwark, or Outwork for defence.

Vaward, see Vanguard.

Vayvode, a Prince, or chief Ruler in
Transilvania, and some of those Northern parts.


U B

Vberty, (lat.) store, plenty,
fertility.

Vbiquitarians, a Sect of Hereticks,
holding Christs body as
well as his Godhead to be every where.

Vbiquity, (lat.) a being in all places at
one time.


V E

Vecordy, (lat.) unsoundnesse of minde,
dotage, stupidity.

Vectarious, (lat.) belonging to a
Waggon, or
carriage.

Vection, (lat.) a carrying.

To Veer, in Navigation, to put out more
rope, or more sheat.

Vegetable, Vegetal, or Vegetive,
(Lat.) living after the manner of Plants and
Minerals, indued with
vigour, moisture and growth.

Vehicular, (lat.) belonging to a Vehicle,
i. a Cart, Wagon, or Coach, or any thing whereby
another is carried, or conveyed.

A Vein is defined by Anatomists to
be a common Organ of the body, round, and oblong apted for
the conveyance of bloud and natural spirits through all
the parts, and according to the several parts, it
passeth through, it taketh
several Denominations, as the Basilick vein, that which
passeth from the Liver through the inward processe of the arm, the
Cephalick the head vein, the Coeliacal,
that which runs into the blinde Gut, the Cystick, that
which runs up toward the Neck of the Gall, the
Epigastrick, the flank veins Gastroepiploick,
that which spreads it self through the bottom of the
Ventricle, Intercostal, those which run through the upper
Ribs. Port vein, that which is rooted in the Liver, and
from thence passeth into the Ventricle, Mesentery, and
other parts. Ranular, that which ascends from the
Throat to the tongue. Salvatel, that which from
the Liver runnes through the wrist into the hand;
Saphæna that which runnes through the inward
part of the Legge to the Ankle. Subclavicular, a
branch of the hollow vein, which runnes under the Neck
bone. Thymick, a branch of the Subclavicular.
Torcular, that which ascends by the inside of the
scull to the brain.

Velification, (lat.) a hoising of
sayls.

Velites, (lat.) the light armed Souldiers
among the Romans, see Triarii, whence
Velitation, a light skirmishing.

Velivolent, (lat.) flying as it were with
full sayl.

Vellication, (lat.) a plucking, twitching,
or giving a sudden pull. In Physick they are said to be
certain convulsions that happen in the Fibers of the
Muscles.

Velocity, (lat.) swiftnesse.

Venality, (lat.) a setting to sale, a being
saleable.

Venatick, or Venatorious, (lat.)
belonging to hunting, or
chacing.

Vendible, (lat.) saleable, fit for
sale.

Vendication, (lat.) a challenging to ones self, a
claiming.

Venditation, (lat.) ostentation, a
bragging, or vain
setting forth of ones self.

Vendition, (lat.) a selling.

Venedotia, the ancient name of all that
part of Wales, which is otherwise called
Guinethia, or Northwales.

Venefick, or Veneficious, (lat.)
belonging to
Venefice, i. the art of making
poysons; also witchcraft,
or sorcery.

Venenous, (lat.) venemous, or full of
poyson.

Veneration, (lat.) a reverencing, or
worshipping.



Venereal, or Venereous, (lat.) given
to Venery, i. lust, or carnal desires.


Venereal disease, (lat. Morbus
Gallicus, or Lues Venerea) a certain
virulent, and contagious disposition of the body,
contracted by
immoderate Venerie, or
coupling with unsound
persons; it is vulgarly called the French
Pox.

Venetiæ, a famous Citie of Italy,
built in the year 421. upon certain Islands of the
Adriatick Sea, 60 in number, by the
inhabitants of Aquileia and Pavia, who fled thither for
fear of the Huns; it is now become
a great Common wealth, and hath large Territories, both in
Italy and other places.

Venew, in Common-law, is taken for a 
neighbouring, or near place.

Venial, (lat.) worthy of pardon, or
forgivenesse; whence
in Theologie they make a distinction between mortal sins,
and Venial sins.

Vent, (lat.) a winde, or breath; also a
place for aire to come in, and out at.

Venta Belgarum, the ancient name of
Winchester, a pleasant Citie in
Hantshire, called by the Brittains Cær
Guente, by the Saxons Windanceaster, and by
the vulgar Latins
Wintonia; Venta giveth name also unto two other
Towns, Caster in Northfolk, called
Venta Icenorum, and Cærwent in
Monmouthshire, called Venta
Silurum.

Ventelet, (Dimin.) a small gale of
winde.

Not found in OED.



Ventiduct, (lat.) a conveyance of winde by
pipes, or otherwayes.

Ventilation, (lat.) a fanning, or
gathering of winde; also
a winnowing of Corn.

Ventosity, (lat.) windinesse.

Ventricle, (lat.) the stomack; it is also
taken for any round concavity of the body.

Ventriloquy, (lat.) a speaking inwardly, or
as it were from the belly.

Venundation, (lat.) a buying, or
selling.

Venus, (lat.) the goddesse of love,
pleasures, and
delights, whom the Poets faign to have sprung out of the
foam of the Sea, after that the Testicles of
Cælus had been cut off, and thrown in by
Saturn, whence she was called Aphrodite;
also the name of one of the seven Planets, or wandring
Stars.

Venustation, (lat.) a making handsome, or beautifull.

Veracity, (lat.) a saying truth.

Verbal, (lat.) consisting of words, or
delivered onely in words.

Verbatim, (lat.) word for word.

Verbeia, a certain goddesse, among the
ancient Brittains, to whom the Captain of the
second Cohort of the Lingones erected an Altar
near Ilekly in York-shire, she is
thought by Cambden to have been the Nymph, or
goddesse of the River Wherf, which was also
anciently called Verbeia.

Verberation, (lat.) a beating, or
strikeing.

Verbosity, (lat.) a being full of words.

Verecund, (lat.) shamefaced, modest,
bashfull.

Verdant, (lat.) green, fresh,
flourishing.

Verderer, (lat.) Viridarius) a
judiciall Officer of the Kings Forrest, who receives and
inrols the attachments of all manner of trespasses of the
Forrest of Vert and Venison.

Verdie, or Verdea, a kinde of rich
Italian wine.

Verdict, the answer of a Jury, or Inquest,
made upon any cause, Civil, or Criminal committed by the
Court to their consideration, or tryal.

Verdigrease, (lat.) Aerugo) a
green substance taken
from the rust of Brasse, or Copper.

Verditure, a green colour among
Painters.

Verdoy, a Term in Heraldry, when a bordure
is charged with leaves, fruits, and flowrs, and other the
like vegetables

Verdure, (French) greennesse.

Verge, (French) a rod, wand, or
Sergeants Mace; also the
compasse about the Kings Court, that bounds the
Jurisdiction of the Lord Steward of the Kings
houshold, and of the
Coroner of the Kings house, and is accounted twelve miles
compasse; also a rod
whereby one is admitted Tenant holding it in his hand, and
swearing
fealty to the Lord
of the Mannour, and for that cause is called Tenant by the
Verge.

Vergobert, (French) a chief Officer, or
Magistrate among the ancient Hedui.

Veridical, (lat.) telling, or speaking
truth.

Veriloquent, (lat.) the same.

Verisimility, (lat.) the probability, or
likelyhood of a thing.

Vermiculate, (lat.) worm-eaten; also
imbroidered with several colours.



Vermillion, (French) a ruddy or deep red
colour.


Vermination, (lat.) a certain disease
wherein worms are bred, and cause a
griping of the guts.

Vermiparous, (lat.) breeding or
bringing forth worms.

Vernaccia, a kind of Italian Wine.

Vernaculous, (lat.) proper and peculiar to
a Country.

Vernal, or Vernant, (lat.)
flourishing or belonging to the Spring.

Vernility, (lat.) servilenesse, or
slavery.

Verona, a famous City of Italy,
built as some say, by Brennus the Gaul,
heretofore governed by the Family of the
Scaligeri, and now under the jurisdiction of the
Venetians.

Verrey, a term in Heraldry, the same as
Varry, i. Fur consisting of Or and Azure, or Or
and Vert.

Verrucous, (lat.) full of warts or little
excrescences of the flesh.

Versatile, (lat.) apt to be wound or turned
any way.

Versation, (lat.) a turning or winding to
and again.

Versicle, (lat.) a little verse or
sentence.

Versification, (lat.) a making of
verses.

Version, (lat.) a translation or turning
out of one language into another.

Vert, in Heraldry, a green colour; but in
the Forrest Laws, it is every thing that grows and beares
a green leaf within the Forrest that may cover and hide a
Deer.

Verteræ, a Town of ancient memory in
Westmoreland, where in the Romans time a Captain
kept his residence with a Band of the Directores; this
place remaineth yet a poor village, called Burgus sub
Saxeto, or Burgh under
Stanmore.

Vertical point, in Astronomy, is that point
of the Heavens which is directly over ones head.

Vertiginous, (lat.) troubled with a
Vertigo, i. a
swimming or giddinesse in the head.

Vertumnus, a certain Deity worshipt by the
ancient Latins who could change
himself into all formes.
See Pomona.

Vervain, a kind of herb called in Latin Verbena, anciently used about sacred rites and
ceremonies.

Vervecine, (lat.) belonging to a
weather.

Vervise, a kind of cloth otherwise
called plonkets.

Verulamium, by Ptolomy called
Vrolanium, the
name of a City heretofore of very great repute in
Hertfordshire, the ruines whereof appear at this
day, near unto Saint Albans; the Saxons
termed it Watlingacester, from the famous highway
commonly called Watling-street, and also
Werlamceaster.

Very Lord and very tenant, in Common Law,
are those that are immediate Lord and Tenant to one
another.

Vesanous, (lat.) mad, furious,
outragious.

Vesculent, (lat.) to be eaten, fit for
food.

Vesicatory, (lat.) a Cupping-glasse; also a
sharp plaister or ointment applied to raise blisters in
the skin.

Vesicle, (lat.) a little bladder.

Vespers, evening-song, prayers said
about evening time.

Vespertine, (lat.) belonging to the
evening.

Vespilone, (lat.) one who in the time of a
great sicknesse carryeth forth dead
bodies in the night time to
be buried.

Vesta, the daughter of Saturn and
Ops, taken ofttimes by the Poets for the earth
and sometimes for the fire, in honour of whom Numa
Pompilius instituted many Rites and Ceremonies, and
conscecrated to her service certain Virgins called
Vestalls, who
were to take care of the Vestal fire, which when it went
out, was not to be kindled by any earthly fire, but to be
renewed by the beams of the Sun. They were injoyned to
preserve their virginity inviolable so long as they
remained in the service of the goddesse, and who ever was
found faulty among them was buried alive.

Vestiary, (lat.) a Wardrope or place to lay
clothes or apparrel in.

Vestible, (lat.) a porch or entry.

Vestigation, (lat.) a seeking any one by
the print of their foot, a searching
diligently.

Vestige, (lat.) a footstep, or print of any
ones foot.

Vestment, or Vesture, (lat.) a
garment, clothing, or attire.

Vetation, (lat.) a forbidding.

Veteran, (lat.) old, serving long in any
place or office.

Veteratorian, (lat.) crafty,
experienced.

Veterine, (lat.) belonging to carriages or
burthens.



Vexillary, (lat.) belonging to an Ensign or
Standard; also subst. a Standarn-bearer.



U F

Vfens, a Captain of the Aequicolæ
who came to assist Turnus against
Aeneas, and was slain by Gyas a
Trojan.

Vffkines, a name anciently given to the
successours of Vffa, the first King of the
East-English;
they were vassals sometimes to the King of
Mercia, sometimes to the Kings of Kent.


V I

Via combusta, the last 15 degrees of
Libra, and the
first 15 degrees of Scorpio.

Vial, (lat. Phiala) a pot or
glasse with a wide mouth.

Viand, (French) meat, food,
victuals.

Viatick, (lat.) belonging to a journey, or
travelling by the high way; also subst. provision or
things necessary for a journey.

Viatorian, (lat.) belonging to
travellers.

Vibius Virius, a Citizen of Capua,
who causing that City to revolt to Hannibal, and
being besieged by the Romans poisoned
himself, and perswaded many of the Senatours to do the like.

Vibration, (lat.) a shaking or winding
about, a brandishing.

Vibrissation, (lat.) a quavering, or
shaking of the voice in
singing.

Vicenarious, or Vicesimal, (lat.)
belonging to twenty, or
the twentieth in number.

Viceroy, (French) a Deputy-King, one that
governs in the place of a King.

Vicinity, (lat.) neighbourhood,
nearnesse.

Vicissitude, (lat.) a changing, or
succeeding by turns.

Vicount, (lat. Vicecomes) a kind
of Magistrate, being the same as a Sheriff; also a
Nobleman next in degree unto an Earle.

Victime, (lat.) a sacrifice or
oblation.

Victour, (lat.) an Overcomer or
Conquerour.

Vidame, (lat. Vicedominus) the
Judge of a Bishops temporal jurisdiction, being originally
the same to a Bishop, as a Vicount
to an Earle.

Viduation, (lat.) a depriving, making
desolate, putting into the estate of Viduity or
Widdow-hood.

The Vies or Devizes, a Castle in
Wiltshire, once
a very stately and magnificent Structure, built at the
vast expences of Roger Bishop of
Salsbury in the reign of King Stephen;
it is called in Latin by some Divisio, by others
Divisæ.

View, signifieth in Hunting the print of a
fallow Deers foot upon the ground.

Viewers, in Common Law, those that are sent
by the Court to take view of any place in question, for
the better decision of the right; also upon other
occasions, as of a man in case of sicknesse or of an
offence.

Vigone, (French) a Demicaster, or a kind of
Hat made of the wool of a beast so called.

Vigorous, (lat.) full of vigour,
i. strength, courage, lustinesse.

To Vilifie, (lat.) to set light by, to
disesteem, to make of
no value.

To Vilipend, (lat.) the same.

Vility, (lat.) cheapnesse, a being base, or
of little worth.

Villenage, in Common Law, is a servile Kind
of Tenure such as Villeins, i.
bondmen, are fittest to
performe: but there are several sorts of Villenage, not
every one that holdeth in Villenage being a
servant or bondman.

Viminal, (lat.) belonging to Osier
twigs.

Vincible, (lat.) to be overcome, or
vanquished.

Vincture, (lat.) a tying or binding.

Vindelicia, a Country of Germany,
bounded on each side with Rhætia,
Noricum, Danubius,
and the Alps.

Vindemial, or Vindemiatory, (lat.)
belonging to a Vintage,
i. a Vine-harvest, or gathering of grapes.

Vindication, (lat.) a revenging or
punishing, also a
delivering or saving from danger.

Vindonum, the chief City, anciently of the
Segontiaci, a people of Hantshire; it
was called by the old Brittains, Britenden, now
Silecester.

Vinitorian, (lat.) belonging to the keeping
of Vines, Vinyards, or Wine.

Vinolent, (lat.) savouring of Wine, given
to drink Wine.

Violation, (lat.) a defiling, misusing;
also a transgressing.

Viperine, (lat.) belonging to vipers, being
a sort of venemous Serpent in some hot Countries.

Virago, (lat.) a manly or couragious
woman.



Virason, a cool gale of wind.


Not found in OED.



Virbius, the son of Theseus and
Hippolyta, called also Hippolytus; it
signifies twice a man.

Virelay, see Vaudevill.

Virge, certain rayes obliquely striking
through a cloud, and signifying rain.

Virginalls, a certain musical Instrument
commonly known.

Virgo, (lat.) one of the 12 Signs of the
Zodiack, being phancy'd to bear the
resemblance of a Maid or Virgin.

Virgult, (lat.) a twig or company of young
shoots or sprigs growing together.

Viriatus, a famous Portughese, who
from a Hunter and noted Robber became at last a great
Commander; he overthrew the two Roman Pretors
Ventidius and Plancius, but at last was
vanquished by a Consular Army, and slain treacherously by
the counsel of Cæpio.

Viridity, (lat.) greennesse, also
lustynesse, strength,
freshnesse.

Virility, (lat.) mans estate, manlinesse;
also ability to perform the part of a man in the act of
generation.

Viripotent, (lat.) ripe for man.

Virtuoso, (Ital.) a man accomplisht in
vertuous Arts and Ingenuitie.

Virulent, (lat.) full of venome or
deadly poison.

Visceral, (lat.) belonging to the bowels of
any creature.

Viscidity, or Viscosity, (lat.) a
clamminesse, a
sticking to any thing like glue or birdlime.

Visibility, (lat.) an aptnesse to be seen
or discerned.

Visier, a Viceroy or chief Statesman
among the Turks.

Vision, (lat.) a seeing or
discerning.

Vistula, a famous River, vulgarly
called Wixel,
running out of the Carpathian Hill, and dividing
Germany from Europæan
Sarmatia.

Visual, (lat.) belonging to the
sight.

Vital, (lat.) belonging to, or
sustaining life.

Vitation, (lat.) a shunning or
avoiding.

Vitelline, (lat.) resembling the yolk of an
egge.

Vitemberga, the City of
Wittenbergh in Germany.

Vitiation, (lat.) a corrupting or
defiling; also a
deflowring.

Vitiferous, (lat.) bearing vines.

Vitoldus, a cruel Tyrant of
Lithuania, who carried with him a bow and arrows
wheresoever he went killing whomsoever he had a mind to
kill, though upon never so slight an occasion, making it
his chiefest sport and
recreation.

Vitreal, or Vitrine, (lat.)
belonging to, or made of glasse.

Vitrification, (lat.) a making of
glasse.

Vitriolous, (lat.) belonging to Vitriol,
i. a kind of middle substance between stone and
mettal, called also Copperass.

Vituline, (lat.) belonging to a
Calf.

Vituperation, (lat.) a blaming,
reprehending, or
dispraising.

Vivacity, (lat.) livelinesse, lustinesse,
vigour.

Vivification, (lat.) an enlivening,
reviving,
quickning.

Viviparous, (lat.) bringing their young
alive.


U L

Vladislaus, a King of Hungaria,
who was slain in a great battle against the
Turks; also the name of several other Kings of
Hungaria and Bohemia.

Vlceration, (lat.) a
blistering or
breaking out into an
ulcer or running sore.

Vliginous, (lat.) plashy, wet, full of
standing water.

Vlisses, the son of Lærtes and
Anticlea, he married Penelope the
daughter of Icarius,
by whom he had Telemachus; he was by
Palamedes forced against his will to go to the
wars of Troy where he proved very serviceable
to the Greeks by reason of his great subtilty;
for he brought Achilles to them who had hid
himself among the daughters of Lycomed; He
stole away the ashes of Laomedon which were
kept in one of the gates of the City; He took away the
Palladium, and with the help of
Diomed slew King
Rhæsus and brought away his white horses; He
by a wile caused Palamed
to whom he bore a grudge, to be stoned to death, and
after Achilles was slain, he was preferred
before Ajax by the common sentence of the
Greeks, to have his armes: after the wars of
Troy, intending
to sail back to his own Country, he was cast by tempest
together with his companions
upon unknown Regions; being cast upon Aeolia,
he obtained of Aeolus the winds in a bottle,
which was broken by his companions thinking there had
been a treasure concealed in it; next coming to the
Country of the Læstrigones,



his companions were changed into beasts by
Circe, whom he compelled to restore them to
their former shapes, and lying with her he begat
Telegonus; having scap't the charms of the
Syrens, his companions were afterward cast away
for killing the flocks of Phæthusa the
daughter of the Sun, and he onely escaping, was cast
uppon Ogygia and
intertained by Calypso, on whom he begat
Nausithous and Nausinous; at length he
was intertained by Nausicaa the daughter of
Alcinous King of the Phæacenses,
and his wife Arete, he obtained of them a new
ship and attendants, with whom he arrived safe at
Ithaca, where he slew all his rivals, and was
himself slain unknown by his son Telegonus.


Vlophone, a kind of plant called the black
Chamæleon thistle; it is also called
Vervilago.

Not found in OED.



Vle-games, Christmas games or sports, from
the French word Noel, i. Christmass, or the Latin
jubilum.

Vlster, a Province in Ireland, which containeth these
following Counties, Louth, Cavon, Fermanagh, Monaghan,
Armagh, Doun, Antrim, Londonderry, Tir Owen, Tirconel.

Vltimate, (lat.) the last, extream, or
utmost.

Vltion, (lat.) a revenging.

Vltramarin, (lat.) beyond the Seas; also a
kind of colour used in painting.

Vltramundane, (lat.) being beyond the
visible World.

Vlulation, (lat.) a howling like a dog or
wolf.


U M

Vmber, a kind of beast; also a dark
yellowish colour used in painting.

Vmbilical, (lat.) belonging to the
navel.

Vmbrage, (French) a shadow, also
suspition, also a
pretence.

Vmbragious, Vmbratical, or
Vmbratile,  (Fr. Lat.)  shady, covert,
obscure.

Vmbrello, (Ital.) a great broad fan or
skreen, which in hot Countries people hold over their
heads to keep off the heat of the Sun.

Vmple, a word used in some ancient Statutes
for fine Lawn.


U N

Vnanimity, (lat.) a being of one mind or
will, a consenting or according together.

Vncial, (lat.) containing an ounce or
inch.

Vnction, (lat.) an anointing with oil, or
any oily substance.

Vncouth, (Sax.) unknown in Common Law, it
is more peculiarly taken for one for whom his Host is not
bound to answer for any offence committed by him, he
being not counted a guest till the third night.

Vndation, (lat.) a waving or rising of
waves.

Vnderside, (Sax.) the evening time.

Vndulate, (lat.) Chamolet wrought, or
painted like waves.

OED has only the adjective.



Vndulation of the air, the waving of the
air to and fro.

Vneth, (old word) scarse, difficult.

Vnguent, (lat.) an ointment or liquid
salve.

Vnicornous, (lat.) having but one
horn.

Vniformity, (lat.) a being of one and the
same form, figure, and fashion.

Vnion, (lat.) a joyning together, a
growing into one; also a
kind of pearl growing in couples; also a combining of two
Churches in one, which is done by the consent of the
Bishop, Patron, and Incumbent.

Vniparous, (lat.) bringing forth one onely
at a birth.

Vnison, (French) an agreement of two notes
in one tone.

Vnity, (lat.) a being one in substance or
in mind, union, concord.

Vnity of possession, in Common Law, is a
joynt possession of two rights by several titles. It is
called by Civilians consolidatio usus fructus.

Vniversal, (lat.) general, extending to
all.

Vniversity, (lat.) in the Civil Law, is
taken for a body politique or corporation;
also an Academy.

Vniversity Colledge, the most ancient
Colledge of Oxford, begun by King
Aelfred who
founded this Academy, and reedified
by William Arch-deacon of
Durham.

Vnivocal, (lat.) consisting of one voice,
name, or sound; in Logick it is, when
under one name one thing is signified.

Vnkennel, To unkennel a Fox, that is to
drive or force him from his hole.

Vnselinesse, (Sax.) unhappinesse.

Vnweather, (Sax.) a storm or
tempest.




V O

Vocabulary, (lat.) a Dictionary or
Index of words.

Vocal, (lat.) belonging to, or consisting
in the voice.

Vocation, (lat.) a profession, calling, or
course of life.

Vociferation, (lat.) a putting forth the
voice, a crying out, or exclaiming.

Voculation, (lat.) a giving a word its
right tone or accent.

Vogue, (French) powr, swey,
authority.

Voidance, a want of an incumbent upon a
benefice.

Voider, a Term in Heraldry, being an
Ordinary, consisting of an Archline
moderate bowing from the
corner of the chief toward the Nombrill of the
Escotcheon.

Voiding, a Term in Heraldry, being an
exemption of some part of the inward
substance of things
voidable, by reason whereof
the field is transparent through the charge.

Voisinage, (French) neighbourhood.

Volant, or Volatical, (lat.)
flying, or passing swiftly away.

Volatil, (lat.) a Term in Chimystry,
unfixt, apt to
evaporate.

Volitation, (lat.) a flying often.

Volta, (Ital.) a course, or turn in riding
or in dancing.

Volubility, (lat.) facility, or aptnesse in
turning about, or changing; also a quick and easie
delivery in speech, or pronunciation.

Voluntary, (lat.) done willingly,
without force, or
constraint.

Voluptuous, (lat.) given to pleasures, or
delights.

Volutation, (lat.) a tumbling, rolling, or
wallowing.

Volutina, a certain goddesse among the
Romans, who according to Varro was said to be the
overseer of the little cups, or sheaths of Corn, wherein
the Grain is inclosed, which in Latin is called Involucrum, as
Hostilina was to take care that the Corn was
supplied with new ears, which is called in Latin Exæquatio, or Hostimentum.

Vomanus, a River of Picenum in
Italy.

Vomition, (lat.) a vomiting, or
spewing.

Voracity, (lat.) greedinesse, gluttony,
aptnesse to devour.

Voraginous, (lat.) swallowing up like a
Vorago, i. a Whirlpool, Gulf, or
Quagmire.

Voration, (lat.) a devouring.

Votary, (lat.) he that binds himself to the
performance favour.

Voucher, in Common-law, is a calling of one
into the Court to warrant, or make good Lands bought with
warranty, for the secure injoying thereof against all
men.

Vowel, a letter which soundeth of it self,
without the help of a consonant.


U R

Vrania, see Muses.

Vranoscopy, (Greek) a viewing, or
contemplating of the
heavens.

Vrbanity, (lat.) the fashion of the City,
civility, courtesie, gentlenesse in speech, or
behaviour.

Vreter, (Greek) the passage of the Urine
from the Reins to the Bladder.

Vricornium, in old times a very famous
Citie, and the principal in Shropshire, built by
the Romans, the Saxons called it
Wrekencoaster,
from the Hill Wreken, near which it stood, it is
now but a poor Village,
and called Wreckceter, or
Wroxcester.

Vrim and Thummim, (Hebrew, lights
and perfections) 12 precious stones in the breast-plate of
the High-priest, which shon like the flame of fire.

Vrinator, (lat.) a diver, or swimmer under
water.

Vrn, (lat.) a certain Vessel among the
ancients, where the ashes of dead bodies that had been
burnt were kept, hence it is taken for any grave, or
sepulcher, it signifieth
also a certain liquid measure, containing
two gallons and a pottle.

Vroscopy, (Gr.) an inspection of Urines,
commonly called a casting of water.

Vrsa Major, the great Bear, a
constellation in the heaven.

Vrsine, (lat.) belonging to a Bear.

Vrsula, the proper name of a woman,
signifying in Latin, a little she Bear.

Vre, (Greek, from Oros a mountain) 
a kinde of wilde Oxe.




U S

Vsquebagh, a strong liquour used among the
Irish, signifying in that language as much as
Aqua vitæ.

Vstion, (lat.) a burning.

Vstulation, (lat.) the same, also a
curling with hot irons.

Vsufructuary, (lat.) reaping the profit of
that thing, whose propriety belongs to
another.

Vsury, (lat.) the taking of interest, or
use-money for any summe lent.

Vsurpation, (lat.) a having, or possessing
against right, or equity.


U T

Vtas, the eighth day following any term, or
feast.

Vtensil, (lat.) houshold-stuff, that which
is usefull and necessary about a house.

Vterine, (latin) belonging to the
womb.

Vtlarie, (in Latin Vtlagatio) a
punishment for such as
being called into Law, do contemptuously refuse to appear,
whereby they forfeit their goods, or lands to the King, or
State.

Vtopia, the feigned name of a Countrey
described by Sir Thomas More, as the
pattern of a well govern'd
Common-wealth; hence it is taken by Metaphor for any
imaginary, or feigned place.


U V

Vveal, (lat.) belonging to a Grape, like a
Grape.

Vvid, (lat.) moist, or wet.

Vulcan, the God of fire, the son of
Jupiter and
Juno, he was thrown out of
heaven for his deformity, into the Isle of Lemnos,
by which fall he became lame, he was brought up by
Eurynome, the daughter of Oceanus and
Thetis, he was the master of the
Cyclops, and made Thunderbolts for
Jupiter; also Hermione's bracelet,
Ariadne's Crown, the Chariot of the Sun, the
Armour of Achilles
and Aeneas, &c. he would have married
Minerva, but she refusing him, he married
Venus, whom he having caught in bed with
Mars, threw a Net over them, and exposed them to
the view of all the gods.

Vulgarity, (lat.) a being common,
vulgar, or publickly known.

Vulneration, (lat.) a wounding, or
hurting.

Vulpine, (lat.) belonging to, or like a
Fox, crafty, subtle.

Vulsion, (lat.) a pulling.

Vulturine, (lat.) belonging to a
Vultur, or Geyr, being a ravenous kind of bird.

Vulturnus, a certain Town of
Campania, with a River of the same name.

Vvula, (lat.) the pallat of the
mouth.


U X

Vxellodunum, a Town of Quercy in
France, vulgarly called Cadenack.

Vxorious, (lat.) belonging to a wife;
also fond, or doating upon a
wife.


U Z

Vzita, a Citie of Africa, called
by Strabo Uxitas.


W A

WAdham Colledge, a Colledge in the
University of Oxford, so
called from the name of him
that erected it.

Wafters, (a Term in Navigation) men of War,
that attend merchants ships to conduct them safe along.

Wage, see Gage.

To Wage Law, to prosecute a law
sute.

A Wagtail, a kinde of bird, otherwise
called a Waterswallow, in Latin Motacilla, in
Ital. Ballarina.

Waif, or Waive, the same which the
Civilians call derelictum, any thing
(whether it be Cattel
strayed, or goods stolen and quitted upon Hue and Cry)
which being found are to be proclaimed sundry Market
dayes, and if they challenge them



within a year and a day are to be restored, otherwise
they are to belong to the Lord of the Franchise; also as
a man forsaken of the Law, to which he was sworn is said
out-lawed, so a woman not being sworn to the Law is
called Waive.


Wain, (Dutch) a decreasing, defect, or
want.

Waive, see Waif.

Wakes, certain feasts and solemnities,
which use to be kept the week after that Saints day, to
whom the Parish Church was dedicated.

Walbury, (Sax.) gratious, an ancient proper
name of several women.

Waldwin, a proper name, signifying in the
German tongue a Conquerour, answerable to the Latin name
Victor, for Waldin we now use
Gawen.

Walereared, a Term in Navigation, not
shipshapen, or when a ship is built right up.

Walter, the proper name of a man,
signifying in
Dutch a Pilgrim, or as others say a
Woodman.

Wandsdike, (contracted from the Saxon
Wodensdike, i. the Ditch of Woden, the
Brittish Mars) a Ditch of wonderfull work in
Wiltshire, many miles in length, near which
Ina, King of the West Saxons, and
Ceolred King of the Mercians joyned
battel, and departed the field on even hand.

Wantage, in the Saxon tongue
Wanading, a place in Bark-shire,
anciently a Mannour house of the Kings of
England, famous for being the birth-place of
Alfred, that prudent
and learned Prince.

Wapentake, a certain division of a
County, called also a
hundred, it is so called from an ancient custome, wherein
he that came to take the government of a hundred was met
by all the better sort, who came and touch't his Lance, or
Weapon, by which Ceremony they were sworn and
confederate.

Warbling of the wings, a Term in
Faulconry; for after a
Hawk hath mantled her self, she crosses her wings together
over her back; which action is called the warbling of the
wings.

Ward, a portion of the Citie committed to
the special charge of one of the 24
Aldermen; also a part,
or division of a Forrest;
also the Heir of the Kings Tenant, holding by Knights
service, during his nonage, is called Ward, whence Warden,
a Guardian, or Oversee-er.

Warin, a proper name, in Latin Guarinus, it
comes from the German Gerwin, i. all
victorious.

Wardmote, a Court kept in every Ward in
London.

Wardstaff, a kinde of petty Sergeanty,
which is a holding of Lands by this
service, namely to carry
a load of straw in a Cart with six horses, two roaps, two
men in harnesse to watch the said Wardstaff, when
it is brought to the place appointed.

Wardwit, see Warwit.

Wardrobe, (Ital. Guardaroba) a
place where the Garments of Kings, or great persons use to
be kept, and he that keeps the inventory of all things
belonging to the Kings Wardrob, is called Clark
of the Kings great Wardrobe.

Wards and Liveries, a certain
Court erected in the time of King Henry the eighth.

Warrant, or Warranty, in
Common-law, is a Covenant made in a deed by one man unto
another, to warrant and secure himself
and his Heirs, against all men whatsoever,
for the injoying of any thing agreed upon between them; it
is called by the Civilians
Astipulatic.

Warren, (lat. Varrenna, or
Vivarium) a prescription, or grant to a man from
the King, of having Pheasants, Partridges, Conies, and
Hares, within certain of his Lands.

Warscot, a contribution, that was wont to
be made towards Armour in the Saxons time.

Not found in OED.



Warwick, the principal Town of
Warwick-shire,
which with much probability is judged to be the same with
that, which anciently
was called præsidium, i. a Garrison; for the
Saxons, called it Warringwyck, the
Brittains, Cær Guarvick,
both which words seem to have sprung from the
Brittish word
Guarth, which also signifieth a Garrison; here
the Captain of the Dalmatian
hors-men kept his residence, under
the command of Dux Britanniæ, this Town is
situate over the River Avon, upon a steep Rock,
fortified with strong walls, and a Castle toward the
South-west.

Warwit, or Wardwit.  a being
quit of giving money for
keeping of watches.

Wassail, (Sax. Wæsheal, i. be in
health) an ancient Ceremonious custome, still used upon
twelf day at night, of going about with a great bowl of
Ale, drinking of healths, taken from Rowena,
the daughter



of Hengistus, her Ceremony to King
Vortiger, to
whom at a banquet she delivered with her own hands a
Golden Cup full of wine.


Wast, in Common-law, is, where a
Tenant for Term of years,
or otherwise doth, to the prejudice of the Heir, or of him
in the reversion make waste, or spoyl of
houses, woods, gardens,
orchards, by pulling down the House, cutting down Timber,
&c.

Water-line, (a Term in Navigation) that
line which ought to be the depth, that a ship should swim
in when she is laden a head,
and a stern.

Watling street, see Ikenild street.

Wavey, a Term in Blazon, bearing a
resemblance of the
swelling wave of the Sea.


W E

Weald of Kent, the wooddy part of
the Countrey, from the Dutch word Wald, which
signifieth a Forrest, or Wood.

Wega, the shining Harp.

Weapon salve, that which cures a wound by
being applied to the weapon that made it.

Weathercoil, is, when a ship being a Hull,
layeth her head the other way, without loosing any of her
sayl, which is done by bearing up the Helm.

Weed, or Wede, (Sax.) a garment,
or suit of apparel.

Wedding, a joyning in marriage, from the
Dutch word Wed, i. e. a pledge.

Weigh, a certain weight of Cheese, or Wool,
containing 256 pounds of Avoir du pois.

Weights, see Aver du pois, and
Troy weight.

Welken, an old Saxon word,
signifying a Cloud; also the Element, or Sky.

Weold, or Wold, (Sax.) a
Forrest.

Werewolf, or Manwolf (Were
signifying in the Saxon language a man) a kinde
of Sorcerer, who by anointing his body, and putting on an
enchanted girdle, takes upon him the shape, and nature of
a Wolf, worrying and killing humane Creatures.

Weroance, a name given to any great Lord,
among the West-Indians.

Werre, or Were, a certain
pecuniary mulct, anciently set upon a mans head for
killing of a man.

Werregelt theft, a thief that may be
redeemed by
Werre.

Westphalia, a Province of Germany,
and one of the 12 Circles of the Empire,
containing in it 6
Bishopricks, 3 principalities, 7 free Cities, with divers
great Earledoms.


W H

Wharfage, a fee due, for things landed at a
wharf, or brought thither to be
exported.

While, (Sax.) which.

Whitehart silver, see Blacklow
Forrest.

Whitespurres, certain Squires made by the
King.

Whitsuntide, as it were the time of the
white son; also Whitsunday seemeth to signify as much as
sacred Sunday; from the Saxon word
Wihed, i. sacred, being a
certain feast celebrated,
in memory of the holy Ghost, descending upon the Apostles
in fiery tongues; it is called in Greek
Pentecost, as
being the 50th. day from the
Resurrection.

Whole-chace-boots, large hunting, or
winter riding bootes;
summer riding bootes, being called demichace.

Whoodings, plancks, which are joyn'd and fastned along the ship-sides
into the stem.

Whorlbat, (in lat. Cæstus) a
certain game or exercise among the ancients, wherein they
whirled leaden plummets at one another.


W I

Wigornia, the chief Citie of
Worcestershire,
commonly called Worcester, the
Brittains
call'd it Cær-Wrangon, and
CærGuarangon,
the Saxons Weorgaceaster; it was set on fire in
the year 1041. by Hardy Cnute the Dane,
in revenge, because the Citizens had slain his
Huscarles; it was also very much harrassed in the
time of the Civil Wars, in King Stephens reign,
but soon it flourish't again, with greater splendour then
before.



Wilfred, (Sax.) much peace, a proper name of
men.


Saint Wilfrid's needle, a certain narrow
hole in the Church of Wakeman, in
Yorkshire,
wherein womens honesties were in times past tried, for
such as were chaste did easily passe through, but such as
had been faulty, were miraculously held fast, and could
not get through.

William, (Dutch Wilhelm) the
proper name of a man, the word signifying a
defence to many.

Wilton, a Town of Wiltshire, in
ancient times the
principal Town of the whole Shire, and from which it took
its denomination, that it was heretofore
called Ellandunum,
appears by the Testimony
of old Records, when Weolstan
being stiled Earle of
Ellandunum; it is farther
added, that is to say of Wilton, here in a very
bloudy battel, Egbert King of the
West-Saxons, overcame Beorwulf, King of
Mercia, in the year of our salvation 821. here
also about fifty years after King Aelfrid,
joyning battel with the Danes, was at length put
to the worst.

Wimple, a plaited linnen cloath, which Nuns
wear about their necks; also a flag or streamer.

Wimund, (Sax.) sacred peace, a proper
name.

Winchester, see Venta.

Windlasse, a piece of Timber placed from
one side of the ship to the other close abast the stem.

Windsore, a Town in Bark-shire, by
the Saxons called Windleshore, haply
from the Winding-shore; it is famous for a most
stately Castle, built by King Edward the third,
who in this Castle held prisoners at the same time,
John King of France, and David
King of Scots; he also founded that Noble Order
of the Garter, of which see more in the word Knight, there
is likewise a magnificent Church begun by the same King,
and consecrated to the Virgin Marie, but finisht
by King Henry, and Sir Reginald
Bray.

Winefrid, the name of an ancient
Brittish Virgin
Saint, of whom it is reported that after her head was cut
off by Cradacus,
there sprung up in the same place the Well, which at this
day is called Saint Winefrids Well, and that
Benno the Priest joyned her head again to her
body; it is also the proper name of divers women, the word
signifying in the Saxon tongue an obtainer of
peace.

Winwidfield, a place near Leeds in
York-shire, so called from the great
victory, which
Oswy, King of Northumberland
had over Penda, King of the
Mercians,
wherein Penda was utterly
overthrown.

Wippedfleed, see Tanet.

Wisard, a witch, a cunning man, one that
telleth where things are that were lost, some think it
comes from the Saxon word Witega, i. a
Prophet.

Wiseacre, the same, from the Dutch words
Wær, i. truth, and Sagen, i. to tell;
it is vulgarly taken for a fool.

Witchcraft, a certain evil Art,
whereby with the
assistance of the Devil, or evil Spirits, some wonders may
be wrought, which exceed the common
apprehension of men.
It cometh from the Dutch word Wiechelen, i. to
divine, or guesse; it is called in Latin Veneficium, in Greek Pharmaceia, i. the
art of making poysons.

Withernam, (from the Dutch words
Wider, i. again, and Namp, i. a taking)
is in Common Law, when a distresse is
taken and driven into a hold
or out of the County, so that the Sheriff cannot upon the
replevin, make delivery thereof to the party
distreined.


W O

Woad, a certain herb wherewith cloth is
dyed blew; it is called in Latin,
Guadum, Glastum, or Pastellum.

Woden, a certain Idol worshipt by the
ancient Saxons, and thought to be the same with
Mars, or the god of Battle; whence the fourth day
of the week came to be called Wodensday, or
Wednseday.

Wodensburgh, (q. the Burgh or Town of
Woden, the abovenamed Idol) a village in
Wiltshire, where in the year 590 Ceaulin
King of the West-Saxons, was in a bloody battle
vanquisht by the Brittains, and
forced to end his dayes in exile.

Wolds, (Sax.) mountains or hills
without woods; whence that
part of Leicestershire
lying Northward beyond the Wreken, is called the
Wold or Would of Leicestershire,
as being hilly without woods.



Wolfetchsod, (Sax.) the condition of an Utlary,
upon whose head the same price was formerly set, as on a
Wolfs head to whomsoever should kill him.


Woodstock, (Sax. a wooddy place) a Town in
Oxfordshire, where King
Ethelred
assembled the States of the Kingdom and enacted Laws; here
King Henry the first built a very magnificent
Royal Palace, in which King Henry the second, that he might keep his
Paramour Rosamund Clifford concealed, built a
Labyrinth with many intricate turnings and windings, which
was called Rosamunds Bower; but it is so utterly
effaced, that at this day it is not to be discerned where
it was. In this Town Geffery
Chaucer a most
famous English Poet was
brought up.

Woodward, an officer of the Forrest, whose
function is to present any offence of Vert or Venison done
within his charge, and if he find any Deer killed or
wounded, to give the
Verderer notice of it.

Woolwinders, those that wind up fleeces of
wool into a kind of bundle to be packt and sold by
weight.

Worcester, see Wigornia.

Wormatia, a famous City of
Germany, built upon the River Rhene; it
is vulgarly called
Worms, and hath been sometime an Arch-Bishops See.


W R

Wreath, in Heraldry, is that which is
between the Mantle and the
Crest, called also a Torce; also a Boares tail so termed
among Hunters.

Wreck, (Fr. Varech, Lat.
Veriscum & naufragium) is when a ship
perisheth at sea, and no man escapeth alive, in which case
whatever goods are cast upon land belong to the King or
the Lord of the soile; but if any person come to land, or
if either dog or cat escape alive, the goods return to the
owner if he claim them within
a year and a day.

Wreedt, (Dutch) angry, fierce, furious;
whence the word wroth is commonly used by us for anger or fury.

Not found in OED.



Writ, (Lat. Breve because the
intention of it is expounded in few words)
signifieth in Common
Law, the Kings precept whereby any thing is commanded to
be done touching the suit of action, as a
defendant to be summoned, a distresse to be taken, &c. It is
called by the Civilians, Actio or
Formula.


W U

Wulpher, (Sax.) helper, the proper name of
a King of Middle-England, it answers to the Greek
names Alexas
or Epicurus.

Wulfrunes Hampton, (from Wulfrune
a devout woman who inriched the Town) a Town in
Staffordshire vulgarly called
Wolverhampton.


X A

XAnthi, a certain people of Asia
who were utterly destroyed by Cyrus his
Lieutenant Harpagus.

Xanthippe, the wife of Socrates, a
woman of a very froward and petulant disposition,
insomuch as Alcibiades told Socrates that
he wondred how he could indure to live with her, to which
he answered, that he kept her to exercise his patience at
home, that he might the better bear the petulancy of
others abroad.

Xantippus, a famous Captain among the
Lacedæmonians, who assisting the
Carthaginians,
overcame the Romans in a great battle, and took
Regulus the Consul prisoner.

Xantho, one of the Sea-Nimphs, the daughter
of Oceanus and Tethys.

Xanthus, a River of Troas, called
also Scamander.


X E

Xenocrates, a famous Chalcedonian
Philosopher, who
succeeded in the Academy of Speusippus, he was a
man of a very strict and severe conversation.

Xenodochy, (Gr.) an Inne or Hospital, a
place for the receiving of Pilgrims
Strangers, and Travellers.

Xenophon, the son of Gryllus a
famous Athenian Philosopher and expert Captain,
he went with an Army of 10000 men
along with Cyrus
into Persia, and after Cyrus was slain,
brought back his Army with little
losse through many strange Countries and divers great
difficulties and dangers. He was for his Eloquence stiled
the Attick Muse, and writ many choice and elegant
books.




Xeriff, the title of a Prince or Supream Ruler
in Barbary.


Xerophthalmie, (Gr.) a certain disease in
the eyes which causeth a rednesse or sorenesse, without
any running or swelling.

Xerxes, a King of Persia, the
grandchild of Cyrus and son of Darius
and Atossa; he with an Army of 1700000 men, and a
Navy so vast that it filled
the whole Hellespont
and joyned the two Continents together,
was vanquisht at Thermopylæ by 4000 men, and
afterwards in a Sea-fight at Salamis by
Themistocles,
and his General whom he left in Boeotia, was
faine to retire with almost
all his forces cut off, he was at length slain in his own
Palace by Artabanus one of his own
Captains.


X I

Xilinous, (lat.) belonging to
cotton.


X Y

Xylobalsame, (Gr.) a certain sweet wood,
whereof baulm is produced.


Y A

YArdland, a certain quantity of land called
in Saxon Gyrdlander, in Latin Virgata
terræ.


Y B

Ybel, an old Brittish proper name of a man,
it seems contracted from the Greek Eubulus, i.
Good Counsellour


Y E

Year and Day, a certain time in
construction of
Common Law thought fit in many
cases to determine a right in one, and prescription in
another, as in case of an Estray, of No claim, of
Protection, of a Wreck &c.

Yeoman, (contract, a youngman) the
next degree to a Gentleman, and called in Latin Ingenuus; in our Laws he is defined to be a
freeborn man, who can dispend of his own free land in
yearly revenue to the summe of 40 shillings Sterling.


Y O

Yonker, (Dutch Junker, i. a Knight
or Nobleman) a lusty lad.

York, see Eboracum.

Youthwort, a kind of plant called in
Latin ros solis.

See OED "youth."




Y T

Ythel, (Brittish) a proper name,
contracted from the
Greek Euthalius, i. very flourishing.


Z A

ZAchary, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Heb. Memory of the Lord.

Zachynthus, an Island of the
Ionian Sea, between Cephalenia, and
Achaia, now called
Zante.

Zaleucus, a famous Lawgiver among the
Locrians, who having made a Law for the punishing
Adultery, and his son hapning to be found guilty of the
same crime, he that he might fulfill the Law and
mitigate his sons punishment, caused one of his sons eyes to be put out, and
one of his own.

Zameis, the fifth King of Assyria,
the son of Ninus and Semiramis,
otherwise called Ninias.

Zany, (French) one that in ridiculous
manner, imitates other mens actions to stir up laughter.


Z E

Zebennia, the wife of Odenatus
King of the Palmyreni, who behaved himself with
much gallantry against Sapores King of
Persia; she after the death of her husband
injoyed the Kingdom with her sons
Herennianus
and Timolaus.

Zecchine, (Ital.) a certain Coin of Gold,
valuing about 7 shillings 6 pence Sterling.

Zelot, (Greek) one that is envious or
jealous of anothers actions; also one that is hot and
fervently zealous in Religion.

Zelotypie, (Greek) jealousie.

Zenith, (Arab.) the vertical point, or that
point of Heaven which is directly over our heads, and
opposite to the Nadir.

Zeno, a famous Greek Philosopher, who was the
first Authour of the Sect of the Stoicks, he strangled
him self in the 72 year of his age, after he had broke his



finger by hitting it against a stone. There was also
another Zeno of Elea a hearer of
Parmenides, he having conspired against the
Tyrant Nearchus, and being put upon the rack to
make him confesse who were the rest of the
conspiratours, he bit off a piece of his tongue and spit
it in the Tyrants face;
whereupon the Citizens stoned the Tyrant to death.


Zenobia, called also Zebennia, a
Queen of Palmyrene, and the wife of
Odatus, she governed the Roman Provinces in
Syria, being reckoned among the 30 Tyrants who
usurpt the government of the World in the time of
Galenus; she was at length overcome by the
Emperour Aurelian, and led in Triumph through the
City of Rome with Golden Chains: Yet he in
compassion afterwards gave her a possession in
Tybur. She understood the Aegyptian,
Greek, and Roman Languages, and brought up
her sons Herennianus and
Timolaus in
learning, of whom it is not known what became, whether
they died a natural death or were killed by
Aurelian.

Zephyrus, the West-wind so called by the
Greeks; by the Latins, Favonius, and
begins to blow as Varro
affirms, about the beginning of February.

Zereth, an Hebrew measure containing nine
inches.

Not found in OED.



Zethes, the son of Boreas and
Orithya,
and the brother of Calais; these two brothers
went with the Argonants to Colchos,
& because they had wings they were sent to drive away
the Harpys from Phineus
his Table, whom they pursued to the Strophades
Islands.

Zethus, the son of Jupiter and
Antiope the wife of Lycus King of the
Thebans, who divorcing Antiope, married
Dirce; after which Jupiter falling in
love with Antiope, got her with child, which
Dirce perceiving, fearing lest she might come
again into favour with her Husband, she put her in prison;
but the time of her delivery drawing nigh, she was set at
liberty, and flying to
the mountain Citheron,
she brought forth twins in the highway,
and the children being afterwards found by the Shepherds,
were brought up by them, and called the one
Zethus, the other Amphion, who coming to
age, and hearing of the injuries which Dirce had
done to their mother, they tied her to the tail of a wild
Bull, whereby she was draged through rough and stony wayes
to a miserable death, and changed by Bacchus into
a Fountain.

Zeuxis, a famous
Painter of Greece, who contended with
Timantes, Androcides, Eu­
pompus, and Parrhasius, all excellent
Painters of his time; he
painted a Boy carrying
Grapes, the Grapes being done with so much life, that the
Birds taking them for true Grapes, flew to them to peck at
them, whereat he grew very angry at his own work, saying,
That if the Boy had been drawn as well as the Grapes, they
would not have peckt at them for fear of the Boy.


Z O

Zodiack, one of the greater imaginary
Circles, being 12 degrees in breadth, and 360 in length,
and dividing the Sphere obliquely into two parts, and
containeth the 12 Signs, which are called Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, through
the whole length of this Circle runneth a line just in the
middle which is called the Ecliptick line, or the path-way
of the Sun, because in that line the Sun performeth its
course. The word Zodiack cometh from the Greek
Zodion, because of the representations of sundry animals which it
containeth; in Latin it is called
Signifer.

Zoilus, a Sophist of Amphipolis,
who lived in the time of Ptolomæus King of
Aegypt, and writ a
book against Homer, (whence he was called
Homeromastix)
which he presented to Ptolomy
expecting a great reward; but when he saw that he gave him
nothing, he being compelled by want, set on some friends
to beg something of him;
but Ptolomy answered
that since Homer, so many Ages past deceased had
fed so many men, he wondred how Zoilus could want
so much, being more learned than Homer.
Concerning his death some say, that being convicted of
Parricide, he was crucified at the
command of Ptolomy. Others that returning into
Greece, he was thrown down
headlong from the rock
Scyron. From him every envious carping Critick is called a
Zoilus.

Zone, (Greek) a belt or girdle, more
particularly it is taken for a girdle
worn anciently by maides about their middle



when they were near marriage, which the Husband untied
the first night of their marriage; also a souldiers
belt; also in Cosmography it is used for a certain space
or division of the Heavens or Earth,
bounded by the lesser
circles, whereof there are 5 in all; namely, the
Torrid Zone included
between the two Tropicks, the two Temperate
Zones included between the Tropicks and
the Polar Circles, and the two Frigid Zones
which are included between
the Polar Circles and the Poles themselves.


Zoography, (Greek) a discription of beasts,
a painting of any kind of animals.

Zoophytes, (Greek) certain substances which
partake of the nature partly of plants, partly of animals,
and are also called Plantanimals.

Zophyrus, a Nobleman of Persia,
who when Darius had besieged Babylon a
long time in vain, he fled to the Babylonians as
a fugitive, cutting off his eares and his lips,
complaining of the cruelty of his King; whereupon being
received by them, he was made their Captain, and betrayed
the City to Darius, who notwithstanding would
often say, That he had rather have one Zophyrus
whole, than take twenty Babylons.

Zoroaster, the first King of the
Bactrians, who, as Pliny saith, was the
first inventour of Magick among the Persians, he
is said to have laught the first day he was born, and his
brain is said to have beat so strongly, that it repelled
any ones hand which was laid on, which was held to be a
signe of his future sagacity, he wrote the liberal arts
upon seven pillars of brick, and also upon seven of
brasse; he wrote also one volume concerning nature, one of
precious stones, with several other works; some say, he
was consumed with fire from heaven, and that he foretold
to the Assyrians, that if they preserved his
ashes, their Kingdom should never fail, others say, he was
slain in the wars he had with Ninus, King of
Assyria.


Z U

Zulemon, a Captain of those
Saracens, inhabiting Asia, who invading
Thrace with a numerous Army, part of them
besieged Constantinople, part making an
irruption into Bulgaria, were overcome by the
Bulgarians.

Zuventebaldus, a Duke of the
Maraveni, to
whom Arnolphus gave the Dukedom of
Bohemia, he rebelling against the Emperour,
overcame him with the help of the
Hungarians.


Z Y

Zygactes, a River of Thrace, near
the City Philippi, in the passing of which,
Pluto is said to have broke his Chariot, when he
ravish't Proserpina.

Zygostat, (Greek) one appointed to look to
weights, a Clark of a market.


FINIS.







The Errata committed in the Capital Words are to
be found by the order of the Alphabet as followeth.


FOr Adory r. Adoxy. Alderanainim
vid. Pap. to be left out. for Archirrave
r. Architrave. for Arcuare r.
Arcuate. for Aniso r. Aviso.

Bacchus to begin a break after Baccharach.
for Becebick r. Becchick. for
Bedobeer r. Bedpheer. for Bourrean r.
Bourreau.

For Calcent r. Calecut. for Carm
r. Carine. for Cartilagindous r.
Cartilagineous. for Casuit r. Casuist Cnossus
should begin a break. for Columbarg r.
Columbarie. for Sir Crispin r. St.
Crispin.

For Dantry r. Dautry. Dative to begin a
break after Datism. Diple to begin a break after
Dipththong.

For Entire perngents r. Entire pertingents.
for Euperation r. Exuperation.

For Fastigation r. Fastigiation.
for Fontegeld r. Foutegeld.

For to be Agog r. to be a Gog. Grith to
be in the same break with Grithbreach. Gryph, to begin
a break after Gryffen. Gibbosity misplaced in G.
Y.

For Langid r. Languid. for Lucida
Laucis r. Lucida Lancis.

For Misoginy r. Mysogyny. for
Mithology r. Mythology.

For Nephglian r. Nephelian.

For Obigillation r. Obsigillation.
for Obtruration r. Obturation.

For Paraselinii r. Paraselenii.
for Paretii r. Parelii. for Paricide
r. Parricide, which should have been placed
after Parrhasius. for Percontation r.
Percunctation. for Portmantean r.
Portmanteau. for
Proem r. Prooem. for Propagotion r.
Propagation.

For Quadrulation r. Quadruplation.

Relohihin to be left out.

For Septunical r. Septuncial. for
Sicambre r. Sicambri. for Smectimnus
r. Smectimnuus. for
Supercilous r.
Supercilious. for Suparlative
r. Superlative.

In Thirdboroughs leave out s at the
later end. for Tonicul r. Tonical. for
Traperzium r. Trapezium  for Tymnætes
r. Tymætes.

For Vicidity r. Viscidity.


The other Errata are to be found under some or
other of the Alphabetical words.


In Corporal, for or r. of a.
in Corporeity leave out Corporeature.
after term in Courtilage for Message
r. Messuage. in Declination, for
Astrology r. Astronomy. in Defeisance
for or r. see. in Cyclops
for Serope r. Sterope. in Dalreudini
for Renda r. Reuda. in Dioptick
for Neniter capedines r. the Intercapedines.
in Entoire
before sorts r. all. in Entweyssel
after ancient r. family. in
Epidemical for Epidemie r. Epidemick.
in Euterpe before the r. one of.
in Excrementitious after belonging r.
to. in Familiar after Substantively
r. used. in Flandria for in
r. of. in Grææ
for Phocys r. Phorcys. in Growm
for Ensighn r. Engin. in Gunora
after barbdheaded r. arrow. in Haire
after time r. appears above. in
Jasion for brought r. taught. in
Information for nor
r. or. in Inodoration for swell
r. smell. in Introversion, after look
r. inward. in Joys of the Planets for
powerfully r. powerful. in Landgraviate
place Sea at the end of the foregoing word. in
Laver for or vessel r. a vessel. in
Libra for vernal r. Autumnal. in
Lucullus make a comma after besides, not afrer
age. in Lyra for Aphorism's r.
Asterism's. in Mate for Motto r.
Matto. in Miletus r. Sarpedon. in
Minchings after
consecrated r. virgins. in Mirach r.
Andromeda. in Opposite for privately
r. privatively. in Otus for Son
r. Sons. in Parapett for Brest
r. Brestwork.
in Paraselenii for Paretii r.
Parelii. in Pentagonal r. 5 angles.
in Peripherie make a comma after about.
in Phaleucian for and 5. r. or 5.
in Ralph r. helpful counsel. in
Schirrus for senses
r. sense. in Scolopender r. vomiteth.
in Supereminence for excellent r.
excellence. in Tegea r. Therimachus.
in Tissue for or r. of. in
Tribunal r. Judgement-seat. in Tripudiation
for tripling r. tripping. in Trophy
for upon r. up. in Velites
for Triani r. Triarii. in Xantippe
for Alcibies r. Alcibiades. These are the
most considerable Errata's that I have observed; what
ere else may have escaped, the discreet
Reader will easily correct.



