




The Languages.

FRom the people we will now proceede to 
the languages. Heere would Schollers 
shew you the first confusion of langua­
ges out of Moses, that the gods had their 
peculiar tongue out of Homer, that brute 
beasts, birdes, and fishes, had their owne 
proper languages out of Clemens Alexandrius. They 
would teach you out of Euphorus, that there were but 52. 



tongues in the world, because so many soules out of Iacob 
descended into Ægypt, and out of Arnobius, that there were 
seaventie and two: Albeit Timosthenes reporteth that in 
Dioscurias a mart towne of Colchis, their trafficked 300. 
Nations of divers languages: And howsoever our Indian or 
American discouerers say, that in every fourescore mile in 
America, and in every valley almost of Peru you shall finde 
a new language. Neither would they omit the Iland where 
the people have cloven tongues out of the fabulous Narra­
tions of Diodorus Siculus: yea, they would lash out of the Vto­
pian language with 

Volvola Barchin hemam, la lalvola drame pagloni.

whenas it is a greater glory now to be a Linguist, then a Re­
alist. They would moreover discourse at large, which I will 
tell you in a word. First the British tongue or Welsh (as we 
now call it) was in vse onely in this Island, having great af­
finitie with the olde Galliquæ of Gaule, now Fraunce, from 
whence the first inhabitants in all probability came hither. 
Afterward the Latin was taken vp when it was brought in­
to the forme of a Proviner, about the time of Domitian, ac­
cording to that notable place of Tacitus, where he report­
teth that Iulius Agricola Governour heere for the Romans, 
preferred the Britans, as able to doe more by witte, then the 
Gaules by studie: Vt qui (saieth he) modò linguam Romanam 
abnuebant, eloquentiam concupiscerent. Inde etiam habitus no­
stri honor & frequens toga. But the British overgrewe the 
Latine, and continueth yet in Wales, and some villages of Cornwall intermingled with some Provinciall Latine. After 
the Irish tongue was brought into the Northwest partes of 
the Isle, out of Ireland by the auntient Scottishmen, and 
there yet remaineth. Lastly, the English-Saxon tongue came 
in by the English-Saxons out of Germany, who valiantly and 
wisely performed heere all the three things, which implie a 
full conquest, viz. the alteration of lawes, language, and at­
tire. 

This English tongue extracted out of the olde German, 
as most other from Island to the Alpes, is mixed as it is now, 


 
of the olde English-Saxon & Norman French of the Frecnh 
of Latine, German, and the olde Gallique, the Italian of  La­
tine and German-Gotish, and the Spanish of Latine, Gotish­
German and Arabique, Saracen, or Morisque. And to the 
honour of our progenitors the English-Saxons be it spoken, 
their conquest was more absolute heere over the Britaines, 
than either of the Francs in Fraunce over the Gaules, or the 
Gothes and Lombardes in Italie over the Romans, or of the 
Gothes, Vandales, and Moores over the auntient Spaniards 
in Spaine. For in these nations much of the provinciall La­
tine (I meane the Latine vsed whilest they were Provinces 
of the Romans) remaineth, which they politikely had spread 
over their Empire, by planting of Colonies and enfranchi­
sing all Nations subiect vnto them. But the English-Saxon 
conquerors, altred the tongue which they found here who­
ly: so that no British words, or provinciall Latine appeared 
therein at the first: & in short time they spread it over this 
whole Iland, from the Orcades to Isle of Wight, except a few 
barren corners in the Westerne parts, wherevnto the reliques 
of the Britans and Scots retyred, reserving in them both their 
life and their language. For certainely it is that the greatest 
and best parts, the East and South of Scotland, which call 
themselves the Lawland-men, speake the English tongue va­
ried onely in Dialect, as descended from the English-Saxons: 
and the old Scottish, which is the verie Irish, is vsed onely by 
them of the West, called the Hechtland-men, who call the 
other as the Welsh call vs Sassons, Saxons, both in respect of 
language and originall, as I shewed before.

I dare not yet heere affirme for the antiquitie of our lan­
guage, that our great-great-great-grandsires tongue came 
out of Persia, albeit the wonderfull Linguist Ioseph Scaliger 
hath observed, Fader; Moder, Bruder, Band &c. in the Persian 
tongue in the very sence as we now vse them.

It will not be vnproper I hope to this purpose, if I note 
out of the epistles of that learned Ambassadour Busbequius, 
how the inhabitants of Taurica-Chersonessus, in the vtter­
most part of Europe eastward, have these words, Wind, Sil­ 



ver, Korne, Salt, Fish, Son, Apple, Waggen, Singen, Ilanda, Beard, 
with many other in the very same sence and signification, 
as they now are in vse with vs, whereat I mervailed not a 
little when I first read it. But nothing can bee gathered 
thereby, but that the Saxons our progenitours, which plan­
ted themselves heere in the West, did also to their glorie 
place Colonies likewise there in the east.

As in the Latine tongue, the learned make in respect of 
time, foure Idioms, the Antient, the Latine, the Roman, the 
Mixt: so we in ours may make the Antient English-Saxon, and 
the Mixt. But that you may seeme how powerable time is 
in altering tongues as all things else, I will set downe the 
Lords prayer as it was translated in sundrie ages, that you 
may see by what degrees our tongue is risen, and thereby 
coniecture how in time it may alter and fall againe.

If we could set it downe in the antient Saxon, I meane 
in the tongue which the English vsed at their first arrivall 
heere, about 420. yeares after Christs birth, it would seeme 
most strange and harsh Dutch or Gebrish, as women call 
it; or when they first embraced Christianitie, about the 
yeare of Christ 600. But the antientst that I can finde, was 
about 900. yeare since, about the yeare of Christ 700. 
found in an antient Saxon, glossed Evangelists in the hands 
of my good friend M. Robert Bowyer, written by Eadfride 
the eight Bishop of Lindiffarne, (which after was translated 
to Durrham,) and divided according to the antient Canon of 
Eusebius, not into chapters, for Stephen Langton, Archbishop 
of Canturburie, first divided the holy Scriptures into chap­
ters, as Robert Stephan did lately into verse; and thus it is.

Our Father which art in heaven
Vren Fader thic arth in heaofnas,

be hallowed thin name. come
Sie gehalgud thin noma, to cymeth

thy kingdom. Be thy will so as in
thin ric. Sie thin willa sue is in



heaven and in earth. Oure lofe
heofnas, and in eortho. Vren hlaf

Super-substantiall give vs to day, and
ofer wirtlic sel vs to daeg, and

forgive vs debts euaes so we for-
forgef vs scylda urna, sue we for.

geve debts oures, and do not led
gefan scyldgum vrum, and no inlead

vs into temptation. But deliver everyone
vsith in custnung. Ah gefrig vrich

from evill.
from ifle. Amen.

Some two hundred yeeres after, I finde this somewhat 
varied in two translations.

Thu vre fader the eart on heofenum
Si thin nama gehalgod. Cum thin ric.
Si thin willa on eorthan, swa swa on heofo­
num. Syle vs to daeg vrn dægthanlican
dayly 
hlaf.
And forgif vs vre gyltas 
trespasses 
swa, swa we for­
gifath tham the with 
against vs 
vs agyltath 
have trespassed. And ne
led the vs on costnung, Ac alys vs from
yfle.
Be it so.
Si it swa.

About an hundred and three score yeeres after, in the 
time of king Henry the second, I find this in time sent from 



Rome by Pope Adrian an Englishman, to be taught to the 
people.

Ure fadyr in heaven rich,
Thy name be halyed everlich:
Thou bring vs thy michell blisse,
Als hit in heaven y-doe,
Evar in yearth beene it also:
That holy bread that lasteth ay,
Thou send it ous this ilke day.
Forgive ous all that we havith don,
As wee forgivet vch other mon:
Ne let ous fall into no founding,
Ac sheild ous fro the fowle thing. Amen.

Neither was there any great variation in the time of king 
Henry the third, as appeereth in this of that age, as I con­
iecture by the Character; 

Fader that art in heavin blisse,
Thin helge nam it wurth the blisse.
Cumen & mot thi kingdom,
Thin holy will it be all don,
In heaven and in erdh also,
So it shall bin full well Ic tro.
Gif vs all bread on this day,
And forgif vs vre sinnes,
As we do vre wider winnes:
Let vs not in fonding fall,
O ac fro evill thu syld vs all. Amen.

In the time of king Richard the second about a hundred
and odde yeeres after, it was so mollified, that it came to be
thus, as it is in the Translation of Wickliffe, with some La­
tine wordes now inserted, whereas there was not one be­
fore.

Our fadyr, that art in heaven, halloed be thy name,
thy kingdom com to, be thy will done, so in heaven,



and in erth: gif to vs this day our bread over other
substance: and forgif to vs our dettis, as we forge­
ven to our detters, and leed vs nott into temptation, 
but deliver vs fro evill. Amen.

Hitherto will our sparkefull Youth laugh at their great
grandfathers English, who had more care to do well, than to
speake minion-like, and left more glory to vs by their ex­
ploiting of great actes, than we shall do by our sonnetting.

Great verily was the glory of our tongue before the Nor­
man Conquest in this, that the olde English could expresse
most aptly, all the conceiptes of the minde in their owne
tongue without borrowing from any. As for example:

The holy service of God, which the Latines called Religi­
on, because it knitted the mindes of men together, and most
people of Europe have borrowed the same from them, they
called most significantly Fan-fastnes, as the one and onely 
assurance and fast anker-holde of our soules health.

The gladsome tidings of our salvation, which the Greekes
called Evangelion, and other Nations in the same word, they
called Godspel, that is, God speech.

For our Saviour, which wee borrowed from the French,
and they from the Latin Salvator, they called in their owne
word, Haelend from Hael, that is, Salus, safetie, which we
retaine still in Al-hael, and Was-hael, that is, Ave, Salve, Sis 
salvus.

They could call the disciples of Christ, Leorning Cnihtas,
that is, Learning Servitours. For Cniht which is now a name
of worship, signified with them an Attendant, or servitour.

They could name the Pharises according to the Hebrew,
Sunder-halgens, as holy religious men which had sundred
and severed themselves from other.

The Scribes they could call in their proper significati­
on, as Booke-men, Bocer. So they called parchment which
wee have catcht from the Latine Pergamenum, Boc-fell in 
respect of the vse.

So they could call the sacrament Haligdome, as holy
iudgement. For so it is according as we receive it.



They could call Fertilitie and fruitfulnesse of land sig­
nificatively Eordes-wela, as wealth of the earth.

They could call a Comet, a Faxed starre; which is all one 
with Stella Crinita, or Cometa. So they did call the iudge­
ment seate Domesettle.

That which we call the Parlament of the French Parier
to speake, they called a Witten mot, as the meeting and as­
sembly of wise men.

The certaine and inward knowledge of that which is
in our minde, be it good or bad, which in the Latine word
we call Conscience, they called Inwit, as that which they 
did inwardly wit and wote, that is, know certainely.

That in a river which the Latines call Alveus, and Cana­
lis, and from thence most nations of Europe name the Cha­
nel, Kanel, Canale, &c. they properly called the Streame­
race.

Neither in the degrees of kinred they were destitute of
significative woordes; for he whom we of a French & En­
glish compound word call Grandfather, they called Eald-fa­
der, whom we call Great Grandfather, they called Thirda­
fader. So Proavus, which we call Great Great Grandfather, 
they called Fortha-fader, as Abavus, Fiftha-fader.

An Eunuch, for whome we have no name, but from the
Greekes, they could aptly name Vnstana, that is, without
stones, as we vse Vnspotted for without spotte, Vnlearned, for,
without learning.

A Covetous man whome we so call of the French Con­
voitise, they truely called Git-sor, as a sore & eagre Getter, and
Gatherer.

That which the Latines call Abortus, and wee in many
wordes, Vntimely Birth, or, Borne before the full time, they 
called Miss-borne.

A Porter, which wee have received from the French,
they could in their own word as significatively call A Dore­
ward.

I could particulate in many more, but this woulde ap­
peare most plentifully, if the labours of the learned Gen­ 



tlemen Maister Laurence Nowell of Lincolnes Inne, who first 
in our time recalled the studie heereof, Maister William
Lambert, Maister I: Ioscelin, Maister Fr: Tate were once
published. Otherwise it is to bee feared, that devouring
Time, in few yeeres will vtterly swallow it, without hope
of recoverie. 

The alteration and innovation in our tongue as in all o­
thers, hath beene brought in by entrance of Strangers, as
Danes, Normans, and others which have swarmed hither, by
trafficke, for new words as well as for new wares, have al­
waies come in by the tyranne Time, which altereth all vn­
der heaven, by Vse, which swayeth most, and hath an abso­
lute command in words, and by Pregnant wits: specially since
that learning after long banishment, was recalled in the
time of King Henry the eight, it hath beene beautified and
enriched out of other good tongues, partly by enfranchi­
sing and endenizing strange words, partly by refining and
mollifying olde words, partly by implanting new wordes
with artificiall composition, happily containing themselves
within the bounds prescribed by Horace. So that our tong
is (and I doubt not but hath beene) as copious, pithie, and
significative, as any other tongue in Europe: and I hope we
are not yet and shall not heereafter come to that which Se­
neca saw in his time,When mens mindes beginne once to iniure 
themselves to dislike whatsoever is vsuall, is disdained. They af­
fect noveltie in speech, they recall forworne and vncuth words,
they forge new phrases, and that which is newest, is best liked;
there is presumptuous and farre fetching of words. And some
there are which thinke it a grace if their speech doe hover,
and thereby hold the hearer in suspence: you know what fol­
loweth. 

Omitting this, pardon me and thinke me not overbal­
lanced with affection, if I thinke that our English tongue
is (I will not say as sacred as the Hebrew, or as learned as the 
Greeke,) but as fluent as the Latine, as courteous as the Spa­
nish, as courtlike as the French, and as amorous as the Italian,
as some Italianated amorous have confessed. Neither hath 



any thing detracted more from the dignitie of our tongue,
than our owne affection of forraine tongues, by admiring,
praising, and studying them above measure: whereas the
wise Romans thought no small part of their honour to con­
sist in the honour of their language, esteeming it a disho­
nour to answer any forraine in his owne language. As for
a long time the English placed in the Borrough townes of
Ireland and Wales, would admit neither Irish nor Welsh a­
mong them. And not long since for the honour of our na­
tive tongue, Henry Fitz-Allan Earle of Arundell, in his tra­
vaile into Italie, and the Lord William Howard of Effing­
ham, in his government of Calice, albeit they were not igno­
rant of other forraine tongues, would answer no strangers
by word or writing, but onely in English. As in this consi­
deration also before them Cardinall Wolsey in his ambas­
sage into France, commaunded all his servaunts to vse no
French, but meere English to the French, in all communica­
tion whatsoever. 

As for the Monosyllables so rife in our tongue which were
not so originally, although they are vnfitting for verses and
measures, yet are they most fit for expressing briefly the first
conceipts of the minde, or Intentionalia as they call them in 
schooles: so that we can set downe more matter in fewer
lines, than any other language. Neither do we or the Welsh
so curtall Latine, that we make all therein Monosyllables, as
Ioseph Scaliger chargeth vs; who in the meane time forget­
teth that his Frenchmen have put in their Proviso in the e­
dict of Pacification in the Grammaticall warre, that they 
might not pronounce Latine distinctly, as the English com­
mon Lawyers obtained then a Reservation that they might
write false Latine, and the Irish not to observe quantitie of 
syllables. I cannot yet but confesse that we have corruptly
contracted most names both of men and places, if they were
of more then two sillables, and thereby hath ensued no lit­
tle obscuritie. 

Whereas our tongue is mixed, it is no disgrace, whenas
all the tongues of Europe doe participate interchangeably 



the one of the other, and in the learned tongues, there hath
been like borrowing one from another. Yet is it false which
Gesner affirmeth, that our tongue is the most mixt and cor­
rupt of all other. For if it may please any to compare but the
Lords Prayer in other languages, he shall finde as few La­
tine and borrowed forraine words in ours, as in any other
whatsoever. Notwithstanding the diversitie of Nations
which have swarmed hither, and the practise of the Nor­
mans, who as a monument of their Conquest, would have
yoaked the English vnder their tongue, as they did vnder
their command, by compelling them to teach their children
in schooles nothing but French, by setting downe their
lawes in the Norman-French, and enforcing them most ri­
gorously to pleade and to be impleaded in that tongue one­
ly, for the space of three hundred yeares, vntill K. Edward
the third enlarged them first from that bondage. Since which 
time, our language hath risen by little, and the proverbe pro­
ved vntrue, which so long had beene vsed, Iacke would be a
gentleman, if he could speake any French. 

Heerein is a notable argument of our Ancestors sted­
fastnes in esteeming and retaining their owne tongue. For
as before the Conquest they misliked nothing more in K.
Edward the Confessor, than that he was Frenchified, & ac­
counted the desire of forraine language, then to be a fore­
token of the bringing in of forraine powers, which indeede
happened. In like manner after the Conquest, notwithstan­
ding those enforcements of the Normans in supplanting it,
and the nature of men, which is most pliable with a curious
iolitie to fashion & frame themselves according to the man­
ners, attyre, and language of the Conquerours. Yet in all
that long space of 300. yeares, they intermingled very few
French-Norman words, except some termes of law, hun­
ting, hawking, and dicing, whenas wee within these 60.
yeares, have incorporated so many Latine and French, as
the third part of our tongue consisteth now in them. But
like themselves, continue still those old Englishmen which
were planted in Ireland, in Fingall, & the Country of Weys­ 



ford, in the time of K. Henry the second, who yet still conti­
nue their antient attyre and tongue, in somuch that an En­
glish gentleman not long since, sent thither in Commission
among them, said that he would quickly vnderstand the
Irish, when they spake the antient English. So that our An­
cestors seemed in part as iealous of their native language, as
those Britans which passed hence into Armorica in France,
and marrying strange women there, did cut out their tongs,
lest their children should corrupt their language with their
motters tongues, or as the Germans which have most of all
Nations opposed themselves against all innovations in ha­
bite, and language. 

Whereas the Hebrew Rabbines say, and that truly, that
Nature hath given man five instruments for the pronoun­
cing of all letters, the lips, the teeth, the tongue, the palate,
and throate; I will not denie but some among vs do pro­
nounce more fully, some flatly, some broadly, and no few
mincingly, offending in defect, excesse, or change of letters,
which is rather to be imputed to the persons and their edu­
cation, than to the language. Whenas generally wee pro­
nounce by the confession of strangers, as sweetely, smooth­
ly, and moderately, as any of the Northerne Nations of the
world, who are noted to soupe their words out of the throat
with fat and full spirits.

This variety of pronuntiation hath brought in some di­
versitie of Orthographie, and heere-vpon Sir Iohn Price, to
the derogation of our tongue, and glorie of his Welsh, re­
porteth that a sentence spoken by him in English, & penned
out of his mouth by foure good Secretaries, severally, for tri­
al of our Orthography, was so set downe by them, that they
all differed one from the other in many letters: whereas so
many Welsh writing the same likewise in their tongue vari­
ed not in any one letter at all. Well, I will not derogate from
the good Knights credite; yet it hath beene seene where
tenne English writing the same sentence, have all so con­
curred, that among them all there hath beene no other
difference, than the adding, or omitting once or twice of 



our silent E, in the end of some wordes. As for the Welsh,
I could never happen on two of that Nation together, that
would acknowledge that they could write their owne lan­
guage. 

Sir Thomas Smith her Maiesties secretarie not long since,
a man of great learning and iudgement, occasioned by som
vncertainty of our Orthographie, though it seeme groun­
ded vpon Sound, Reason, and Custome, laboured to reduce
it to certaine heads; Seeing that whereas of Necessity there
must be so many letters in every tongue, as there are sim­
ple and single sounds, that the Latine letters were not suf­
ficient to expresse all our simple sounds. Therefore he wi­
shed that we should have A short, and A long, bicause a in 
Man, and in Mân of horse hath different sounds; E long as
in Mên moderate, and e short as in Men, and an English e
as in wée, thee, he, me: I long, and I short, as in Bi, per,
and Bî, emere: O short, and O long, as in smōk of a wo­
man, and smok of the fire: V long, as in Bût, Ocrea, and 
V short, as in Būt, Sed: and v or y Greeke, as slu, nu, tru.
For consonants he would have C be never vsed but for Ch,
as it was among the olde English, and K in all other words;
for Th, he would have the Saxon letter Thorne, which was
a D with a dash through the head, or þ; for I consonant the
Saxon Ʒ, as Ʒet, not Ieat for Ieat-stone, Ʒay for Iay:
Q, if he were king of the A, B, C, should be putte to the
horne, and banished; and Ku in his place, as Kuik, not 
quik, Kuarel, not Quarel: Z; he would have vsed for the 
softer S, or eth, and es, as dîz for dieth, liz for lies, and
the same S inverted for sh, as Sal for shall, fles for flesh.
This briefly I have set you downe his devise, which albeit
Sound and Reason seemed to countenance, yet that Tyranne 
Custome hath so confronted, that it will never be admit­
ted.

If it be any glorie which the French and Dutch do brag
of, that many wordes in their tongues doe not differ from
the Greeke, I can shew you as many in the English; where­
of I will give you a few for a taste, as they have offred them­ 



selves in reading; but withall, I trust you will not gather
by consequence, that wee are descended from the Græci­
ans. Who dooth not see an identitie in these wordes, as if
the one descended from the other. 


Καλέω, to call.

Πάτος, a path.

Αάπτω, to lappe.
 
Ράνις, raine
 
Ραπἱζειν, to rappe.
 
Λοῖσθος, last.
 
Ζέω, to seethe.
 
Θρασύς, rash.
 
Νεος, new.
 
Γράστις, grasse.
 
Ὄρχατος, an Orchard.
 
Κρέκω, to creake.
 
Αστἠρ, a starre.
 
Ὃλος, whole.
 
Φαῦλος, foule.
 
Θήρ, a Dere.
 
Ρἃβδος, a rodde.
 
Ραστώνη, rest.

Μήνη, the Moone.
 
Μύλη, a mill.
 
Τίτθος, a teate.
 
Σκάφη, a shippe.
 
Στρόφος, a rope.
 
Καλπάξεω, to galloppe.
 
Ἂχος, ache.
 
Ρἅκος, a ragge.
 
Κλίμαξ, a climbing.
 
Οῦθαρ, an vdder.
 
Ὅαρος, whoorish sporte.
 
Κῦσαι, to kisse.

Ἄγχεσθαι, to hang.
 
Ερἂ, earth.
 


Κάραβος, a crabbe.
  
Φῶλος, a phoale.
 
Λύχνας, a linke.
 
Κόπτω, to cut.
 
Ραιεω, to raze out.
 
Ὤχρα, oker.
 
Μωκάω, to mocke.
 
Ελασσων, lesse.
 
Αξίνη, an axe.
 
Σκίπτεω, to scoffe.

Στρώνυμι, to strowe.
 
Χάρμη, a skirmish.
 
Κυριακἠ, a Church.
 
Ποτήριον, a potte.
 
Μυστάχες, Mustaches.
 
Θύρα, a doore.
 
Ὃλκας, a hulke.
 
Κακάω, to you know what.


With many more
if a man would be so idle to gather them with Budans, Baisi­
us, Iunius, Pichardus, and others. 

Heereby may be seene the originall of some english
words, and the Etymology or reason whence many other are
derived, beside them alreadie specified may as well be found
in our tongue, as in the learned tongues, although hardly;
for that heerein as in other tongues, the truth heth hidden
and is not easilie found, as both Varro and Isidor do acknow­
ledge. But an indifferent man may iudge that our name of
the most divine power, God, is better derived from Good,
the chiefe attribute of God, than Deus from Δεος, because
God is to be feared. So Winter from Winde, Sommer from
the Sonne, Lent from springing, because it falleth in the
spring, for which our Progenitours the Germans, vse Glent. 
The feast of Christs Rising, Easter, from the old world East,
which we now vse for the place of the rising of the Sunne,
Sayle as the Sea-haile, Windor or Windowe, as a doore against
the winde, King from Conning, for so our Great grandfa­
thers called them, which one word imployeth two most 


```
important matters in a Governour, Power and Skill, and
many other better answering in sound and sence, then those
of the Latines, Frater quasi ferè alter, Tempestas quasi Tem­
pus pestis, Caput à capiendo, Digiti quia decentèr iuncti, Cura 
quia cor vrit, Peccare quasi pedam capere. 

Dionysius a Greeke coyner of Etymologyes is commended
by Athenæus, in his supper-gulls, table-talkers, or Deipnoso­
phistæ, for making mowse-traps of Musteria: and verily if
that be commendable, the Mint-masters of our Etymilogies,
deserve no lesse commendation: for they have merily for­
ged Mony from My-hony, Flatter from flie-at-her, Shovell
from shove-full, Mayd as my ayd Mastiefe as Mase-thiefe, 
Staffe as Stay of, Beere, Be-heere, Symony See-mony, Stirrup,
a Sayre-vp, &c.

This merry playing with words too much vsed by some
hath occasioned a great and high personage, to say, that as
the Italian tongue is fit for courting, the Spanish for treating,
the French for trafficke; so the English is most fit for trifling
and toying. And so doth Giraldus Cambrensis seem to think
whenas in his time he saith, the English and Welsh delighted
much in licking the letter and clapping together of Ag­
nominations. But now will I conclude this trifling discourse
with a true tale out of an antient Historian.

Of the effectuall power of words, great disputes have
beene of great wits in all ages; the Pithagoreans extolled it,
the impious Iewes ascribed all miracles to a name which
was ingravened in the revestiarie of the Temple, watched
by two brazen dogges, which one stale away and enseamed
it in his thigh, as you may reade in Osorius de Sapientia, and
the like in Rabi Hamas Speculation: and strange it is what 
Samonicus Serenus ascribed to the word ABRADACABRA, a­
gainst agues. But there was one true English word of as
great, if not greater force than them all, now out of all vse
and will be thought for sound barbarous; but therefore of
more efficacie (as it pleaseth Porphyrie) and in signification
it signifieth as it seemeth, no more then abiect, base minded,
false harted, coward, or nidget. Yet it hath levied Armies, 



and subdued rebellious enemies; and that I may hold you
no longer, it is Niding. For when there was a daungerous
rebellion against King William Rufus, and Rochester Ca­
stle then the most important & strongest fort of this Realm
was stowtly kept against him, after that he had but proclai­
med that his subiects should repaire thither to his Campe,
vpon no other penaltie, but that whosoever refused to come,
should be reputed a Niding: they swarmed to him immedi­
atly from all sides in such numbers, that he had in few daies
an infinite Armie, and the rebells therewith weere so terri­
fied, that they forthwith yeelded. While I runne on in this
course of English tongue, rather respecting matter then
words, I forget that I may be charged by the minion refi­
ners of English, neither to write State-English, Court-En­
glish, nor Secretarie-English, and verily I acknowledge it.
Sufficient it is for me, if I have waded hither-vnto in the
fourth kinde, which is plaine English, leaving to such as are
compleat in all, to supply whatsoever remaineth. 



Christian Names. 

NAmes called in Latine Nomina quasi
Notamina, were first imposed for the
distinction of persons, which wee call
now Christian names: After for diffe­
rence of families which wee call Sur­
names, and have beene especially re­
spected as whereon the glorie and cre­
dite of men is grounded, and by which 



the same is convayed to the knowledge of posteritie. 

Every person had in the beginning one onely proper
name, as among the Iewes, Adam, Ioseph, Solomon; among the 
Ægiptians, Anubis, Amasis, Busuris; among the Chaldæans, 
Ninus, Ninias, Semiramis; among the Medians, Astiages, Bar­
danes, Arbaces; among the Grecians, Diomedes, Vlisses, Ore­
stes; among the Romans, Romulus, Remus, Faustulus; among
the old Gaules, Litavicus, Cavarillus, Divitiacus; among the
Germans, Ariovistus, Arminius, Nassua; among the Britans, 
Cassibellin, Caratac, Calgac; among the antient English, 
Hengest, Ælla, Kenrie, likewise among all other Nations, ex­
cept the savages of Mount Atlas in Barbary, which were re­
ported to be both namelesse and dreamelesse. 

The most antient Nation of the Iewes gave the name
at the Circumcision the eight day after the nativitie; the
Romans to females the same day, to males the ninth day,
which they called Dies lustricus, as it were the cleansing day;
vpon which day they solemnized a feast called Nominalia,
and as Tertulian noteth, Fata scribenda advocabantur, that is,
as I conceive, their nativitie was set. At what time other
Nations in auntient times gave names I have not read:
but since Christianitie, most Nations for the time followed
the Iewes, celebrating baptisme the eight day after the birth,
onely our Ancestours in this Realme, vntill latter time bap­
tized, and gave name the very birth day, or next day after,
following therein the counsell of S. Cyprian, in his third E­
pistle Ad Fidum. But the Polonians gave name in the
seaventh yeare, at which time they did first cut their chil­
drens haire. 

The first imposition of Names was grounded vpon so
many occasions, as were hard to be specified, but the most
common in most antient times among all nations, as well as
the Hebrewes, was vpon future good hope conceived by
parents of their children, in which you might see their first
and principall wishes toward them. Whereupon Saint Hie­
rome saith, Votiva & quasi ob virtutis auspicium imponuntur 
vocabula hominibus, & appellativa vertuntur inpropria, sicut a­ 



pud Latines, Victor, Probus, Castus, &c. And such hopefull
luckie names called by Cicero, Bona nomina, by Tacitus, Fan­
sta nomina were ever first enrolled and ranged in the Roman
Musters; first called out to serve at the first sacrifices, in the
foundation of Colonies, as Statorius, Faustus, Valerius, which
implied the persons to be stowt, happy, and valorous. As
contrariwise Atrius Vmber is accounted in Livie, abominandi
ominis nomen, an abhominable name, for that it participa­
ted in signification with dismall darkenes, dead ghosts, and
shadowes. And you remember what Plautus saieth of one
whose name was Lyco, that is, a Greedy Woolfe; 

Vosmet nunc facite coniecturam cæterùm
Quid id sit hominis, cui Lyco nomen siet.

Yea such names were thought so happy and so fortu­
nate, that in the time of Galienus one Regilianus, which com­
manded in Illyricum, got the Empire there, only in favour
of 
 his name. For when it was demanded at a supper from
whence Regilianus was derived, one answered, à Regno, an­
other beganne to decline Rex, Regis, Regi, Regilianus; where­
at the souldiers (which in all actions are forward.) beganne
with acclamation, Ergo potest Rex esse, Ergo potest regere,
Deus tibi regis nomen imposuit: and so invested him with im­
periall roabes. In this Isle also at Silcaster in Hamshire, Con­
stantinus a militarie man of some reputation, in hope of his
luckie name, and that he would proue another Constantinus
Magnus to the good of the people, was by the Britan Ar­
mie proclaimed emperour against Honorius: who exploy­
ted great matters in his owne person in Gallia, and by his
son in Spaine. So in former times the name of Antoninus in 
remembrance of Antoninus Pius, was so amiable among the
Romans, as he was supposed vnfit for the empire, who
bare not that name, vntill Antoninus Elagabalus with his fil­
thie vices distained the same. We reade also that two Am­
bassadours were sent out of France into Spaine, to King Al­
phonse the 9, to demand one of the daughters that he begat 
of the daughter of King Henry the second of England, to be
married to their Soveraigne, King Lewes the eight: one of 



these Ladies was very beautifull called Vrraca, the other
not so beautifull, but named Blanche. When they were pre­
sented to the Ambassadours, all men held it as a matter re­
solved that the choyce would light vpon Vrraca, as the elder
and fairer: But the Ambassadours enquiring each of their
names, tooke offence at Urraca, and made choyce of the
Lady Blanche, saying, That her name would be better re­
ceived in France than the other, as signifying faire and beau­
tifull, according to the verse made to her honour. 

Candida, candescens candore, & cordis, & oris. 

So that the greatest Philosopher Plato might seeme, not
without cause, to advise men to be carefull in giving faire
and happie names: as the Pythagoreans affirmed the mindes,
actions, and successes of men to be according to their Fate,
Genius, and Name. One also well observeth that these seven 
things; Virtue, good Parentage, Wealth, Dignity or Office,
good Presence, a good Christian name, with a gratious Sur­
name, and seemely attire, doe especially grace and adorne a
man. And accordingly saieth Panormitan; Ex bono nomine
oritur bona præsumptio. As the common Proverb, Bonum
nomen, bonum omen.

The divell neverthelesse who alwayes maligneth God
and goodnesse, wrought by the cruelty of Valens the em­
perour the destruction of many men of worth, who hadde
happy names beginning with Theo signifying God, as The­
odorus, Theodubis, Theodoretus, Theodosius, &c. For that di­
verse curious companions had found by the falling of a ring
magically prepared, vpon those letters onely of all the Al­
phabet, graven in a Charger of sundry mettals, and set vpon
a Laurell trivet; that one who had his name beginning with
Theod, should succeede in the empire, which was verified
in Theodosius not long after. 

In times of Christianity the names of most holy and ver­
tuous persons, and of their most worthy progenitors were
given to stir vp men to the imitation of them, whose names
they bare. But succeeding ages (little regarding saint Chry­
sostoms admonition to the contrary) have recalled prophane 



names, so as now Diana, Cassandra, Hyppolitus, Venus, Lais,
names of vnhappy disastre are as rife some-where, as ever
they were in Paganisme: Albeit in our late reformation, some
of good consideration have brought in Zachary, Malachy,
Iosias, &c. as better agreeing with our faith, but without 
contempt of our countrey names (as I hope) which have
both good and gratious significations, as shal appeare here­
after. 

Whereas in late yeeres Surnames have beene given for
Christian names, among vs, and no where else in Christen­
dome; although many dislike it, for that great inconveni­
ence will ensue: neverthelesse it seemeth to proceede from
hearty good-will and affection of the Godfathers to show
their love, or from a desire to continue and propagate their
owne names to succeeding ages. And is in no wise to be dis­
liked, but rather approoved in those which matching with
heires generall of worshipful antient families have given
those names to their heires, with a mindefull and thankefull
regard of them, as we have now, Pickering Wotton, Grevill 
Varney, Bassingburne Gawdy, Culthorp Parker, Pecsall Brocas,
Fuz-Raulfe Chamberlaine, who are the heires of Pickering,
Grevill Bassingburn, Grevill, Calthorp, &c. For beside the con­
tinuation of the name, we see that the selfe name, yea & som­
time the similitude of names doth kindle sparkles of love
and liking among meere strangers.

Neither can I beleeve a waiward olde man, which would
say, that the giving of Surnames for Christian names first
began in the time of king Edward the sixt, by such as would
be Godfathers, when they were more then halfe fathers,
and thereupon would have perswaded some to change such
names at the Confirmation. Which (that I may note by
the way) is vsuall in other countries, as wee remember two
sonnes of king Henry the second of France, christned by the
names of Alexander and Hercules, chaunged them at their
Confirmation into Henry and Francis.

But two Christian names are rare in England, and I only
remember now his Maiesty who was named Charles Iames, 



as the Prince his sonne Henry Frederic; and among private
men, Thomas Maria Wingfield, and sir Thomas Posthumus
Hobby. Although it is common in Italie, to adioyne the
name of some Saint, in a kinde of devotion to the Christi­
an name, as Iohannes Baptista Spinalu, Iohannes Franciscus
Borhomeus, Marcus Antonius Flaminius: and in Spaine to 
adde the name of the Saint on whose day the childe was
borne. 

If that any among vs have named their children Remedi­
am amoris, Imago sæculi, or with such like names, I knowe
some will thinke it more then a vanitie, as they do but lit­
tle better of the new names, Free-gift, Reformation, Earth,
Dust, Ashes, Delivery, More fruite, Tribulation, The Lord is
neare, More triall, Discipline, Ioy againe, From above: which
have lately beene given by some to their children with no
evill meaning, but vpon some singular and precise conceit.
That I may omit another more vaine absurditie, in giving
names and surnames of men, yea and of the best families
to dogges, beares, and horses. Whenas wee reade it was
thought a capitall crime in Pomposiamas for calling his base 
bondslaves by the name of grand captaines. Here I might
remember how some mislike the giving of parents names
successively to their heires, for that if they should be forced
to proove descent, it will be hard to proove the Doner and 
the Done in Formedon, and to distinguish the one from the
other. 

It were impertinent to note heere, that destinies were
superstitiously by Onomantin desciphered out of names, as
though the names and natures of men were sutable, and fa­
tall necessitie concurred heerein with voluntary motion, in
giving the name, according to that of Ausonius to Probus.

Qualem cravit moribus,
Iussit vocari nomine.
Mundi supremus arbiter.

And after, where he playeth with bibbing mother Me­
roê, as thogh she were so named, bicause she would to drink 



meere wine without water, or as he pleasantly calles it Me­
rum Merum; for as he saieth; 

Qui primus Meroê nomen tibi condidit, ille
Thesida nomen condidit Hippolito.
Nam divinare est, nomen componere, quòd sit
Fortuna, morum, vel nocis indicium.

For Hyppolitus the sonne of Theseus was torne in peeces
by his coach horses, according to his name. So Agamemnon,
signified he should linger long before Troy. Piramus that
he should be redeemed out of bondage in his childehoode,
Tantalus, that he should be most wretched, because
Αγαν μένων, in the one, and Πρίαμενος, in the other, and Ταλάντατος
in the third implieth such accidents vnto them. Hither al­
so may be referred that of Claudius Rutilius.

Nominibus certis credam decurrere mores?
Moribus aut potiùs nomina certa dari?

But to confront Poet with Poet, our good Epigramma­
ticall Poet, olde Godfrey of Winchester thinketh no ominous
forspeaking to lie in names, in that to Faustus: 

Multùm Fauste tua de nobilitate superbis,
Quodque bono Faustus omine nomen habes,
Sed nullum nomen momenti, sit licèt omen.

Memorable is that which may be observed out of hi­
stories, how that men of the selfe same name have begun
and ended great states and empires: as Cyrus the sonne of 
Cambises beganne the Persian Monarchy, Cyrus the sonne
of Darius ruinated the same. Darius the sonne of Histaspes
restored it. And againe, Darius the sonne of Arsamis vt­
terly overthrew it. Philip the sonne of Amintas especially
enlarged the kingdome of Macedonia, Philip the sonne of 
Antigonus wholy lost the same. Augustus was the first e­
stablished emperour of Rome, Augustulus the last. Constan­
tinus Magnus borne in this Isle first beganne the Empire of 
Constantinople, Constantinus the last left it to the Turkes, and 
vtterly lost the same, &c.



Such like curious observations bred the superstitious
kinde of Divination called Onomantia, condemned by the
last generall Counsell, by which the Pithagoreans iudged
the even number of vowells in names to signifie imperfe­
ctions in the left sides of men, and the odde number in the
right. By this Augustus the emperour encouraged himselfe,
and conceived good hope of victory, whenas the night be­
fore the sea-battell at Actium, the first man hee mette was a
poore wayfaring man driving his asse before him, whose
name when hee demaunded, he answered, Eutyches, that
is, Happy man; and that his asses name was Nicon, that is,
Victor. In which place when he accordingly had obtained
the victory, he builded the Cittie Nicopolis, that is, the citty 
of Victory, and there erected brasen Images of the man and
his asse. By this Theodatus king of the Gothes, when he was 
curious to knowe the successe of his warres against the Ro­
mans, an Onomanticall or Name-wisard Iew willed him to
shut vp a number of swine in little hog-sties, and to give
some of them Roman names, to other Gotish names, with
severall markes, and there to leave them to a certaine day;
At the day appointed, the king with the Iew repaired to
the hog-sties, where they found them only dead to whom
they had given the Gotish names, and those alive to whom
they had given the Roman names, but yet with their bris­
sels more then halfe shed. Whereupon the Iew foretolde,
that the Gothes should wholy be discomfited, and the Ro­
mans should loose a great part of their forces. By this Vespa­
sian was incouraged to take vpon him the empire, when
comming to the Temple of Serapis at Alexandria, and be­
ing there alone at his devotion, he sodainly sawe in a vision,
one Basilides, a noble man of Ægypt, who was then foure 
score miles off. Vpon which name of Basilides derived from 
Basileus, signifying a King, hee assured himselfe of royaltie,
and the empire which hee then complotted for. As con­
cerning this Onomantia a German lately set foorth a Table,
which I wish had beene suppressed, for that the divell by
such vanities, doth abuse the credulitie of youth to greater 



matters, and sometimes to their owne destructions. 

I can not tell how you would like it if I should but re­
member how the Greekes superstitiously iudged them more
happy, in whose names the numerall letters added toge­
ther made the greater summe, and therefore Achilles for­
sooth must needes vanquish Hector, because the numerall
Greeke letters rose to a greater number in his name then in
the others. Or how the amorous Romans kissed the Cup
with a health so often at their meetings, as there were let­
ters in their Mistresse names, according to that of merry
Martiall of his two wenches, Navia which had six letters, 
and Iustina that had seaven in her name; 

Navia sex cyathis, septem Iustina bibatur.

Our Nation was farre from those and such curious toies;
therefore heere will I overpasse them, and set downe Alpha­
betically the names which wee now call Christian names,
most vsuall to the English Nation, with their significations.
For this is to be taken as a granted veritie, that names among
all nations and tongues (as I partly noted before) as signi­
ficative and not vaine senselesse sounds. Among the He­
brewes it is certaine out of sacred Scriptures, S. Hierome, and
Philo likewise among the Greekes, Romans, German, French, 
&c. yea among the barbarous Turks, for with them Maho­
met signifieth glorified or laudable, Homar lively, Abdalla 
Gods servant, Seliman peaceable, Agmad good, Haniza rea­
die. Neama pleasant. And the savages of Hispaniola and all
America, name their children in their owne languages, Gli­
stering light, Sunne bright, Gold-bright, Fine gold, Sweete, Rich 
feather, &c. as they of Congo, by names of birdes, pretious
stones floures, &c. 

So that it were grosse ignorance and to no small reproach, 
of our Progenitours, to thinke their names onely nothing
significative, because that in the daily alteration of our tong,
the signification of them is lost, or not commonly knowne,
which yet I hope to recover, and to make in some part
knowne, albeit they cannot easily and happily be transla­ 


 
ted because as Porphyrie noteth; Barbarous names (as hee
termeth them,) were very emphaticall and very short. But
in all the significations of these names, you shall see the good
and hopefull respects which the devisers of the names had,
that there is an Orthetes or certitude of names among all
Nations according to Plato, and thereby perceive that many
were translated out of the Greeke and Latine. With all we
may make this fruit by consideration of our names, which
have good, hopefull, and luckie significations, that accor­
dingly we do carrie and conforme our selves; so that wee
faile not to be answerable to them, but be Nostri nominis
homines, and ςερώνυμοι, as Severus, Probus, and Aureolus are
called Sui nominis imperatores. And accordingly it seemeth
to have beene the manner at giving of names, to wish the
children might performe and discharge their names, as
when Gunthram King of the French, named Clatharius at
the font, he said; Crescat puer, & huius sit nominis executer. 

But before I proceed farther, this is to be noted. In most
antient times the Britans had heere their peculiar names,
for the most part taken from colours, (for they vsed to paint
themselves) which are now lost, or remaine among the
Welsh. Afterward they tooke Roman names when they
were Provincialls, which either remaine corrupted among
them, or were extinguished in the greatest part of the
Realme, after the entrance of the English Saxons, who
brought in their German names, as Cridda, Ponda, Oswald,
Edward, Vchtred, Edmund, &c. Then to say nothing of the
Danes, who no doubt brought in their names, as Suayn, Ha­
rold, Knute, &c. The Normans conquest brought in other
German names, for they originally vsed the German tong,
as William, Henry, Richard, Robert, Hughe, Roger, &c. as the 
Greeke names, Ablabius, i. Innocent, Aspasious i. Delightful, 
Boëthius, Symmachus. i. Helper, Texetius. i. Archer, &c. were
brought into Italy after the division of the Empire. After
the Conquest, our Nation (who before would not admitte
strange and vnknowne names, but avoyded them therefore
as vnluckie) by little and little beganne to vse Hebrew and 



sacred names, as Mathew, David, Sampson, Luke, Simon, &c. 
which were never received in Germany, until after the death
of Frederick the second, about some 300. yeares since. 

So that the Saxons, Danish, Norman, and British tongues,
are the fittest keyes to open the entrance for searching out
of our antient names yet in vse. For the Hebrew I wil follow
the common tables of the Bible, which every one may do
as well, and Philo De nominibus mutatis. For the Greeke the
best Glossaries with mine owne little skill. For the Welsh,
I will sparingly touch them, or leave them to the learned of
that Nation. But for old English names, which heere are the
scope of my care, I must sift them as I may out of old En­
glish-Saxon treatises, as I have happened vpon heere and
there: and some coniecturally, referring all to the iudgement
of such, as shall be more happy in finding out the truth, ho­
ping that probability may either please, or be pardoned by
such as are modestly learned in histories and languages; to
whose iudgement in all humilitie, I commit all that is to be
said. For that they cannot but observe the diversity of names,
from the originall in divers languages, as how the French
have changed Petrus into Pierre, Iohannes to Iehan, Benedi­
ctus to Benoist, Stephanus to Estien, Radulphus to Raoul: how
the Italians have changed Iohannes into Giovanni, Constans 
into Gostante, Christopherus into Christophano, Iacobus into
Iacopo, Radulphus into Ridulpho, Laurentius into Lorenz.
How the Welsh have altered Ioannes into Even, Ægidius 
into Silim, George into Sior, Lawrence into Lowris, Constan­
tinus into Custenith. How the English have changed Gerrard
into Garret, Albric into Aubry, Alexander into Sanders, Con­
stantin into Custance, Benedict into Bennet. How the En­
glish and Scottish borderers do vse Roby and Rob for Robert,
Lokky for Luke, Iokie and Ionie for Iohn, Cristie for Christopher,
&c. That I may omit the Spaniard which have turned Iohn
into Iuan, and Iacobus into Iago and Diego: as the Ger­
mans which have contracted Iohannes into Hanse, and The­
odoric into Deric. These and the like, whosoever will lear­
nedly consider, will not thinke any thing strange which shal 



heereafter follow; howsoever the vnlearned will boldly cen­
sure it. I had purposed heere, lest I might seeme heereafter
to lay my foundations in the sands of coniecture, and not
on grounds of truth and authoritie, to have given you the
signification of such words as offer themselves most fre­
quent in the compositions of our meere English names, viz. 

Æl 
Al 
Ælf 
Ard 
Ar 
Bert 
Bald 
Cin 
Cuth 
Ead 
Fred 
Gisle 
Gund 
Hold 
Helm 
Hulph 
Hare 
Here 
Leod 
Leof 
Mer 
Mund 
Rad 
Red 
Rod 
Ric 
Sig 
Stan 
Theod 
Ward 
Wald 
Wold 
Wi 
Will 
Win, &c.

And these not out of suppositive coniectures, but out of
Alfricus Grammer, who was a learned Archbishop of Can­
terbury, well neere six hundred yeare since, and therefore
not to be supposed ignorant of the English tongue, out of
the English-Saxon Testament, Psalter, and Lawes, out of Wil­
leramus Paraphrasis vpon the Canticles, and the learned
Notes thereon by a man skilfull in the Northerne tongues,
as also out of Beatus Rhonanus, M. Luther, Dasipodius, Kil­
lianus, who have laboured in illustration of the old German 
tongue, which vndoubtedly is the matrix and mother of
our English. But I thinke it most fitting to this purpose, to
shew those my grounds in their proper places heereafter.



In the Table following.
Gre. noteth the name to be Greeke; Germ. Ger­
man, Lat. Latine, Fre. French, Hebr. Hebrew, Brit.
Welsh, Sax. Saxon, or old English.



Usuall Christian names.


ARAON, Heb. a Teacher, or Mountaine
of fortitude.

ABEL, Heb. Iust.

ADAM, Heb. Man, earthly, or red.

ADOLPH, see Eadulph.

ADRIAN, see Hadrian.

ALAN, is thought by Iulius Scaliger (some of
whose progenitors bare that name) to sig­
nifie an hownd in the Sclavonian tongue,
and Chaucer vseth Aland in the same sense:
neither may it seem strange to take names
from beasts. The Romanes had their Ca­
ninius, Apur, Asinus, &c. and the Christians,
Leo, Lupus, Ursula. But whereas this came
into England with Alan earle of Britaine, to
whome the Conqueror gave the greatest
part of Richmondshire, and hath bin most
common since that time in the Northern
parts, in the yonger children of the noble
house of Percies, and the family of Zouch,
descended from the Earles of Britaine; I
would seeks it rather out of the British,
than Sclavonian tongue, and will beleeve 
with an antient Britan, that it is corrupted
from Ælianus, that is, Sunne-bright, as
they corrupted Vitelianus into Guidalan.

AUBRY, in Latine Albericus, deduced from
the German name Alberic, Given in wish,
and hope of royall power, empire, king­ 



dome, wealth and might, as Plutarchus, Ar­
chitas, Crates, Craterus, Polycrates, Pancratius,
with the Greekes, Regulus Opimius, &c. with
the Latines. The king of the Gothes, which
sacked Rome bearing his name, was called by
the Romans Allaricus, the olde Englishmen
turned it into Alric, the Normans into Alberic.
That Ric, as it signified a kingdome, so also it
signified, rich, wealthy, mighty, able power­
ful, attributes to a kingdome; the word yet re­
maines in that sence among all the German
nations dispersed in Europe, and little mollifi­
ed dooth sufficiently proove. The Italians re­
ceiving it from the Longobardes, have turned it
into Ricco, the Spaniards from the Gothes in­
to Rico, the French from the Frankes into 
Riche, we from the Saxons into Rich, &c. For­
tunatus Venantius, who lived about a thousand
yeares since, translated it by Potens, and Fortis
in these verses to Hilperic king of Fraunce:

Hilperice potens, si interpres barbarus adsit,
Adiutor fortis hoc quoque nomen habet.
Nec fuit in vanum sic te vocitare parentes,
Præsagum hoc totum laudis, & omen erat.

As that Hilperic did signifie, puissant and
mightie helper. This name is vsually written
Chilperic, but the C was set before for Coning, 
that is, King, as in Clotharius, Clodovens, Cheri­
bertus, for Lotharius, Lodovæus, Heribertus. Au­
bry hath beene a most common name in the
honorable familie of Vere earles of Oxford.

ALBAN, Lat. White, or High, as it pleaseth other.
The name of our Stephen and first Martyr of
Britaine.

ALWIN, Sax. All victorious, or Winning all, 



as Victor and Vincentius, in Latine Nicetas and 
Nicophorus. The Yorkeshireman, which was
Schoolemaister to Carolus Magnus, and per­
swaded him to found the Vniversitie of Pa­
ris, is in an English-Saxon treatise called Al­
win. But the French, as it seemeth, not able to
pronounce the w, called him Alcuinus, and
Albinus. 

ALBERT, Germ. All-bright, as Epiphanius, Phæ­
drus, Eudoxus with the Græcians: Lucilius, Illu­
strius, Fulgentius, with the Latines, Beert and
Bert, as Alfricus, and Rhenanus do translate it,
is famous, faire, and cleare. Which the rather I
beleeve, for that Bertha a German Lady sent
into Greece, was there called Eudoxia in the
same sence, as Luitprandus reporteth. They
moreover that in auntient Bookes are written
Ecbert, Sebert, Ethelbert, in the latter are writ­
ten Ecbright, Sebright, Ethelbright: So that,
Bert in composition of names dooth not sig­
nifie Beard, as some translate it. 

ÆLFRED, Sax. All peace, not varying much in
signification from Irenans. Eal, Ail, Æl in
old English compound names is answerable
to Pan and Pam in Greek names, as Pamphilus,
Pammachius, Panætius, Pantaleon, &c. 

ALDRED, Sax. All reverent feare.

ALEXANDER, Gre. Succour-man, or Helper of
men.

ALPHONS, if it be a German name, and came in­
to Spaine with the Gothes, a German nation, it
is as much as Helfuns, that is, Our helpe, and
probable it is to be a Gotish name, for Alphons
the first king of Spaine of that name Anno 740
was descended from the Gothes.

AMERY, in Latine Almaricus, from the German
Emerich, that is, alwayes rich, able, and pow­ 



erfull, according to Luther: the French write
it Aumery, as they of Theodoric, Henric, Frede­
ric, make Terrey, Henry, Frery. 

AMBROSE, gre. Divine, Immortall.

AMIE, from the French Amiè, that is, Beloved, 
and that from Amatus, as Renè from Renatus. 
The erles and dukes of Savoy which be com­
monly called Aimè, were in Latine called A­
madeus, that is, Loving God, as Theophilus, and
so was that erle of Savoy called, which did ho­
mage to king Henry the third of England for
Bourg in Bresse, Saint Maurice in Chablais, 
Chasteau Bard, &c. which I note for the ho­
nour of England. We doe vse now Amias for
this in difference from Amie the womens
name. Some deduce Amias from Æmilius
the Roman name, which was deduced from
the Greeke Aimulios, Faire spoken. 

ANANIAS, heb. The grace of the Lord.

ANDREW, gre: Manly, or Manfull Freculphus
turneth it Decorus, Comely and Decent; I know
not vpon what ground. See Charles.

ANARAVD, brit. corrupted from Honoratus, that
is, Honorable.

ANGEL, gre: a Messenger.

ANTHONIE, gre: as Antheros, flourishing, from
the greeke Anthos a floure, as Florens and Flo­
rentius with the Latines, and Thales, Euthalius
with the Greekes. There are yet some that
drawe it from Anton a companion of Hercu­
les.

ANSELM, germ: Defence of Authoritie, accord­
ing to Luther. Whether this name came from
the Gotish word Anses, by which the Gothes
called their victorious Capitaines as Demi-­
gods, I dare not determine: yet Ansbert, An­
segis, Answald, Germane names, and Anske­ 



tel vsed much in the antient house of the Mal­
lories seeme to descend from one head. 

ARCHEBALD, vide Erchenbald.

ARFAST, Sax. Goodly-man [Alfricus.]

ARNOLD, ger: Honest, but the Germans write
Ernold. Probus in Latine [Luther.] It hath
beene common in the old familie of the Boy­
ses.

ARTHVR, a Latin name in Iuvenal drawne from
the goodly fixed starre Arcturus, and that
from Arctus is the Beare, as Vrsicinus amongst
the Romanes. The famous Arthur made
this name first famous amongest the Brit­
taines.

AVGVSTINE, Latine, Encreasing, or Maiesticall
from Augustus, as Victorinus, Iustinus, Constan­
tinus diminutives from Victor, Iustus, Constans,
according to Molinæus. One observeth that
adoptive names doe end in anus, as Æmilia­
nus, Domitianus, Iustinianus, adopted by Æ­
milius, Domitius, Iustinus [Lilius Giraldus.]

B 

BALDWIN, Ger. if we beleeve Luther, Spee­
die Conquerour, if Rhenanus, and Lipsius, Victo­
rious power. But whereas Iornandes, cap. 29.
sheweth that king Alaric was surnamed Baldh
id est, Audax: for that he was bold and ad­
venturous, and both Kilianus, and Lipsius him
selfe doth confesse, that it was antiently in
vse, for Bold and confident, Baldwin must sig­
nifie Bold victor, as Winbald, the same name 



inverted, Ethelbald nobly bold, Willibald very
bold and confident, concurring somewhat
in signification with Thraseas, Thrasimachus,
Thrasibulus, Thrasillus of the Græcians. So all
the names wherein Win is found, seeme to im­
ply victorie, as Tatewin, Learned victor, Bert­
win, Famous victor, Earlewin, Glorious or ho­
nourable victor, and Unwin, yet amongst the
Danes for invincible [Ionas Turson] as Ani­
cetus in Greeke. Accordingly we may iudge
that most names wherein Win is found, to re­
semble the Greeke names, Nicetes, Nicocles,
Nichomachus, Nicander, Polynices, &c. which
have Nice in them. 

BAPTIST, gre: A name given to S. Iohn, for that
he first baptized, and to many since in honor
of him.

BARDVLPH, Ger. from Bertulph .i. faire helpe,
Vlph, Wolf, Hulf, Ælf, Hilp, Helf, signifie Help, 
as Luther and others assure vs. So Æelfwin
Victorious helpe, Æelfric Rich or powerfull
helpe, Ælfwold Helping Governour, Ælf­
giva Helpe-giver. Names conformable to Bo­
etius, Symmachus, &c.

BARTHOLMEW, Hebr. the sonne of him that
maketh the waters to mount, that is, of God
which lifteth vp the minde of his teachers,
and droppes downe water [Szegedinus.]

BARNABAS, or Barnabie, Heb. sonne of the Ma­
ster, or Sonne of Comfort.

BARVCH, Hebr. the same which Bennet, blessed.

BASIL, Gre. Royall, Kingly, or Princely.

BEDE, Sax. He that praieth, or a devout man,
as Eucherius, or Eusebius in Greeke. We re­
taine still Bedman in the same sence, and to
say our bedes, is but to say our praiers.

BEAVIS, may seeme probably to be corrupted 



from the name of the famous Celtique King
Bellovesus. Whereas the French have made in
like sort Beavois of the olde Cittie Bellova­
cum. In both these is a significancie of beau­
tie. In latter times Boge hath beene vsed in
Latine for Beavis.

BENET, Lat. contracted from Benedictus. i. Bles­
sed.

BENIAMIN, He. The son of the right hand, or Filius
dierum, [Philo:] See Ioseph. li. 1. Archaiologias.

BERNARD, Germ. Saint Bernardes Cluniac
Monks drew it from Bona Nardus, by allusi­
on, some turne it Hard child, in which sence
Barne is yet retained with vs in the North. If
it be derived as the Germans wil have it from
Bearne, which signifieth a Beare, it is answe­
rable to Arthur. Others yet more iudicially
translate Bernard, into Filialis indoles, Childe­
like disposition toward parents, as Bernher, Lord
of many children. It hath been most common
in the house of Brus of Connigton and Exton.
Out of the which the Lord Harrington of
Exton, and Sir Robert Cotton of Connington are
discended, as his most excellent Maiestie
from Robert Brus, eldest brother to the first
Bernard.

BERTRAN, for Bertrand, Faire and pure; some
thinke that the Spaniards have with sweeter
sound drawne hence their Fernando and Fer­
dinando.

BLASE, Gr. Budding forth, or Sprowting with en­
crease.

BONIFACE, Lat. Well doer, or Good and sweete
face: See Winefrid.

BONAVENTVRE, Lat. Good adventure, as Euty­
chius among the Greekes, Faustus and Fortu­
natus among the Latines.



BOTOLPH, Sax. contracted into Botall, Helpe
shippe, as Saylers in that age were called Bo­
tescarles. In parte it is answereable to the
Greeke names, Nauplius, Naumachius. &c. 

BRIAN, Fre. written in old bookes, Briant and
Brient, Shrill voyce as among the Romans
Voconins, [Nicotius].

BALTHASAR, heb. Searcher of Treasure, or
without treasure.


C
CALER, Heb. Hearty, Philo.

CALISTHENES, Gre. Beautifull & strong.

CARADOC, Bri. Deerely beloved. Quære.

CEASAR, This came a late to be a Christian
name among vs. Spartianus saith it was first
given for killing of an Elephant, which in the
Moores language is called Cæsar, or that he
was cut out of his mothers woombe, or borne
with a bush of haire, or grey eyes. Such va­
riety of opinions is concerning a name, which
as he saith, Cum æternitate mundi duraturum.

CHARLES, Germ. according to I. Du Tillet,
from Carl, that is, strong, stowt, couragious,
and valiant, as Virius, Valerius, Valeus, &c. with
the Romans, Craterus, &c. with the Greekes;
not from the Greeke Charilaus, which signifi­
eth Publicola, the Claw-backe of the people.
The Hungarians call a king by a generall name
Carl [Aventinus.]. And Carl is onely in the
coines of Carolus Magnus, Ful. Scaliger makes
Caellman Carlman answerable to the Greeke
Andreas.



CHRISTOPHER, Gre. Christe-carrier, a name, as
learned men thinke, devised, and a picture
thereunto mystically applied as a representati­
on of the dueties of a true Christian, and was
as their Nosce teipsum. Of such mystical Sym­
boles of the Primitive Christians; See Ioseph
Scaliger ad Freherum. 

CHRYSOSTOME, gre: Golden-mouth.

CLEMENS, lat: Meeke, Milde and Gentle.

CONSTANTIN, Lat: Fast, or Firme, for which
in some partes of the realme we vse Custance.

CONRAD, germ: Able-counsell, or Advised va­
lour, as Iulius Scaliger will Exercitat. 256.
But heere is to be noted, that Rad, Red,
and 
Rod signifie counsell and advise. [Luther, Al­
fricus, Killian] and differ onely in Dialect, as
Stan, Sten, Stone. And this appeereth by that
which the Northerne men cried when they
killed Walter bishop of Duresme, Short Rad,
good Rade, quell yee the Bishop, that is, Short
councell, Good councell, &c. [M. Paris.] 

CORNELIVS, Lat: All drawe it from Cornu an
horne.

CVTHBERT, Sax. Not Cut-beard, as some fable,
but famous, bright, and cleare skill or know­
ledge, according to the olde verse; 

Quique gerit certum Cuthbert de luce vocamen.
 
No man doubteth but Cuth signified know­
ledge, as vncuth vnknowne; So Cuthwin skil­
full victor, Cuthred, skilfull in counsell. 

CYPRIAN, gre: from Cypria, a name of Venus, so 
named of the Isle of Cyprus, where she was e­
specially honoured.

CADWALLADER, Brit: A warrelike name, de­
duced from Cad, that is, Battaile, as it seemeth:
but I referre it to the learned Britans.

CRESCENS, Lat: Increasing.




D
DANIEL, Hebr. Iudgement of God.

DAVID, Hebr. Beloved.

DEMETRIVS, Ger. belonging to Ceres.

DENIS, Gr. for Dionisius, which some fetch from
Dios nous, i. divine mind. It is one of the names
of the drunkard Bacchus, & derived by Non­
nus in his Dionysiacis, from Iupiter his lame leg,
for Nises signifieth, saith he, lame in the Syrian 
tongue: and we will imagine that Iupiter hal­
ted when Bacchus was enseamed in his thigh
But Saint Denis of Fraunce hath most graced this name.

DRV, in Lat Drugo, or Drogo Subtile, as Callidius
in Latin if it come from the Saxon or German;
but if it bee French, Lively and Lustie [Ni­
cotius]

DVNSTAN, Sax. One that writeth S. Dunstans
life, saith the name is answerable to Aaron, i. 
Mountaine of fortitude. That Dun with the
old English signified a mountain or high hill,
is apparant that they called mountaine man
Dunlettan, and Downe continueth in the like
sence with vs. Others suppose it to signifie
Most high, as among our Ancestors Leofstan
signified Most beloved, Betstan, Best of al, Frid­
stan, most peacefull, &c. Stan being the most
vsuall termination of the Superlative degree.
 



E
EADGAR, Sax for Eadig-ar, Happy, or blessed
honor, or power, for I find it interpreted in
an old history Fælix potestas The last verse of Ethelwardus historie seemeth to proove the
same, and Eadigi (for the which Ead was vsed
in composition,) is the word in the 6. of saint
Math. in the English Saxon testament, so of­
ten iterated, for Blessed in the Beatitudes. That
Ear, or Ar, signifie Honor, it appeareth in the 
Saxon lawes, and in Ionas Turson Danish Vo­
cabulary, as Artic & Earlic, Honourable. And
from hence commeth our honourable name
of Earles, which came hither with the Danes,
as may be gathered out of Ethelwerdus. 

EDMVND, Sax. for Eadmund, Happy, or blessed,
peace: Our Lawyers yet doe acknowledge
Muna for Peace. in their word Mundbreck, for 
breach of Peace. So Ælmund all peace, Kin­
mund, Peace to his kinred, Ethelmund noble
peace; yet I know that some translate Mund
by Mouth, as Pharamund, True Mouth. 

EADVLPH, Sax. Happy helpe.

EADWIN, Happy victor.

EDWARD, in Sax. coins Eadward, happy keeper.
The Christian humilitie of King Edward the
Confessor, broght such a credit to this name,
that since that time it hath beene most vsuall
in all estates. That Ward signifieth a Keeper,
is apparant by Wood ward. Mill-wara, &c.

EALDRED, Sax. All reverent feare.

EALRED, Sax All Councell.

EBVLO, See Thell.

EGBERT, or rather Ecbert, Sax. Alwaies bright, 



famous for ever, as the olde English called
Everlasting life, Ec-life. 

ELLIS, Heb. corruptly for Elias, Lord God.

ELMER, Sax. Contracted from Ethelmer, Noble
and renowned: For Willeranus translateth
Mere, by Celebris and Famosus. So Merwin re­
nowmed Victor, Merwald renowmed Go­
vernour. Yet I know B. Rhenanus turneth
Mier & Mere by Governor. Cap. vlt. Rer. Ger. 

EMANVEL, Heb. God with vs.

EMERY, See Amery.

ENION, Brit. From Æneas as some thinke, but
the British Glossarie translateth it Iustus .i. Iust
and vpright.

ENGELBERT, Germ. Bright Angell.

ERASMVS, Gr. Amiable, or to be beloved.

ERCHENBALD, Ger. Powerfull, bold, and speedie
learner, or observer [Dasypodius.]

ERNEST, Germ. in Cæsar Ariovistus, Severe [A­
ventinus.] 
in the like sence we still retaine it.

ESAY, Heb. Reward of the Lord.

ETHELBERT, or Edlebert, Noble bright, or no­
bly renowmed, for Ethel or Adel, signifie in 
Germany, Noble. From whence happily Athal­
ric King of the Gothes had his name. From
hence it was that the heires apparant of the
Crowne of England, were surnamed Etheling .i.
Noble borne, and Clito .i. Inclitus; as in the de­
clining estate of the Roman Empire, the heires
of Emperours were called Nobilissimi: hence
also the Spaniards which discended from the
German Gothes, may seeme to have partly
borrowed their Idal-guie, by which word they
signifie their noblest gentlemen. 

ETHELRED, Sax. Noble advise and Councell.

ETHELARD, Sax. For which we now vse Adelard,
Noble disposition.



ETHELSTAN, Sax. Noble jewell, pretious stone,
or, most noble.

ETHELWARD, Sax. Now Aelward, Noble Kee­
per.

ETHELWOLD, Sax. Noble Governour, for the
old booke of S. Augustines in Canterbury. Wil­
eranus and Luther do agree that Wold & Wald
doth signifie Præfectus a Governour. So Bert­
wold and Brightwold Famous Governour, Kin­
wald, Governour of his kinred. 

ETHELWOLPH, Sax. Noble helper.

EVERARD, ger. Wel reported, as Gesnerus writeth,
like to Eudoxus of the Greekes: but other with
more probabilitie deduce it from Eberard .i.
excellent or supreme towardnes. A name
most vsuall in the ancient familie of the Dig­
byes.

EVSEBIVS, gre. Pious and religious godly-man.

EVSTACE, gre. Seemeth to be drawne from the
Greeke ἐνσταθἠς, which signifieth Constant,
as Constantinus; but the former ages turned it
into Eustachius in Latine.

EVAN, See Ivon.

EVTROPIVS. gr. Well mannered.

EZECHIAS, Heb. Strength of the Lord.

EZECHIEL, Heb. Seeing the Lord.


F
FABIAN, from Fabius, who had his name
from beanes, as Valerian from Valerius Fa­
bianus bishop of Rome, martyred vnder Deci­
us, first gave reputation to this name.

FOELIX, Lat: Happy, the same with Macarius
among the Græcians.



FLORENCE, Lat: Flourishing, as Thales with the
Greekes, Antonius with the Latines. 

FRANCIS, germ: from Franc, that is, Free, not
servile, or bond. The same with the Greeke
Eleutherius, and the Latine Liberius.

FREDERIC, germ: Rich peace, or as the Monk
which made this allusion, Peaceable raigne.

Est adhibenda fides rationi nominis huius
Compositi Frederic, duo componentia cuius.
Sunt FRIDERIC, Frith, quod nisi pax, Ric quod nisi regnum.
Sic per Hendiadin Fredericus, quid nisi vel rex, 
Pacificus vel regia pax? pax, pacificusque.

For Frideric, th' English have commonly vsed
Frery and Fery, which hath beene now a long
time a christian name in the antient family of
Tilney, and luckie to their house, as they re­
port.

FREMVND, Sax: Free-peace.

FOVLK, or FVLKE, germ: Some derive it from
the German Vollg, Noble and Gallant. But
I from Folc, the English-Saxon woorde for
people, as though it were the same with Pub­
lius of the Romanes, and onely translated from 
Publius, as, beloved of the people and com­
mons.

FVLBERT, Sax: Full bright.

FVLCHER, Sax: Lord of people.

FERDINANDO, See Bertram. This name is so
variable, that I can not resolve what to say: for
the Spaniards make it Hernand, and Hernan,
the Italians Ferando, and Ferante, the French 
Ferrant, which is now become a surname with
vs, and the Latines Ferdinandus: vnlesse wee
may thinke it is fetcht by transposition from 
Fred, and Rand, that is, Pure peace.




G
GABRIEL, hebr. Man of God, or Strength 
of God.

GAMALIEL, hebr. Gods rewarde, as Deodatus,
Theodorus, and Theodosius.

GARRET, for GERARD, and GERALD: See E­
verard, for from thence they are detorted, if
we beleeve Gesnerus. But rather Gerard may
seeme to signifie, All towardnes, as Gertrud,
All truth, Gerwin, All victorious, and the Ger­
man nation is so named, as All and fully men. 

GAWEN, a name devised by the author of king
Arthurs fable, if it be not Walwin: See Wal­
win.

GEORGE, gre: Husbandman, the same with
Agricola, a name of speciall respect in England,
since the victorious King Edward the third
chose Saint George for his Patrone, and the
English in all encounters, and battailes, vsed
the name of Saint George in their cries, as the
French did, Montioy S. Denis.

GEDEON, Heb: A Breaker, or Destroyer.

GERMAN, Lat: of the same stocke, True, no 
counterfeit, or a naturall brother. S. German,
who suppressed the Pelagian heresie in Brit­
taine, about the yeere 430. advaunced this
name in this Isle.

GERVAS, Gervasius in Latine, for Gerfast, (as
some Germans coniecture) that is, All sure,
firme, or fast. If it be so, it is onely Constans
translated. But it is the name of a Martyr, who
suffered vnder Nero at Millaine, who if hee
were a Græcian, as his felow martyr Protasius 



was, it may signifie Grave & Antient, or Ho­
nourable, as wrested from Gerousius. 

GEFFREY, Ger. from Gaufred, Ioyfull peace. Ki­
lianus translateth Gaw. Ioyfull, as the French
doe Gay. That Fred and Frid, doe signifie
peace, is most certaine, as Fred-stole. i. Pacis
cathedra. See Frederic. 

GILBERT germ. I supposed heretofore to signi­
fie Gold-like-bright, as Aurelius or Aure­
lianus: or yellow bright, as Flavius with the
Romans. For Geele is yellow in old Saxon,
& still in Dutch, as Gilvus according to some
in Latin. But because it is written in Dooms­
day booke Gislebert. I iudge it rather to signi­
fie Bright or brave pledge; for in old Saxon,
Gisle signifieth a pledge, & in the old English
booke of S. Augustines of Canterbury, sureties
and pledges for keeping the peace are called
Fredgisles. So it is a well fitting name for chil­
dren which are the onlye sweet pledges and
pawns of love between man & wife, & accor­
dingly called Dulcia pignora & Pignora amoris.

GILES, is miserably disjoynted from Ægidius, as 
Gillet from Ægidia, by the French, as appea­
reth in histories by the name of Duke of Rol­
los wife It may seeme a Greeke name, for that
S. Giles, the first that I have read so named,
was an Athenian, and so drawne from Aigi­
dion, that is, Little Kid, as we know Martia­
nus Capell. had his name in like sense; yet
some no lesse probably fetch Giles from Iu­
lius, as Gilian from Iuliana.

GODFREY, ger. From Godfred, Gods-peace, or 
godly; for the Danes call godlines Gudfreid­
hed. [Ionas Turson]

GODARD ger. Strength of God, or Gods-man 
as Gabriel according to Luther. But I thinke 



it rather to signifie Godly disposition or to­
wardnes, for Ard and Art in the German
tongue, do signifie Towardnes, aptnes or dis­
position. As Mainard, powerfull disposition,
Giffard, Liberal disposition, as Largus; Bernard,
Childlike disposition, Leonard Lionlike dis­
position, as Leoninus; Reinard, pure disposi­
tion, as Syncerus. 

GODWIN, ger. for Win-God, converted, or
Victorious in God.

GODRICH. ger. Rich, or powerfull in God.

GREGORY gre. Watching, watchfull, as Vigilan­
tius, and Vigilius in Latine.

GRYFFITH, Brit. Some Britans interpret it,
Strong-faithed.

GRVFFIN, Brit. If it be not the same with Grif­
fith, some do fetch from Rufinus, Red. as many
other Welsh names are derived from colours.

GRIMBALD, ger. But truly Grimoald, power over
anger, as Rodoalà power of councel [Luther]
a name most vsuall in the old family of Paun­
cefoote.

GWISCHARD, See Wischard.

GVY, In Latine, Guido from the French Guide.
A guide, leader, or director to other.


H
HADRIAN, Lat. deduced from the city Ha­
dria, whence Hadrian the emperor had his
originall. Gesner bringeth it from the Greeke
Αδρος, Grosse or wealthie. 

HAMON, Heb. Faithfull.

HANIBALL, A Punick name. Gratious Lord.

HECTOR gr. Defendour, according to Plato.

HENRY, ger. in Latine Henricus. A name so fa­ 



mous since the yeare 920. when Henry the
first was Emperour, that there have beene 7.
Emperours, 8. Kings of England, 4. Kings of
France, as many of Spaine of that name. If Ein­
ric be the originall, it signifieth Ever rich or
powerfull. If it be deduced from Herric, which
the Germans vse now, it is as much as Rich­
Lord. I once supposed, not without some pro­
babilitie, that it was contracted from Honori­
cus, of which name, as Procopius mentioneth,
there was a Prince of the Vandales, in the time
of Honorius, and therefore likely to take name
of him, as hee did from Honor. And lately I
have found that Fr. Philelphus is of the same
opinion. Howsoever it hath been an ominous
good name in all respects of signification. 

HENGEST, Sax. Horse man, the name of him
which led the first Englishmen into this Isle,
somewhat answerable to the Greeke names,
Philippe, Speusiprus, Ctesippus, his brother in like
sort was called Horsa.

HARHOLD, Sax. Luther interpreteth it Gover­
nour or Generall of an Armie, and so would I
if it were Harwold. But being written Harhold
& Herold, I rather turne it love of the Armie.
For Hold see Rheinhold. For Hare and Here 
that they signifie both an Armie, and a Lord,
it is taken for granted: Yet I suspect this Here,
for a Lord to come from the Latine Herus. See
Ethelwold. 

HERBERT, Germ. Famous Lord, bright Lord, or
Glorie of the Army.

HERWIN, ger. Victorious Lord, or Victor in
the Armie.

HARMAN, or Hermon, ger. Generall of an Army,
the same which Strato or Polemarchus in
Greeke Cæsar turned it into Arminius [Tscu­ 



dus,] Hence the German Dukes are called
Hertogen, as Leaders of Armies. 

HERCVLES, gr. Glorie or illumination of the
aire, as it pleaseth Macrobius, who affirmeth it
to be proper to the Sunne, but hath bin given
to valiant men for their glorie.

HIEROME, gr. Holy name.

HILDEBERT, germ. Bright, or famous Lord. See
Maud.

HILARY, Lat. Merrie and pleasant.

HOWEL, A Brittish name, the originall whereof
some Britan may finde. Goropius turneth it
Sound or whole, as wisely as he saith, English­
men were called Angli, because they were
good Anglers. I rather would fetch Hoel from
Hælius, that is, Sunne-bright, as Coel from 
Cælius.

HVGH, Aventinus deriveth it from the German
word Hougen, that is, slasher or cutter. But
whereas the name Hugh, was first in vse a­
mong the French, and Otfrid in the yeare 900.
vsed Hugh for Comfort, I iudge this name to
be borrowed thence, and so it is correspon­
dent to the Greeke names Elpidius, and Elpis.

HVMFREY, ger. for Humfred, House-peace, a
lovely and happie name, if it could turne
home-warres betweene man and wife into
peace. The Italians have made Onuphrius of it
in Latine.

HVBERT, Sax. Bright forme, faire shape, or faire
hope.

HORATIO, I know not the Etymologie, vnlesse
you will derive from the Greeke ὃρατος, that
is, wel sighted.
 



I
IACOB, Heb. A tripper, or supplanter. Whose
name because he had power with God, that
he might also prevaile with men, was changed
into Israel by God. See Genes. ca. 32. Philo de
nominibus mutatis.

IAMES, Wrested from Iacob, the same. Iago in Spa­
nish, Iaques in French, which some frenchifi­
ed English, to their disgrace, have too much
affected.

IASPER.. 

IBEL. See Ybel.

IOACHIM, Heb. Preparation of the Lord.

IEREMY, Heb: High of the Lord.

IOAB, Heb: Fatherhood.

IOHN, Heb: Gratious, yet though so vnfortunate
in Kings; for that Iohn of England well neare,
lost his Kingdome; and Iohn of France was
long captive in England; and Iohn Balioll was
lifted out of his Kingdome of Scotland; that
Iohn Steward when the Kingdome of Scot­
land came vnto him, renouncing that name,
would be proclaimed King Robert. See Iuon.

IOB, Heb. Sighing or sorrowing.

IORDAN, Heb: The river of iudgement.

IOSVAH, Heb: As Iesuiah Saviour.

IOSCELIN, A diminitive from Iost or Iustus, as Iu­
stulus according to Islebius, but molefied from 
Iostelin, in the old Netherland language, from
whence it came with Ioscelin of Lovan, yon­
ger sonne of Godfrey Duke of Brabant, Pro­
genitour of the honourable Percyes, if not the
first, yet the most noble of that name in this 



Realme. Nicotius maketh it a diminitive from
Iost Iudocus. 

IOSEPH, Heb. Encreasing [Philo] or encrease of
the Lord.

IOSIAS, Heb: Fire of the Lord.

IOSVAH, Heb: The Lord Saviour.

INGELBERT, See Engelbert.

INGRAM, Germ: Engelramus in Latine, deduced
from Engell which signifieth an Angell, as
Angelo is common in Italy, so Engelbert see­
meth to signifie bright Angell.

ISAAC, Heb: Laughter, the same which Gelasius
among the Greekes.

ISRAEL, Heb. Seeing the Lord, or prevailing in 
the Lord: See Iacob.

IVLIVS, gr: Soft haired or mossie bearded, so
doth Iulus signifie in Greeke. It was the name
of Æneas sonne, who was first called Ilus.

Ilus erat dum res stetit Ilia regno. 

The old Englishmen in the North parts turned
Iulius into Ioly, and the vnlearned Scribes of that
time may seeme to have turned Iulianus, into Io­
lanus, for that name doth often occurre in olde
evidences.

IVON, is the same with Iohn, and vsed by the
Welsh, and Sclavonians for Iohn; and in this
Realme about the Conquerours time Iohn
was rarely found, but Iuon as I have observed.

IONATHAN, Heb. The same with Theodorus, and 
Theodosius, that is, Gods gift.


K
KENHELME, Sax. Defence of his kinred.
Helm, Defence, [Luther:] so Eadhelme 



Happy defence, Bright-helme, Faire defence,
Sig-helme, Victorious defence. 

KENARD, Sax. Kinde disposition, and affection
his kinred.


L
LAMBERT, Sax: As some thinke, Faire-lamb
Luther turneth it Farre famous.

LANCELOT seemeth a Spanish name, and may signifie a Launce, as the militarie men, vse
the word now for an horseman. Some think
it to be no auntient name, but forged by the
writer of king Arthurs historie for one of his
doubtie knights.

LAVRENCE, Lat: Flourishing like a Baie tree:
the same that Daphnis in Greeke.

LAZARVS, Hebr: Lords-help.

LEOFSTAN, Sax: most beloved.

LEOFWIN, Sax: Winlove, or to be loved, as
Agapetus, and Erasmus with the Greekes, and
Amandus with the Latines.

LEONARD, ger: Lion-like disposition, as Thy­
moleon with the Greekes, or Popularis indoles,
as it pleaseth Lipsius, that is, People pleasing
disposition.

LEWIS, Wrenched from Lodowike, which Tili­
us interpreteth, Refuge of the people.

LEWLIN, Brit. Lion-like, the same with Leo­
minus, and Leontius.

LIONELL, Lat: Leonellus, that is, Little-lyon.

LVKE, Hebr: Rising or lifting vp.



LEODEGAR, or LEGER, germ: Gatherer, of peo­
ple, Lipsius in Poliorceticis, or, Altogether po­
pular. 

LEODPOLD, ger: Defender of people, corrupt­
ly Leopold. In our auncient tongue Leod sig­
nified people of one Citie, as Leodscip, was to
them Respublica, The northerne Germans
have yet Leud in the same sense. So Luti, Liudi,
Leuti, and Leudi, as the Dialect varieth, signi­
fies people. In which sence, the Normans in
the life of Carolus Magnus were called Nort-­
leud. The names wherein Leod are found,
seeme translated from those Greeke names
wherein you shall finde Demos and Laos, as
Demosthenes, that is, Strength of the people.
Dimochares, that is, Gratious to the people,
Demophilus, that is, Lover of the people. Ni­
codemus, that is, Conqueror of people. Lao­
medon, that is, Ruler of people. Laodamas,
that is, Tamer of people, &c.

LIVIN, germ. The same with Amatus, that is,
Beloved [Kilianus]


M
MADOC, Brit: from Mad, that is, Good in
the Welsh, as Caradoc, from Care, that
is, Beloved. The same with Agathias in Greek
[Dict: Wallicum]

MALACHIAS, hebr: My messenger.

MANASSES hebr: not forgotten.

MARCELLVS, lat: Plutarch out of Possidonius de­
riveth it from Mars, as martiall and warlike, 



other from Marculus, that is, an Hammer.
The latter times turned it to Martell and Mal­
let, which diverse tooke for a surname, be­
cause they valiantly didde hammer and beate
downe their adversaries, See Malmes. pag. 54. 

MARMADVC, germ: Mermachtig as some con­
iecture, which in olde Saxon signifieth More
mightie, being sweetened in sound by pro­
cesse of time. A name vsuall in the North,
but most in former times in the noble families
of Tweng, Lumley, and Constable, and thought
to be Valentinianus translated.

MARKE In Hebrew signifieth High, but in La­
tine, according to Varro, it was a name at the
first given to them that were borne in the
moneth of March; but according to Festus
Pompeius it signifieth a Hammer or Mallet,
given in hope the person should be martiall.

MATHEW, hebr. Gods-gift.

MARTIN, Lat: from Martius, as Antoninus from 
Antonius. Saint Martin the militarie Saint, bi­
shop of Toures first made this name famous
among the Christians by his admirable piety.

MERCVRIE, Lat: Quasi medius currens inter deos
& homines, as the Gramarians Etymologize
it, A mediate coursitor betweene gods and
men.

MEREDITH, Brit: in Latine Mereducius.

MERRIC, Brit: in Latine Meuricus, I knowe
not whether it be corrupted from Maurice.

MICHAEL, Hebr. Who is perfect? or, Who is
like God? The French contract it into Miel.

MAXIMILIAN, A new name, first devised by
Frederic the third Emperour, who doubting
what name to give to his sonne and heire,
composed this name of two worthy Romans
names, whome he most admired, Q. Fabius 



Maximus, and Scipio Æmilianus, with hope,
that his sonne would immitate their vertues.
[Hieronymus Gebviterius de familia Austriaca. 

MILES, Lat: Mile, which some fetch from Mi­
lium, a kinde of graine called Millet, as proba­
bly as Plinie draweth Fabius, Lentulus, Cicero 
from Faba, Lens, Cicer, that is, beanes, lentill,
and chich pease. But whereas the French
contract Michael into Miel: some suppose
our Miles to come from thence.

MOSES, hebr. Drawne vp.

MORGAN, Brit; the same with Pelagius, that is,
Seaman, if we may beleeve an olde fragment,
and Mor signifies the Sea among the Welsh:
So Marius, Marinus, Marianus, and Pontius a­
mong the Latines have their name from Ma­
re and Pontus the Sea. Quere.

MAVGER, a name eftsoones vsed in the wor­
shipfull family of Vavasors. Malgerius, in olde
histories. Quare.

MORICE, from the Latine Mauritius, and that
from Maurus, A Moore, as Syritius from Sy­
us a Syrian. The name not of any worth in
his owne signification, but in respect of Saint
Maurice a Commander in the Thebane Le­
gion martyred for the Christian profession
vnder Maximianus
.

N
NATHANIEL, Hebr: The gift of God, as
Theodosius, &c.

NEALE, Fre: Blackish, or swart, for it is abrid­ 



ged from Nigel, and so alwayes written, in La­
tine records Nigellus, consonant to Nigrinus,
and Atrius of the Latines, Melanius and Me­
lauthus of the Græcians. 

NICHOLAS, gre: Conquerour of the people.

NORMAN, drawne from the Norman nation, as
Northerne-man, vsuall antiently in the familie
of Darcy.

NOEL, Fre: the same with the Latine Natalis,
given first in honour of the feast of Christes
birth, to such as were then borne.


O
ODO, See Othes.

OLIVER, A name fetched from the peace-­
bringing Olive, as Daphnis, and Laurence, from
the triumphant Larorell.

OSBERN, Sax. House-childe, as Filius familiàs, 
[Luther.]

OSBERT, Sax. Domesticall brightnes, or light of
the family.

OSMVND, Sax. House-peace.

OSWOLD, Ger. House-ruler or Steward: for
Wold in old English and high Dutch, is a Ru­
ler: but for this the Normans brought in Le­
despencer now Spencer. The holy life of S. Os­
wald King of Northumberland, who was in­
cessantly in prayer hath given much honour
to this name. See Ethelwold.

OTHES, An old name in England, drawne from
Otho, written by some Odo, and by others, Eu­
do, in English-Saxon Odan, and after the 



originall, whereof when Suetonius could not
finde, I will not seeke. Aventinus maketh it
Hud, that is, Keeper: but Petrus Blesensis Epist.
126. maketh it to signifie a Faithfull recon­
ciler; for he writeth, Odo in Episcopum Parisien­
sem consecratus nomen suis operibus interpretari
non cessat, fidelis sequester inter deum & homines.
Ottwell and Ottey seeme to bee nursenames
drawne from Othes. 

OWEN, Lat. Audoenus, if it be the same with S.
Owen of France. But the Britans will have it
from old King Oenus father in law to Hercu­
les; others from Eugenius, that is, Noble or well
borne. Certaine it is that the Country of Ire­
land called Tir-Oen, is in Latine Records, Ter­
ra Eugenij; and the Irish Priests know no La­
tine for their Oen but Eugenius, as Rothericus
for Rorke. And Sir Owen Ogle in Latine Re­
cords, as I have beene enformed, was written
Eugenius Ogle.

ORIGINALL, May seeme to be deducted from
the Greeke Origenes, that is, Borne in good
time.


P
PASCAL, Deduced from Pascha, the Passo­
ver.

PATRIK, Lat. From Patricius, Quasi Patrem ciens,
A Peere or State, he which could cite his fa­
ther as a man of honour. A name given first
to Senators sonnes, but it grew to reputation
when Constantine the Greeke made a new state 



of Patricij, who had place before the Præfectus
Prætorio, or Lord great Master of the house, if
it may be so translated [Zosimus.] 

PAVL, Heb. Wonderfull or rest: But the learned
Baronius drawing it from the Latine, maketh
it Little, or Humble.

PAVLIN, From Paul, at Nigrinus from Niger.

PERCIVAL, Is thought at first to have bin a sur­
name, and after (as many other) a Christian
name: fetched from Percheval, a place in Nor­
mandie. One by allusion made this Percival,
Per se valens.

PAYN, in Lat. Paganus, exempt from militarie ser­
vice, a name now out of vse, but having an op­
posite signification to a millitarie man, as Scali­
ger observeth vpon Ansonius.

PETRE, For which as the French vsed Pierre: so
our Ancestours vsed Pierce, a name of high
esteeme among the Christians, since our Savi­
our named Simon, the sonne of Iona, Cephas,
which is by interpretation a stone, Ioan.
5. 42. But fole-wisely have some Petres, cal­
led themselves Pierius.

PEREGRINE, Lat. Strange, or outlandish.

PHILEBERT, Ger. Much bright fame, or very
bright and famous, as Polyphemus in Greeke
[Rhenanus.]

PHILIPPE, Gr. A lover of horses, Philip Beroald
conceiting this his name, very clerckly proveth
that Phillippe is an Apostolicall name by Saint
Philip the Apostle, a royall name by King Phi­
lip King of Macedonia, and an imperiall name
by Philip the first Christian Emperour.

POSTHVMVS, Lat. Borne after his fathers death.
 



Q
QVINTIN, Lat. From Quintus, the fifth
borne, a man dignified by Saint Quintin of
France
.

R
RALFE, Germ. Contracted from Radulph,
which as Rodulph signifieth Help-councell,
not differing much from the Greeke Eubulus.

RAYMVND, Germ. Quiet peace, as Hesichius in
Greeke.

RANDAL, Sax. Corrupted from Ranulph, that is,
Faire helpe.

RAPHAEL, Heb: The Phisicke of God.

REINHOLD, Sax. Sincere or pure love: for the
Germans call their greatest and goodliest ri­
ver for purenes Rheine, and the old English
vsed Hold for love, Holdlic, for lovely, as Vn­
hold, without love: Willeranus vseth Hold for
favour, which is answerable to love. I have
also observed Hold for Firme, and once for a
Generall of an armie. 

RHESE, A British name, deduced as they thinke
from Rhesus the Thracian King, who was
(as Homer describeth him by his Armour,)
of a Giantlike stature. But I dare not say the
word implieth so much in signification: yet
Rhesi, signifieth a Giant in the German tong.



RICHARD, Sax. Powerfull and rich disposition,
as Richer, an antient Christian name, signified
Powerfull in the Armie, or Rich Lord, and
was but Herric reversed, Aventinus turneth it,
Treasure of the kingdome. See Aubry. 

ROBERT, Germ. Famous in Councell, for it is
written most anciently Rodbert. Rod, Red, and
Rod, do signifie councell, See Conrad and Al­
bert. This name was given to Rollo, first
Duke of Normandy, an originall Ancestour
of the Kings of England, who was called first
by the Normans and French Rou, wherevn­
to, some without ground thinke that Bert was
added: so that it should signifie Rou, the re­
nowmed. Others vntruly turne it Red-beard,
as thogh it were al one with Ænobarbus of the
Latines, or Barbarossa of the Italians, Iohn Bo­
din (or Pudding,) that I may give him his true
English name, maketh it full wisely Red-bara;
but I thinke no Robert which knoweth what
Bardus meaneth, will like of it. 

ROGER, Ger. Ruger, Quiet, the same with Tran­
quilles in Latine, Frodoard writeth it alwaies 
Rottgarius, or Rodgarus, so it seemeth to signi­
fie All councell, or strong councell. 

ROLLAND, Ger. Whereas it was anciently writ­
ten Rod-land, it may seem to signifie Councell
for the Land. And the first that I finde so na­
med, was land-warden in France, vnder Carolus
Magnus, against the Piracies of the Normans.
The Italians vse Orland for Rowland by Me­
tathesis.

ROMANE, Lat. Strong, from the Greeke Ρωμἠς
answerable to Valens.

RVBEN, Heb. The sonne of visions, or a quick-­
seeing sonne. [Philo.]

REINFRED, Sax. Pure peace.




S
SALOMON, hebr: Peaceable.

SAMPSON, hebr: There the second name.

SAMVEL, hebr: Place of God.

SAVLE, Hebr: Lent of the Lord, or as some will,
Fox.

SEBASTIAN, gre: Honorable or maiesticall, as
Augustus or Augustinus among the Romans.

SIGISMVND, germ: Victorious peace, or victo­
ry with peace; That Sig signifieth Victorie,
Alfric, Dasipodius, and Luther do all agree, yet
Hadr: Iunius turneth it Victorious or prevai­
ling speech. So Sigward, now Seward, victo­
rious preserver, Sighelm, victorious defence,
Sighere, Conqueror of an army, or victorious 
Lord: and Sigbert, now Sebright, victorious
fame, or fame by victory. 

SILVESTER, Lat: Woodman.

SYLVANVS, Lat: Woodman, or rather Wood-­
god. See Walter.

SIMON, Hebr: Obedient listening [Philo]

STEPHEN, gre: A Crowne.

SWITHIN, Sax: From the olde English Swithe-­
ahn, that is, Very high, as Celsus or Exupe­
rius with the Romans. This name hath bin
taken vp in honour of Saint Swithin the holie
Bishop of Winchester about the yeere 860.
and called the Weeping saint Swithin, for that
about his feast Præsepe and Aselli, rainie con­
stellations do arise Cosmically, and common­
ly cause raine.
 



T
THEOBALD, 
commonly Tibald, and Thibald,
Gods power, as B: Rhenanius noteth.
But certaine it is, that in our Saxon Psalter
Gentes is alwayes translated by Theod, and in
the English-Saxon old Annales, the English
nation is often called Engla-theod. The same
Lipsius in Poliorceticis affirmeth to be in the
auntient German Psalters. So that Theobald
seemeth in his opinion to signifie Powerfull,
or bolde over people. It was the common
name in the familie of the Gorges; and of the
Lord Verdons, of whom the Earles of Shrews­
burie, and Essex are descended. 

THEODORE, gre: Gods gift, now corruptly by
the Welsh-Britans called Tydder.

THEODOSIVS, gre: the same with Theodore.

THEODERIC, ger: contractly Deric and Terry
with the French, Powerable, or Rich in peo­
ple according to Lipsius.

THEOPHILVS, gre: A lover of God.

THOMAS, hebr: Bottomles deepe, or Twinne.

TIMOTHY, gre: from Timotheus, Honouring
God.

TOBIAS, hebr: The Lord is good.

TRISTRAM, I knowe not whether the first of
this name was christned by king Arthurs fa­
bler. If it be the same which the French call
Tristan, it commeth from sorrow: for P. Æ­
milius noteth that the sonne of Saint Lewes of
France, borne in the heavie sorrowfull time of
his fathers imprisonment vnder the Saracens,
was named Tristan in the same respect.

TVRSTAN, Sax: for Trustan, most true and
trustie, as it seemeth.
 



V
VALENS, Lat: Puissant.

VALENTINE, Lat: The same.

VCHTRED, ger: High counsell, vsed in the old
family of Raby. From whence the Nevilles.

VINCENT, Lat: Victorious.

VITAL, Lat: Hee that may live a long life, like
to Macrobius; or Lively, the same that Zosimus
in Greeke.

VIVIAN, Lat: the same.

VRBANVS, Lat: Curteous, civill.

VRIAN, The same with George, as I have heard
of some learned Danes. It hath beene a com­
mon name in the family of Saint Pier of Ches­
shire, now extinguished.


W
WALTER, ger: from Waldher, for so it is
most auntiently written, a Pilgrime
according to Reneccius; other make it a Wod-­
Lorde, or a Wood-man, aunswerable to the
name of Silvius, Silvanus, or Sylvester. The
old English called a wood, Wald, and an her­
mite living in the woods, a Waldbrooder. But
if I may cast in my conceit, I take it to be Her­
wald inverted, as Herric and Richer, Winbald 



and Baldwin. And so it signifieth Governour
or Generall of an Armie, as Hegesistratus, See
Herman and Harold. 

WALWIN, Some have interpreted out of the
German tongue, a Conquerour, as Nicho­
laus and Nicodemus, Victor in Latine; but wee
now vse Gawen insteede of Walwyn, Architre­
nius maketh it Walganus in Latine. But if Wal­
win was a Britan, and king Arthurs nephew,
as W: Malmesbury noteth, where hee speaketh
of his giant-like bones found in Wales, I re­
ferre the signification to the Britans.

WARIN, Iovianus libr. I. de Aspiratione draw­
eth it from Varro. But whereas it is written in
all Records. Guarinus: It may seeme molli­
fied from the Dutch Gerwm, that is, All-vi­
ctorious. See Gertrud.

WILLIAM, ge: For sweeter sound drawne from
Wilhelm, which is interpreted by Luther,
Much Defence, or, Defence to many, as
Wilwald, Ruling many. Wildred, Much re­
verent feare, or Awfull. Wilfred, Much peace.
Willibert, Much brightnesse, or Very bright.
Willibrod Much increase. So the French that
cannot pronounce W have turnd it into Phil­
li, as Phillibert, for Willibert, Much brightnes.
Many names wherein wee have Will, seeme
translated from the Greeke names composed
of Πολὐς, as Polydamas, Polybius, Polyxenus, &c.
Helm yet remaineth with vs, and Villi, Willi,
and Bills yet with the Germans for Many. O­
ther turne William, a Willing Defender, and
so it answereth the Roman Titus, if it come
from Tuendo, as some will have it. The Ita­
lians that liked the name, but could not pro­
nounce the W if wee may beleeve Gesner, tur­
ned it into Galeazo, retaining the sence in part 



for Helme. But the Italians report, that Ga­
leazo the first Viscount of Millaine was so cal­
led, for that many Cockes crew lustily at his
birth. This name hath beene most common
in England since king William the Conqueror,
insomuch that vppon a festivall day in the
Court of king Henry the second, when Sir
William Saint-Iohn, and Sir William Fitz-Ha­
mon especiall Officers had commaunded that
none but of the name of William should dine
in the great Chamber with them, they were
accompanied with an hundred and twentie
Williams, all Knights, as Robert Moutensis re­
cordeth Anno 1173. 

WILLFRED, Sax: Much peace.

WIMVND, Sax: Sacred peace, or holy peace, as
Wibert, Holy and Bright; for Wi, in Wille­
ramus is translated Sacer.

WISCHARD, or GVISCARD, Norm: Wilie, and
crafty shifter: [W: Gemiticensis] Falcandus
the Italian interpreteth it Erro, that is, Wan­
derer. But in a Norman name I rather be­
leeve the Norman Writer.

WOLSTAN, Sax: Comely, decent, as Decentius,
[Dasipodius.]

WVLPHER, Sax: Helper, the Saxon name of a
King of Middle-England, answering to the
Greeke name Alexias, or rather Epicurus. The
most famous of which name was a hurtefull
man, albeit he had a helpefull name.




Y
YBELL, Brit: Contracted from Eubulus, good
Councellor.

YTHELL, Brit: Likewise contracted from Eu­
thalius, very flourishing.


Z
ZACHARY, Hebr: The memorie of the
Lord.






Christian Names of 
Women.

Lest Women, the most kinde sex, should con­
ceive vnkindenes if they were omitted, some­
what of necessitie must bee saide of their
names.


ABIGAEL, Heb. The fathers ioy.

AGATHA, Gr. Good, Guth in old Saxon.

AGNES, Gr. Chaste, the French write Ignatia,
but I know not why.

ALETHEIA, Gre. Veritie, or truth.

ALICE, Ger. Abridged from Adesiz, Noble.
See Ethelbert. But the French make it defen­
dresse, turning it into Alexia.

ANNA, Heb. Gracious, or mercifull.

ARBELA, Heb. God hath revenged, as some tran­
slations have it. [Index Bibliorum.]

ADELIN, Ge. Noble, or descending from nobles.

AVDRY, Sax. It seemeth to be the same with
Etheldred for the first foundresse of Ely church
is so called in Latine histories, but by the peo­
ple in those parts, S. Audry. See Etheldred.

AMIE, Fr. Beloved, in Latine Amata, the name
of the ancient King, Latinus wife. It is written
in the like sence Amicia, in old Records.

ANCHORET, Gr. for Anachoreta, Solitarie liver,
which retyred her selfe from the world to serve 
God.



AVICE, Some observe that as it is written now
Avice, so in former times Hawisia, and in elder
ages Helwisa: where-vpon they thinke it de­
torted from Hildevig, that is, Lady-defence, as
Lewis is wrested from Lodovicus and Ludwig. 

AVREOLA, Lat. Pretty-little golden dame.

ANSTASE, Gr. Anastasia, and that from Anasta­
sis, as Anastasius, given in remembrance of
christs glorious resurrection & ours in Christ.


B
BARBARA, Gr. Strange; of vnknowne lan­
guage, but the name respected in honour of
S. Barbara, martyred for the true profession of
Christian religion, vnder the Tyranne Max­
imian.

BEATRICE, Lat. From Beatrix, Blessed.

BLANCH, Fr. White, or faire.

BRIGID, Contracted into Bride, an Irish name
as it seemeth, for that the ancient S. Brigid,
was of that Nation: the other of Suetia was
lately Canonized about 1400. Quære.

BERTHA, Ger. Bright and famous. See Albert.

BONA, Lat. Good.

BENEDICTA, Lat: Blessed.

BENIGNA, Lat: Milde and gentle.




C
CASSANDRA, Gr. Inflaming men with love.

CATHERIN, Gr: Pure, Chaste.

CHRISTIAN, A name from our Christian pro­
fession, which the Pagans most tyrannically
persecuted, hating as Tertullian writeth in his
Apologetico, a harmelesse name in harmelesse
people.

CLARA, Lat: Bright, the same with Berta, & Cla­
ricia in latter times.

CICELY, From the Latine Cæcilia, Grey-eyed.


D
DENIS, See before among the name of men.

DIANA, From the Greeke Dios, that is, Iove,
as Iovina, or Ioves daughter,
or Gods daughter.

DIONYE, From Diana.

DIDO, A Phænician name, signifying a manlike
woman. [Servius Honoratus.]

DOROTHYE, Gr: The gift of God, or given of
God.

DORCAS, Gr: A Roe-bucke, Lucretius lib. 4. no­
teth, that by this name, the Amorous Knights
were wont to salute freckled, wartie, and wod­
den-faced wenches, where he saith,

Cæsta Palladion; nævosa & lignea Dorcas.

DOVZE, From the Latine Dulcia, that is, sweete­
wench.



DOVSABEL, Fr: Sweete and faire, somewhat like
Glycerium. 

DOVGLAS, of the Scottish surname, taken from
the river Douglas, not long since made a Chri­
stian name in England, as Iordan from the ri­
ver of that name in the holy Land, was made
a Christian name for men.


E
ETHELDRED, Noble advise: See Audrey.

ELA, See Alice.

ELEANOR, Deduced from Helena, Pittifull.

ELIZA, Heb. God saveth.

ELIZABETH, Heb. Peace of the Lord, or Quiet
rest of the Lord, the which England hath found
verified in the most honoured name of our
late Soveraigne. Mantuan playing with it, ma­
keth it Eliza-bella.

EADE, Sax. Drawne from Eadith, in which there
is signification of happines. In latter time it
was writen Auda, Ada, Ida, and by some Ido­
nea in Latine.

EMME, Some wil have to be the same with Amie,
in Latine Amata. Paulus Merula saith it signi­
fieth a good nurse, and so is the same with Eu­
trophime among the Greekes, Rog: Hoveden
pag. 246. noteth that Emma daughter to Ri­
chard the first Duke of Normandie, was called
in Saxon Elfgiva, that is as it seemeth, Helpe-­
giver.

EMMET, A diminitive from Emme.

EVA, Heb. Giving life.
 



F

FAITH. 

FORTVNE, The signification well knowne.

FREDISWID, Sax. Very free, truely free.

FRANCIS, See Francis before.

FAELICE, Lat. Happy.

FORTITVD, Lat.

FLORENCE, Lat. Flourishing.


G
GERTRVD, gr: All true, and amiable; if Ger­
man signifieth All-man, as most learned
consent, and so Gerard may signifie All-har­
dy. [Althamerus.]

GRACE, the signification is well knowne.

GRISHILD, Grey Lady, as Cæsia, see Maud.

GLADVSE, Brit: from Claudia.

GOODITH, Sax: Contracted from Goodwife,
as we now vse Goody: by which name king
Henry the first was nicked in contempt, as
William of Malmesbury noteth.


H
HELENA, gre: Pittifull: A name much v­
sed in the honour of Helena mother to 



Constantine the Great, and native of this Isle
although one on the Authour maketh her a
Bithinian, but Baronius and our Historians
will have her a Britaine. 

HAWIS, See Avice


I
IANE, See Ioane; for 32. Eliz: Regina it was
agreed by the court of the Kings Bench to
be all one with Ioane.

IVDITH, Hebr. Praising, Confessing our aun­
cestors turned it into Iuet.

IOYCE, in Latine Iocosa, Merry, pleasant.

IAQVET, Fr: from Iacoba, See Iames.

IENET, a diminitive from Ioan, as litle and pret­
tie Ihoan.

IOANE, See Iohn. In latter yeeres, some of the
better and nicer sorte misliking Ioane, have
mollified the name of Ioane into Iane, as it may
seeme, for that Iane is never found in olde
Recordes: and as some will, never before the
time of king Henry the eight. Lately in like
sort some learned Iohns and Hanses beyond
the sea, have new christned themselves by
the name of Ianus.

ISABELL, The same with Elizabeth; if the Spa­
niardes doe not mistake, which alwayes tran­
slate Elizabeth into Isabel; and the French in­
to Isabeau.

IVLIAN, from Iulius, Gilian commonly, yet
our Lawyers libr. Assis. 26. pa. 7. make them
distinct names, I doubt not but vppon some
good ground.




K'
KATHARIN, See Catharin.

KINBVRG, Sax: Strength and defence of
her kinred; as Kinulf, help of her kinred.


L
LETICE, Lat: Ioyfulnesse, mirth.

LYDIA, gre: Borne in that region of Asia.

LORA, Sax: Discipline, or Learning: but I sup­
pose rather it is corrupted from Laura, that is,
Bay, and is agreeable to the Greeke name
Daphne.

LVCIA, Lat: Lightsome, Bright: A name gi­
ven first to them that were borne when daie­
light first appeared.

LVCRETIA, Lat: An honourable name in re­
spect of the chaste Lady Lucretia; if it as
Lucretius doe not come from Lucrum, gaine,
as a good huswife, I leave it to Grammarians.
Lucris, a wench in Plautus seemed to have hir
name from thence, when-as hee saieth it was
Nomen & omen quantivis pretij
.



M
MABEL. Some will have it to be a contra­
ction of the Italians from Mabella, that
is, my faire daughter, or maide. But whereas
it is written in Deedes, Amabilia and Mabilia,
I thinke it commeth from Amabilis, that is,
Loveable, or lovely.

MAGDALEN, Hebr: Maiesticall.

MARGARET, gre: commonly Marget, pearle or
pretious.

MARGERIE, Some thinke to be the same with
Margaret: others fetch it from Marioria, I
know not what floure.

MARIE, Hebr: Exalted. The name of the bles­
sed Virgine, who was blessed among wo­
men, because of the fruit of her wombe.

MAVD for MATILD, ger: Matildis, Mathilidis,
and Matilda in Latine, Noble or honourable
Ladie of Maides. Alfric turneth Heroina by
Hild. So Hildebert was heroically famous, 
Hildegard, heroicall preserver: and Hilda was
the name of a religious Lady in the Primitive
church of England.

MELICENT, Fr: Hony-sweete.

MERAVD, Vsed antiently in Cornewall, from
the pretious stone called the Emeraud.

MVRIEL, from the Greeke Muron, Sweete per­
fume.



