


A Supplement or Addition, contai­
ning a demonstration of Dogges 
names how they had their 
Originall.


THe names contayned 
in the generall table, for so much 
as they signifie nothing to you be­
ing a straunger, and ignoraunt of 
the Englishe tounge, except they 
be interpreted: As we haue giuen 
a reason before of the latine words 
so meane we to doe no lesse of the 
Englishe that euery thing maye 
be manyfest vnto your vnderstanding. Wherein I intende 
to obserue the same order which I haue followed before. 



The names of such Dogges as be contained in 
the first section.


SAgax, in Englishe Hunde, is deriued of our English word 
hunte. One letter chaunged in another, namely, T, into 



D, as Hunt, Hunide, whom (if you coniecture to be so named 
of your country worde Hunde which signifieth the generall 
name Dogge, because of the similitude and likenesse of the 
wordes I will not stand in contradiction (friende Gesner) for 
so much as we retaine among vs at this day many Dutche 
wordes which the Saxons left at such time as they occupyed 
this country of Britane. Thus much also vnderstand, that 
as in your language Hunde is the common word, so in our 
naturall tounge dogge, is the vniuersall, but Hunde is per­
ticuler and a speciall, for it signifieth such a dogge onely as 
serueth to hunt, and therfore it is called a hunde.

Of the Gasehounde. The Gasehounde called in latine Agasaeus, hath his name 
of the sharpenesse and stedfastnesse of his eyesight. Ey which 
vertue he compasseth that which otherwise he cannot by 
smelling attaine. As we haue made former relation, for to 
gase is earnestly to viewe and beholde, from whence floweth 
the deriuation of this dogges name.

Of the Grehounde. The Grehounde called Leporarius, hath his name of this 
word, Gre, which word soundeth, Gradus in latine, in Eng­
lishe degree. Because among all dogges these are the most 
principall, occupying the chiefest place, and being simply and 
absolutely the best of the gentle kinde of houndes.

Of the Leyner or the Lyemmer. 
This dogge is called a Leuyner, for his lyghtnesse, which 
in latine soundeth Leuitas. Or a Lyemmer which worde is 
borrowed of Lyemme, which the latinists name Lorum: and 
wherefore we call him a Leuyner of this worde Leuitas? (as 
we doe many things besides) why we deriue and drawe a 
thousand of our tearmes, out of the Greeke, the Latine, the 
Italian, the Dutch, the French, and the Spanishe tounge? (Out 
of which fountaines in deede, they had their originall issue.) 
How many words are buryed in the graue of forgetfulnes? 
growne out of vse? wrested awaye? and peruersly corrupted 



by diuers defaultes? we wil declare at large in our booke in­
tituled, Symphonia vocum Britannicarum.

Of the Tumbler.
Among houndes the Tumbler called in latine Vertagus,
is the last, which commeth of this worde Tumbler flowyng 
first of al out of the French fountaine. For as we say Tum­
ble so they, Tumbier, reseruing one sense and signification, 
which the latinists comprehende vnder this worde Vertere, 
So that we see thus much, that Tumbler commeth of Tum­
bier, the vowell, I, chaunged into the Liquid, L, after the ma­
ner of our speache. Contrary to the French and the Italian 
tounge. In which two languages, A Liquid before a Vowell
for the most part is turned into another Vowell, As, may be 
perceaued in the example of these two wordes Implere & 
plano, for Impiere & piano, L, before, E, chaunged into, I, 
and L, before A, turned into I, also. This I thought conue­
nient for a taste.





The names of such Dogges as be contained in 
the second Section.


AFter such as serue for hunting orderly doe follow such as 
serue for hawking and fowling, Among which the prin­
cipall and chiefest is the Spaniell, called in Latine Hispa­
niolus, borrowing his name of Hispania Spaine, wherein wee 
Englishe men not pronouncing the Aspiration H, Nor the 
Vowell I, for quicknesse and redinesse of speach say roundly 
A Spaniell.

Of the Setter. 
The second sort of this second diuision and second section, 
is called a Setter, in latine Index, Of the worde Set which 
signifieth in Englishe that which the Latinistes meane by 
this word Locum designare, the reason is rehersed before more 
largely, it shall not neede to make a new repetition.



Of the water Spaniell or Finder. 
The water Spaniell consequently followeth, called in 
Latine Aquaticus, in English a waterspaniell, which name 
is compounde of two simple wordes, namely Water, which
in Latine soundeth Aqua, wherin he swymmeth. And Spaine, 
Hispania, the country from whence they came, Not that Eng­
land wanteth such kinde of Dogges, (for they are naturally 
bred and ingendred in this country.) But because they beare 
the generall and common name of these Dogges synce the 
time they were first brought ouer out of Spaine. And wee 
make a certaine difference in this sort of Dogges, eyther for 
some thing which in theyr voyce is to be marked, or for some 
thing which in their qualities is to be considered, as for an 
example in this kinde called the Spaniell by the apposition 
and putting to of this word water, which two coupled toge­
ther sounde waterspaniell He is also called a fynder, in La­
tine Inquisitor, because that by serious and secure seeking, he 
findeth such things as be lost, which word Finde in English 
is that which the Latines meane by this Verbe Inuenire. 
This dogge hath this name of his property because the prin­
cipall point of his seruice consisteth in the premisses.




The names of such Dogges as be contained in 
the thirde Section.


NOw leauing the suruiewe of hunting and hauking dogs, 
it remaineth that we runne ouer the residue, whereof 
some be called, fine dogs, some course, other some mungrels 
or rascalls. The first is the Spaniell gentle called Canis Me­
litæus, because it is a kinde of dogge accepted among gentles, 
Nobles, Lordes, Ladies, &c. who make much of them vouch­
safeing to admit them so farre into their company that they 
will not onely lull them in theyr lappes, but kysse them with 
their lippes, and make them theyr prettie playfellowes. 
Such a one was Gorgons litle puppie mencioned by Theo­



critus in Siracusis, who taking his iourney, straightly char­
ged & commaunded his mayde to see to his Dogge as charely 
and warely as to his childe: To call him in alwayes that 
he wandred not abroade, as well as to rock the babe a sleepe, 
crying in the cradle. This puppitly and peasantly curre. 
(which some frumpingly tearme fysteing hounds) serue in a 
maner to no good vse except, (As we haue made former rela­
tion) to succour and strengthen quailing and quamming sto­
mackes, to bewray bawdery, and filthy abhominable leud­
nesse (which a litle dogge of this kinde did in Siciliae) As Æy;
anus in his .7. booke of beastes and .27. chapter recordeth.




The names of such dogges as be contained in 
the fourth Section.


OF dogges vnder the courser kinde, wee will deale first 
with the shepherds dogge, whom we call the Bandogge, 
the Tydogge, or the Mastyue, the first name is imputed to 
him for seruice Quoniam pastori famulatur, because he is at 
the shepherds his masters commaundement. The seconde a 
Ligamento of the band or chaine wherewith he is tyed, The 
thirde a Sagina. Of the fatnesse of his body.

For this kinde of dogge which is vsually tyed, is myghty, 
grosse, and fat fed. I know this that Augustinus Niphus, cal­
leth this Mastinus (which we call Mastinus.) And that Al­
bertus writeth how the Lyciscus is ingendred by a beare and 
a wolfe. Notwithstanding the self same Author taketh it for 
the most part pro Molosso. A dogge of such a countrey.



The names of such dogges as be contained in 
the fifte Section.



OF mungrels and rascalls somwhat is to be spoken. And 
among these, of the Wappe or Turnespet, which name is
made of two simple words, that is, of Turne, which in latine 
soundeth Vertere, and of spete which is Veru, or spede, for
the Englishe word inclineth closer to the Italian imitation: 
Veruuersator, Turnspet. He is called also Waupe, of the na­
turall noise of his voyce Wau, which he maketh in barcking. 



But for the better and the redyer sounde, the vowell, u, is 
chaunged into the consonant, p, so that for waupe we say wappe. 
And yet I wot well that Nonius borroweth his Baubari of 
the naturall voyce Bau, as the Graecians doe their Βχνζειν 
of wau,

Now when you vnderstand this that Saltaro in latine sig­
nifieth Dansare in Englishe. And that our dogge therevpon 
is called a daunser and in the latine Saltator, you are so farre 
taught as you were desirous to learne, And now suppose I, 
there remaineth nothing, but that your request is fully ac­
complished.



The winding vp of this worke, called the Supplement, &c.


THus (Friend Gesner) you haue, not only the kindes of our 
countrey dogges, but their names also, as well in latine 
as in Englishe, their offices, seruices, diuersities, natures, & 
properties, that you can demaunde no more of me in this 
matter. And albeit I haue not satisfied your minde peraduen­
ture (who suspectest al speede in the performaunce of your re­
queste employed, to be meere delayes) because I stayde the 
setting fourth of that vnperfect pamphlet which, fiue yeares 
ago, I sent to you as to a priuate friende for your owne ree­
ding, and not to be printed, and so made common, yet I hope 
(hauing like the beare lickt ouer my younge) I haue waded 
in this worke to your contentation, which delay hath made 
somewhat better and Αεντέραι φροντίδες, after witte more 
meete to be perused.

The ende of this treatise.

FINIS.


