





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 5 6 1 4 . 2

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )




A SHORTE
INTRODVCTI­
ON OF GRAMMAR
generally to the vsed: com­
piled and set forth, for the
bringing vp of all those
that intende to attaine
the knowledge of 
the Latine 
tongue.








Letters are diuided into Vowels and Consonants.



A Vowel, is a letter whiche maketh a full and perfect
sounde of himselfe: and there are fiue in number, namely, A,
E, I, O, V: wherevnto is added the Greeke vowell, Y.

A Consonant, is a letter which needes must be sounded
with a vowell: as B with E. And all the letters, except the 
vowels, are Consonantes.

A Syllable is the pronouncing of one letter or mo, with
one breathe: as, A_ue.

A Diphthonge, is the sound of ij vowels in one Syllable,
and of them there be foure in number: namely, æ, œ, au, eu.
Whereunto is added, ei: as Aeneus, cœna, audio, euge, hei. 








AN INTRODVCTION 
OF THE EYGHT PARTES OF 
Latine Speache.


In Speache be these eight partes fo­
llowinge:

Noune, declined. Aduerb, vndeclined.
Pronoune, declined. Coniunction vndeclined.
Verbe, declined. Preposition, vndeclined.
Participle, declined. Interiection vndeclined.

Of the Noune.

A Noune is the name of a thinge, that may be seene, 
felte, hearde, or vnderstande: As the name of my 
hande in Latine is Manus: the name of an house
is Domus: the name of goodnes is Bonitas.

Of Nounes, some be Substantiues, and some be Adiectiues.


A Noune Substantiue 
is that standeth by him selfe, & requireth 
not another word to be ioyned with him: as Homo, a man. And it 
is declined with one article: as Hic magister, a maister. Or else 
with two at the moste: as Hic & Hæc Parens, a father or mother.

A noune Adiectiue 
is that can not stand by himselfe, but requi­
reth to be ioyned with an other word: as Bonus, Good. Pulcher, 
Faire. And it is declined either with three Terminations: as Bo­
nus, Bona, Bonum: or else with three Articles: as Hic, Hæc, & 
Hoc fœlix, Happy. Hic & hæc leuis, & hoc leue, Light.

A Noune Substantiue 
either is propre to the thinge that it be­
tokeneth: as Eduardus, is my proper name, or else is common to 
mo: as Homo, is a common name to all men.


Numbres of Nounes.


IN Nounes be two numbres, the Singular, & the Plurall. The 
Singular numbre speaketh of one: as Lapis, a stone. The plu­




rall numbre speaketh of mo then one: as Lapides, Stones.

Cases of Nounes. 
NOunes be declined with sixe cases, Singularly and Plurally: 
the Nominatiue, the Genitiue, the Datiue, the Accusatiue, the 
Vocatiue, and the Ablatiue.

The Nominatiue case commeth before the verbe, and aunswe­
reth to this question, Who or what: as Magister docet, The mai­
ster teacheth.

The Genitiue case is knowen by this token Of, and aunswereth 
to this question, Whose or whereof: as Doctrina magistri, 
The learning of the maister.

The Datiue case is knowen by this token To, and aunswereth 
to this question, To whome or to what: as Do librum magistro, 
I giue a booke to the maister.

The Accusatiue case foloweth the verbe, & aunswereth to this 
question, whome, or what: as Amo magistrum, I loue the maister.

The Vocatiue case is knowen by callinge or speakinge To: as 
O Magister, O maister.

The Ablatiue case is commonly ioyned with Prepositions ser­
uing to the ablatiue case: as De magistro, Of the maister. Coram 
magistro, Before the maister.

Also In, with, through, for, from, by, & then, after the compa­
ratiue degree, be signes of ye ablatiue case.

Articles. 

ARticles are borowed of the Pronoune ...

Genders of Nounes.

GEnders of Nounes be seuen: the Masculine, the Feminine, 
the Neuter, the Commune of two, the Commune of three, the 




Doubtful, & the Epicene.

The Masculine Gendre is declined with this Article Hic: as 
Hic vir, a man.

The Feminine Gendre is declined with this article Hæc: as 
Hæc mulier, a woman.

The Neuter gendre is declined with this article Hoc: as Hoc 
Saxum, a stone.

The Commune of two is declined with Hic and Hæc: as Hic 
& Hæc Parens, a father or mother.

The Commune of three, is declined with Hic, Hæc, and Hoc: 
as Hic, hæc & hoc fœlix, Happy.

The Doubtfull gendre is declined with Hic or Hæc: as Hic 
vel hæc Dies, a Daye.

The Epicene gendre is declined with one article, and vnder 
that one article: bothe kinds be signified: as Hic passer, a Sparrow. 
Hæc aquila, an Aegle, bothe hee and shee.




Comparisons of Nounes. 

ADiectiues whose signification may encrease or be diminished, 
may fourme comparison.

There be three degrees of comparison: The Positiue, the Com­
paratiue, and the Superlatiue.

The Positiue  betokeneth the thing absolutely without excesse: 
as, Durus, Hard.

The Comparatiue  somwhat excedeth his Positiue in significa­
tion: as, Durior, Harder. And it is formed of the firste case of his 
Positiue that endeth in i, by putting therto, or, & us: as of Duri, 
hic & hæc durior, & hoc durius: of Tristi. hic & hæc tristior, 
& hoc tristius. of Dulci, hic & hæc dulcior, & hoc dulcius.

The Superlatiue  excedeth his Positiue in the highest degree: 
as, Durissimus, Hardest. And it is fourmed of the firste case of his 
Positiue that endeth in i, by putting therto s & simus: as of Duri, 
durissimus. of Tristi, tristissimus. of Dulci, dulcissimus. 





Of the Pronoune.
A PRONOVNE, 
is a parte of speache, muche like 
to a Noune, which is vsed in shewinge or rehear­
sing. There be fiftene Pronounes: Ego, tu, sui, 
ille, ipse, iste, hic, is, meus, tuus, suus, noster, ve­
ster, nostras, vestras, whereof foure haue the vo­
catiue case: as, Tu, meus, noster, and nostras, and all the other lacke 
the vocatiue case.

To these may be added their compounds, Egomer, tute, idem: 
and also Qui, quæ, quod.

These eight Pronounes, Ego, tu, sui, ille, ipse, iste, hic, & is, 
be Primitiues, 
so called, for bicause they be not deriued of others. 
And they be also called Demonstratiues, bicause they shew a thing 
not spoken of before.

And these six: Hic, ille, iste, is, idem, and qui, be Relatiues, 
bi­
cause they rehearse a thing that was spoken of before.

These seauen, Meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, nostras, vestras, 
be Deriuatiues, 
for they be deriued of their primitiues, Mei, tui, 
sui, nostri, and vestri.

There belongeth to a Pronoune these fiue thinges: Numbre, 




Case, and Gendre, as are in a Noune: declension and Person, as 
here followeth.





Of a Verbe.
A Verbe is a parte of speache declined with Mode 
and tense, & betokeneth doinge: as, Amo, I loue, 
or suffering: as, Amor, I am loued: or beinge: as 
Sum, I am.

Of verbs, suche as haue persons, be called Per­
sonals: as, Ego amo, Tu amas. And suche as haue no persons, be 
called Impersonals: as, Tedet, It yrketh. Oportet, It behoueth.

Of Verbes Personalles there be fiue kindes: Actiue, Passiue, 
Neuter, Deponent, and Commune.

A Verbe Actiue endeth in o, and betokeneth to doe: as Amo, I 
loue: and by putting to r, it may be a passiue: as Amor.

A Verb Passiue endeth in or, & betokeneth to suffer: as Amor, 
I am loued: and by putting away r, it may be an actiue: as Amo.

A Verbe Neuter 
endeth in o, or m, and can not take, r, to make 




him a passiue: as, Curro, I runne. Sum, I am. And it is englished 
somtime actiuely: as, Curro, I runne: And somtime passiuely: as, Aegroto, I am sicke.

A Verbe Deponent 
endeth in r, like a passiue, and yet in signifi­
cation is but either actiue: as Loquor verbum, I speake a worde.
or Neuter: as Glorior, I boaste.

A Verb Commune 
endeth in r, and in signification is bothe A­
ctiue and Passiue: as Osculor te, I kisse thee: Osculor à te. I 
am kissed of thee.

MODES. 

THere be six Modes: the Indicatiue, the Imperatiue, the Opta­
tiue, the Potentiall, the Subiunctiue, and the Infinitiue.

The Indicatiue mode 
sheweth a reason true or false: as, Ego a­
mo, I loue. or else asketh a question: as, Amas tu? Doest thou loue?

The Imperatiue 
biddeth or commandeth: as, Ama, Loue thou.

The Optatiue 
wissheth or desireth, with these signes, would God, 
I pray God, or God graunt: as, Vtinam amem, I pray God I loue. and 
hath euermore an Aduerbe of wisshing ioyned with him.

The Potentiall mode 
is knownen bi these signes, may, can, might, 
would, should, or ought: as, Amem, I may or can loue: without an ad­
uerbe ioyned with him.

The Subiunctiue mode 
hath euermore some Coniunction ioy­
ned with him: as Cum amarem, When I loued. and it is called the 
Subiunctiue mode, bicause it dependeth of an other verbe in the 
same sentence, either going afore, or comming after: as Cum ama­
rem eram miser: when I loued, I was a wreatche.

The Infinitiue 
signifieth to do, to suffer or to be, and hath nei­
ther numbre nor person: nor nominatiue case before him, & is kno­
wen commonly by this signe, To: as, Amare, To loue. Also when 
two verbes come together, without any nominatiue case betweene 
them, then the latter shalbe the Infinitiue mode: as Cupio di­
scere, I desire to learne.

GERVNDES. 

THere be moreouer belonging to the Infinitiue mode of verbs, 
certaine voyces called Gerunds, ending in Di, do, and dum: 
which haue bothe the actiue and passiue signification: as Amandi,
Of louing, or of being loued. Amando, In louinge, or In being loued. A­
mandum, To loue, or to be loued.




SVPINES. 

¶ There be also pertaining vnto verbs two Supines, the one en­
ding in um, which is called the firste Supine, bicause it hath the 
signification of the verbe actiue: as Eo amatum, I goe to loue. And the 
other in u, which is called the Letter Supine, bicause it hath for 
the moste part the signification Passiue: as Difficilis amatu, hard 
to be loued.

TENSES. 

THere be fiue Tenses or Times: the Present tense, the Preter
imperfect tense, the Preterperfect, the Preterpluperfect, and 
the Future tense.

¶ The Present tense 
speaketh of the time that nowe is: as Amo, 
I loue.

The Preterimperfect tense 
speaketh of the time not perfectly 
past: Amabam, I loued, or did loue.

¶ The Preterperfect tense 
speaketh of the time perfectly past, with
this signe Haue: as Amaui, I haue loued.

¶ The Preterpluperfect tense 
speaketh of the time more then perfectly past, with 
this signe Had: as Amaueram, I had loued.

¶ The Future tense 
speaketh of the time to come, with this signe 
Shal or will: as Amabo, I shall or will loue.

PERSONS. 

THere be also in verbs three Persons in bothe numbres: as, Sin. 
Ego amo, I loue: Tu amas, Thou louest: Ille amat, He loueth. P. 
Nos amamus, We loue. Vos amatis, Ye loue. Illi amant, They loue.





Of the Participle.

A Participle 
is a part of speache deriued of a verbe, 
and taketh part of a Noune, as gendre, case, and de­
clension: and part of a Verbe, as tense, and signifi­
cation: and part of bothe, as numbre and figure.





Of an Aduerbe.
AN ADVERBE is a part of speache ioyned to 
the Verbes, to declare theyr signification.





Of a Coniunction.
A Coniunction is a parte of speache, that ioyneth 
wordes and sentences togither.

Of Coniunctions, some be Copulatiues: as Et, 
que, quoque, ac, atque, nec, neque.

Some be Disiunctiues: as Aut, ve, vel, seu, siue.

Discretiues: as Sed, quidem, autem, verò, at, ast.

Causals: as Nam, nsmque, enim, etenim, quia, vt,
quod, quum, quoniam, and quando set for quoniam.

Conditionals: as Si, sin, modo, dum, dummodo.

Exceptiues: as Ni, nisi, quin, alioquin, praeterquam.

Interrogatiues: as Ne, an, vtrum, necne, anne, nnne.

Illatiues: as Ergo, ideo, igitur, quare, itaque, proin.

Aduersatiues: as Etsi, quanquam, quamvis, licet, esto.

Redditiues to the same: as Tamen, attamen.

Electiues: as Quàm, ac, atque.

Diminutiues: as Saltem, vel.


Of a Præposition
A Preposition 
is a parte of speache moste commonly 
set before other parts, either in Apposition, as Ad 
patrem: or els in Composition: as Indoctus.





Of an INTERIECTION.
AN Interiection is a part of speache which betoke­
neth a sodaine passion of the minde, vnder an vnper­
fect voice.

Some are of Myrth:  as Euax, vah.

Some are of Sorow: as Heu, her.

Some are of 
Dreade: as At at.

Some are of Maruailling: as Papè.

Some are of Disdaining: as Hem vah.

Some are of Shunning: as Apage. Praising: as Euge.

Some are of Skorning: as Hui.

Some are of Exclamation:  as Proh Deum atque hominum fidem.

Some are of Cursing: as Væ, malum.

Some are of Laughing: as Ha ha he.

Some are of Calling: as Ehò, oh, io.Z

Some are of Silence: as Au. And suche others.








OMNIVM
NOMINVM IN REGVLIS
Generum contentorum, tum Heteroclito­
rum, ac verborum, interpretatio aliqua.


A.

ABdo, 
Abscondo, occulto. To hyde.



Abyssus, immensa quædam profunditas
impeneterabilis.. A depth that by soun­
dinge can not be founde.



Acarnan, gens ex quadam regione Græciæ. The people
of Acarnania in Greece.



Acer, arbor. A Maple tree.


 
Accerso, eo ad vocandum, vel voco. To go to call.



Acies, acumen rerum secantium, exercitus instructio, 
oculi lumen. An edge. The araye of an armye.
The sight of the eye.



Acus, instrumentum sartoris, ac mulieris ornamen­
tum. A nedell, or an instrument wherwith women
did set their heare.



Adeps, omnis pingue do siue carnis, siue alterius rei. Fatte.



Adipiscor, assequntus sum. To obtaine.



Adolescens, iuuenis adultus. A stripling from twelue
yeares to xxj.



Ador, frumenti genus vel farris. Wheate.



Aduena, qui non est ciuis, sed externus. A stranger.



Aether, tota c&ecedil;li syderumque substantia ac com­
pago. The whole substance of the Spheres, from the
fyre vnto the extremest circuite of heauen.



Aequor, mare, pelagus. The sea, bicause nothinge ys
more playne than it. for Aequor dothe generally sig­
nifie a playne in any parcell of the worlde, It is taken
for the ayre also as, Aspice bis senos volitantes &ecedil;­
quore cygnos.



Aes, species metallí rubro colore, Copper, and by­
cause that in olde tyme monye was made of yt, Aes 
some tyme doth signifie monye.



Affinis, cognatus. A kinseman by mariage.



Agnosco, est noscere id, quod nobis olim aut vi­
sum fuit, aut alia qua piam ratione cognitum, To 
recognise, to know a new, or to cum to remembrance of.



Ago, facio. To Doe.



Agragas, vrbs Siciliæ. A towne in the Isle of Sicile,
called now Gergenti.



Agricola, qui exercirat rem rusticam. An husbandman.



Alcyon, anis maritima, hyeme pullos educans. A
certaine Sea byrde that leyeth in the sandes, and
hatcheth in winter.

"Sea byrde" antedates the earliest OED citation (1589).




Ales, quælibet auis, aut velox. A byrde, or swifte.



Alnus, genus arboris. An alder tree.



Alo, nutrio. To nourishe.



Alter. The other of the twoo.



Aluus, qua sordes defluunt, aut eluuntur, The panche,
and some tyme the bealye without.



Amazones, Scythicæ fœminæ, eo quod mammis
careant. Certaine women of Scythia, so named
for lackinge a dugge.



Ambigo, circumago, circundo. To compasse, to doubt.



Amicio, vestio. To clothe.



Amnis, fluuius. A Riuer.



Anas, auis in aquis degens. A ducke, or a drake.



Ango, crucio, premo, vexo. To trouble and vexe.



Anguis, serpens in aquis degens. A drye or a water 
snake.



Animus, consilii principium. The mynde.



Anna, nomen mulieris. Anne.



Annuo, assentior. To assent and agree vnto.



Annus, tempus, 365. dierum, et 6 horarum. A yeare



Anus, vetula. An olde wyfe.



Antes, ab ante, eminentes lapides, siue ultimæ co­
lumnæ quibus sustinetur fabrica. The Pillers or 
sayling stones that sayleth ouer the wales to beare the
frame, or the drye stone walle that incloseth a vine­
yarde, or the first sette or frontier of vines



Antidotus, medicamentum contra uenena datum. A 
preseruatiue against poyson.



Antiæ, muliebres capilli in fronte demissi. A wo­
mans forelockes.



Antistes, in aliqua resummus. A president or chefe
ruler, man or woman.



Anxur, nomen vrbis Itali&ecedil;, qu&ecedil; nunc Tarentina
dicitur. Tarentine.



Aperio, indico, refero. To open, to shew, or to declare.



Apes & apis, animal mellificum. A bee.



Apiscor, assequor, acquiro. To obtaine.



Apollo, deus quem Gr&ecedil;cisolem appellant. The
God of wisedome and Phisice, and of Prophesye, 
and the God that caryeth the Sunne about.



Appendix, quod aliis adiunctum, quasi ex alio pen­
deat. An appentise or a boote to encrease a thing.



Applico, & iungo, & aduenio. To apply vnto, or to
ariue



Aptoton, nomen inuariabile, sed nullo defectum
casu. A nowne vndeclined, hauinge one termina­
tion in all the cases.



Aqualis, vasis genus quo aqua tenetur ad pr&ecedil;ben­
dam eam manibus, A Lauer or an Eawer.



Arbor, vel arbos, not&ecedil; significationis. A tree.



Arceo, pello, & aduenire non sino. To keepe awaye.



Arcesso, voco & accuso. To call, or to accuse, or to 
goe to accuse.



Archas, ex Archadia populus. The people of Archadí.






Arctus, vrsa, quam nostri septemtrionem dixerunt
signum cœleste. A signe called the Beare, or the
wagon.


Ardeo, vror, inflammor. To be hote. 



Argos, oppidi nomen A towne of the halfe Isle in 
Greece called Peloponnesus. 



Arma, munimenta, scutum, gladius, telum, & ea qui­
bus pr&ecedil;liamur. Armour, or any kinde of weapon. 



Aruspex, qui uictimas incipit. He or she that see­
keth destinies by the bowels of beastes. 



As, est libra, id est duodecim vnciæ. A pounde of
xij. vnces, or the whole summe of any thinge. 



Assecla, qui continue & semper aliquid sequitur. 
A Page or lackey, or continuall wayter. 



Athamas, nomen uiri. A mans name which should be
sacrifised for his sonne Phryxus. 



Astu, dolo, fallaciis. By deceyt or guile. 



Athen&ecedil;, ciuitas Græci&ecedil;, inter Achaiam & Mace­
doniam. The citie of Athens. 



Athletes, pugil & luctator. A champion, or he that
striueth for a game. 



Atomus, corpus insecabile. A mote, so small that it
cannot be parted. 



Auceps, qui uel qu&ecedil; aues capit. A fouler, man or woman 



Audeo, sum ausus. To be bold, to enterprise. 



Aueo, cupio. To desire, or to couette. 


Augeo, mains facio, amplifico. To encrease. 



Augur, qui futura pronunciat. A southsayer, man or
woman. 



Auernus, lacus Campani&ecedil; prope Baias, quem Plu­
toni dicatum opinabantur veteres. A lake in Ita­
ly, where hence they thought was descent into hell 



Auriga, qui uel quæ currum ducit. A waggoner, a 
carman, or a carter. 



Auster, ventus flans a meridie. The south winde. 



Autor, qui vel quæ aliquod opus facit. The worker  
or doer of any thinge, man or woman. 



Axis, diametros mundi, & dicitur lignum teres, cir­
ca quod rota currus vertitur. An axeltree. And
by translation, the strayght lyne that maye be ima­
gined from the one pole to the other pole. 



B.

Bacchanalia, Dionysia, i. Bacchi festa. The feaste of 
Bacchus. 



Bacchar, herba radicis odoratæ. An herbe that
the Frenche men cal, our Ladies gloues. 



Bacchus, deus vini. The dronken God, the God of wine. 



Baculus, bacillus & bacultum, & hinc bacillum, sci­
pio. A staffe. 



Balneum, locus publicus vel priuatus, in quo aut 
sanitatis aut abster gendarum sordium causa laua­
mur. A bathe. 



Barathrum, erat locus profundior Athenis putei mo­
do. A certaine pitt by Athenes. Now it is taken for
hell. It is also the hole were anye water entreth 
and falleth into the earth. 



Barbiton, instrumentum musicum, quod pulsatur plectro vel calamo. The lute, or any like that is 
plaied on a quille. It is also Barbitos, bothe
masculine and feminine. 



Bellaria, cibi secund&ecedil; mensæ. Iuncats. 



Bes, vnciæ octo. Eight vnces. 



Bibo, potum haurio, humorem attraho, To drink. 



Bidens, instrumentum duorum dentium, vel ouis Any 
instrument with two teeth, or a sheepe of twoo teeth,
in the feminine gendre. 


Bifrons, habens duas frontes. He or she that hath a
face before, another behinde. 



Bilis, humoris genus. It is with this word atra, melan­
choly, and with flaua, Cholere, and being vsed a­
lone, is the same disease that Cholera is after Cor..
Celsus. See Cholera. 



Bombix, vermis, & pro materia sumitur. A silke
worme, or silke. 



Bos, nota est significatio. An Oxe, Cow, or Bull. 



Britannia, Insula quam nunc Angli & Scoti inco­
lunt. The Isle which is inhabited of Englishemen
and Scotishmen, and is called Brittania maior. 



Britannia minor, is Britaine in Fraunce. 



Bubo, auis nomen, a bouis mugitu. An Owle. 



Bucephalus, nomen equi Alexandri magni. Alex­
ander the Greate his horse. 



Byssus, tenuissimi lini genus, A most fine sorte
of fine flax, wherof a preciouse kynde of linen cloth ys
made. yt may be taken for a silke clothe. 



C.

Cacoæthes, malus mos. An euill custome, or a bile
harde to be cured. 



Cadauer, corpus mortuum. A carcasse. 



Cado, corruo, pr&ecedil;cipitor, Or labor, To fall, and 
some tyme to happen, to chaunce. 



C&ecedil;do, percutio, ferio, verbero, To strike or to beat,
and somtime to cut or to loppe, or to prime trees, some 
tyme to kill, some time to sacrifice, and some time to
breake, as, ædere ianuam saxis, iustare ferro. 



Cællo, percutio, aut frango, To smyte or to breake
antiquum verbum, The compoundes whereof bee in vse
onely. Cello ys readen also with out a diphthong. 



Cælum vel cœlum, extrema mundi determinatio
cum sph&ecedil;ris quas ambit ad elementum ignis. Hea­
uen, or with a difference anye of the spheres. It sig­
nifieth whether also. 



Calco, pede comprimo, To treade vppon, and by a
translation vnto the minde, to despice and set naught by



Calend&ecedil;, dies primus cuiusque mensis, The verye
firste day of euery moneth. 



Caleo, ferueo, calidus sum, To be hot or to glowe 



Callis, via perdurata, id est via trita. A path way. 



Caluo, decipio, frustror, To deceaue and to beguile




to trompe. 



Calx, pes imus, & pro cuiusuis rei fine ponitur.
vel pro materia qua lapides in muro congluti­
nantur. An heele, or laste ende of a race, or lime. 



Cambio, commuto, To exchaunge. and of the old
wryters it is taken for to fight. 



Canalis, per quod aqua confluit in vijs lapide stra­
tis. A chanell. 



Cancelli, ligna inter se modicis interuallis in trans­
uersum instar retis inuicem annexa. A lattise. 
or the listes of a gameplace or of a spectacle. 



Canis, animal latratile, & piscis marinus, & signum
cœleste. A dogge, or a dogge fishe, and a starre or
signe in the firmament, called Canus. 



Cano, To singe, to endicte poetically, to play vppon in­
strumentes. Somtime it is to praise or to prophecie. 



Capesso, capio, siue ad capiendum eo, To take or to
go to take, and somtime recipio me to go: as, Nunc
pergam her æ imperium exequi, & me domum
capessam. 



Capio, To take, to delite, to deceaue, to chuse, to 
abide and suffre: as Capio dolores. To holde or con­
taine, To inuade and catche. as. Nauem cepimus 
To inflame with loue. And is lightlie of such signifi­
cation as the ablatiue is that commeth with it. 



Capistrum, capitis vinculum, adhibitum ne anima­
lia aufugiant. An halter. 



Capital, quod olim sacerdotes gestabant in capi­
te. An ornament that the Nunnes were wonte to
beare vpon their heades. 



Capra, animal a carpendis virgultis dictum. A Goate. 



Car, aliquis ex Caria. A man of Caria. 



Cardo, quo ianua mouetur. An hooke or hinge. 



Careo, est rem desideratam non habere. To lacke, 
or to be with out, and specially such a thinge as ones
wee had. 



Carex, herba acuta durissima. Sedge. 



Caro, quod anima careat, non solum de animalibus,
sed etiam de piscibus & fructibus. The meate of
any thing, but most commonly fleshe. 



Carpo, decerpo. To croppe, to bite of nottelie, or 
to gather. It is also to lease, or to chouse out, and som­
time to taunt or rebuke. Carpere viam, Is to be­
gene to iourney, Carpere vitales auras, carpere
lanam, to teyse wull. Carpere linum, To hacchel
flaxe, Carpere cibum, to eate.



Castra, locus in quo milites tentoria fixerunt. The 
campe, the Pauilions, or the army. 



Cassis, reticulum, & pro galea fœminini est cassis, dis,
& hæc cæssida. A net, Or an helmet, in the femi­
nine gendre. 



Cato, nomen viri. A certaine Romaines name. 



Caueo, diligentiam adhibeo, prouideo, consulo,
prospicio ne aliquid pr&ecedil;ter spem eueniat, To
beware, or to be warie and hedefull. Cauere is also
to put in assurance and to saue harmlesse by cauti­
on or sureties.



Caulis, in herbis dicitur ipsum robur, siue stipes. A
stalke. 



Cedo, To giue place, to depart and go away. 



Cedrus, arbor ingens & procera. A Cedre tree. 



Cello See Cællo. 



Censeo, existimo, puto, arbitror, To deme, to iudge,
to suppose, to thinke, to tell ones minde. Some take it 
for to be angrie. Censeri, is also to be in bokes of subsidi­­
es, and to be tasked, or valued. 



Centum, An hundred. 



Centussis, centum librarum. An hundred pounde. 



Cera, illud quod melle, ex fauis expresso, remanet. 
Waxe. 



Cerno, video, To see. and by translation, to perceaue 
and vnderstande. Somtime to decree and appointe. 
To sifte, renge or bolte, to seuer and parte, to fighte, to
go vnto. as, Cernere h&ecedil;reditatem. 



Cetus, piscis maximus. A Whale. 



Cholera, est ventriculi immodica perturbatio, supra
& infra per uomitum facta. The Cholike. It is also
cholere, the whote and dry humour. 



Cicer, genus leguminis. A certaine Italian pese. 



Cico, turbo, commoueo, To trouble, to shake and 
styrre, and some time for Cio, it is to call.


Cinis, vel ciner, puluis Ashes. 



Cinis, est auis, quam alio nomine a laudam dici­
mus, A larke. 



Claudo, obstruo, obfero, To shut or to close, to make
faste, to stoppe or to staie, not to suffre to passe further.
as, Ecce maris magna claudie nos obice pontus. 



Cliuus, locus molliter arduus, & pro colle ponitur: A Banke, a risinge, and it is vsed for a little hill. 



Clunis, natium tumor. The buttoke. 



Cluo, splendeo, To shine, to glister. some time to fight. 



Clypeus & Clypeum, scuta maiora, & proprie pe­
ditara. A buckler. 



Cœlum, A grauinge toole, the skie, that is, as muche
of the worlde as is aboue the element of fyre, whiche is 
called Aether, or Quintum elementum. Cœlum al­
so somtime is taken for the ayre, as, In hoc c&ecedil;lo, qui
dicitur aér.



Cœno, cœnam sumo To suppe, or to take supper. 



Cœpio, pro incipio, antiquum est, To beginne. 



Cognosco, nosco eos qui prius incogniti erant, To 
know that which we knew not before, somtime diligent­
lie and attentiuelie to considre, or to vnderstande, to 
searche by an inquirie, and to sitte in iudgement. 



Collis, monticulus An hillocke. 



Colo, adoro, veneror, To honor or worshippe with
praier, sometime to make much of, to exercise, to inha­
bite, to loue, & Vitam colere is to leade a life, som­
time to plowe or toyle the grounde, somtime to decke 
and to trimme. 






Colus, instrumentum quod pensa continet. A dis­
taffe or spindle. 



Comes, comitans aut sequens. A companion by the
way, either man or woman. 



Comminiscor, fingo, excogito To immagine, to 
faine, to inuent, deuise, to assaie, to bringe a man 
to the beleefe of that that is not. 



Como, comam compono, To keame, to dresse the
busch with a combe, or to decke and adourne. 



Compago, compactio, & coniunctio. A ioynt. 



Compedes, vinculi genus A paier of Fetters or giues.



Congrus, conger, genus piscis. A congre. 



Coniunx, maritus vel vxor. An husband or wyfe. 



Coquo, cibum vsui aptum reddo, To dresse meate, 
to play the cooke, to prepare and go about: as, Bellum
coquere. To vexe and trouble, as Coquit me cura. 
To concocte, to bring our nutrument vnto a natural
foment or iuse. 



Consulo, to aske counsel, with an accusatiue, to giue 
counsell, or to prouide for, with a datiue: to take in
goodworth, with a genitiue. Sometime it is to sitte in
counsell and to deliberate, but vsed plurallie. as con­
sulunt Senatores. 



Cor, pr&ecedil;cipuum inter viscera, & vit&ecedil; sedes & arte­
riarum, ac caloris natiut, quo animal regitur, qua­
si fons quidam & domicilium, The harte, and some
time it is vsed for the minde. 



Cornus, vel Cornum, aut Cœnu, munimentum ca­
pitis quorundam animalium. An horne. By transla­
tion the tourninges of riuers be called Cornua. It 
signifieth also the winge of an armie, and the end of
a thinge. 



Cornus, arbor ramos habens duritia & rigiditate
cornibus similes fructum circa solstitium ferens,
pruno candidum, postea sanguineum, A certaine
tree vnknowen amonge vs. 



Costus, radix magni odoris. A shrubbe growing in
Arabia, Iury, and Syria, hauinge a roote of verye
fragrante sauoure, the whiche antiquitie burned to
their Gods, as they did frankincense. 



Coxendix, coxatum vertex, quo fœmora vertun­
tur. The Hippe. 



Crater, vel cratera, vas amplum, cui vinum aut ole­
um imponimus. A Goblet or standing piece.



Crepo, sono, to cracke. Somtime to complaine, lamente 
and accuse, as, Quis post vina, grauem pauperiem
crepat. 



Crepundia, prima munuscuia quæ pueris dantur. Al
manner of thinges that are geuen children in their 
infancie, as corales, swathelingbandes, daggers, 
timbriles, and suche like. 



Creta, insula est. The Isle called Candie. 



Cres, Cretensis. A man of Candie. 



Crinis, capillus Heare. 



Crystallus, glacies ex gelu vehementer concreta. 
Christall. 



Crus, pars a genibus vsque ad inferiorem pedem. A legge. 



Conditor, qui aliquid facit A maker or builder.



Corbis, vas ex viminibus factum. A basket. 



Cubo, taceo, To lie, and somtime to be sicke in bedde. 


Cucumis A Cucumer, the which is called also in La­
tine Cucumer. 



Cumbo, The same that Cubo is. 



Culex, vermiculus alatus. A Gnatte. 



Cunabula, cunæ. A cradell. 



Cunæ, cunabula. Idem. 



Cupio, opto, desidero, To couet, to desire, to lust for,
and sometime with a datiue to fauoure.


Cupressus, arboris nomen. A Cypresse tree. 



Cures, oppidi nomen. A tounes name 



Curculio, animal paruum, fræmentum corrodens. 
A Wesle. 



Curro, celeriter eo, gradum pr&ecedil;cipito, intenta cele­
ritate viam quasi voro, To runne, and sometime to
flowe, that is to runne as riueres doe.



Cuspis, acutior pars hastæ. The poynt of a speare, pike
partizane, or any other like. 



Custos, qui uel quæ rem aliquam tuetur & curat. A keeper, man or woman. 



Cyprus, insula diuis. Cypres the Isle. 



D.

Dama, animal timidum. A Bucke, or a do. 



Damno, damno afficio, vel condemno. To dammage. 
or to condemne. 



Dedo. in perpetuum do, vel totum subdo, siue in
manus & arbitrium do. To yelde. 



Defrutum, a deferendo, vinum decoctum ad medi­
am partem. Wine sodden to the halfe. 



Dego, ago. To liue. 



Deleo, expungo, proprie lineas aut regulas. To put
out and to canceil.



Delicium, oblectamentum quod nobis voluptati est. 
The thinge wherin we take pleasure in. 



Delphin, uel delphinus, uel delphis, piscis maris, &
signum cœleste, A Dolphine. 



Demo, aufero. To pull away and to exempt. 



Dens, notum est: per similitudinem capitur pro om­
ni, quo aliquid teri potest. A toothe. 



Depango, defigo. To fasten downe and to plante. 



Desidia, ignauiæ vitium. Slothfulnesse. 



Dico, loquor, nomino. To speake or to call.



Dies, tempus viginti quatuor horarum. A daye. 



Diffiteor, inficias eo, nego To deny. 



Digredior, discedo. To go from. 



Diligo, amo. To loue. 



Diluo, aqua uel quouis humore aliquid purgo. To
purge with washing. 



Diphthongus, vnus duarum vocalium sonus. A 
double sounde. A diphthonge. 


Diptoton, nomen flexum duobus in casibus quibus
conque. A nowne declined with two cases whatso­
euer. 






Dindimus, iugum montis Phrigi&ecedil;, Idæ matri deum
dicatum. The toppe of Ida, the hill by Troy. 



Dir&ecedil;, imprecationes, execrationes, & inferorum
furiæ. Curses banninges, and the Furies of hell. 



Disco, capio doctrinam. To learne. 



Dispesco, separo, dirimo. To seuer. 



Displiceo, To displease. 



Ditionis imperii, dominii, Of my right and title. 
We neede not scrupulously to refuse ditio, the no­
minatiue.



Diuido, partior. To diuide. 



Diuitiæ, opes ampl&ecedil; fortunæ. Riches. 



Do, dono. To giue. 



Doceo, alicuius rei cognitionem alteri trado. to teach, and somtime to shewe and to declare, to warne 
and to ascertaine. 



Dodrans, vnciæ nouem. Nine ounces. 



Doleo, tristis sum. To be sorowfull. 



Domo, mansuetum facio. To tame. 



Domus, ædificium ad habitandum factum. An house. 



Duco, notum est. To leade, to mary, to accounte.



Dulcedo, suauitas. Swetenes. 



Dux, qui vel quæ ducit aliquem. A guide, Man or
Woman. 



E.

Ecquis, Whether any. 



Edo, comedo. To eate. 



Edo. i. emitto, & quasi extra do. To set out, and to 
euulgate, and sometime to exhibite and shewe: as 
Edere spectacula. Edere animam. Is to dye, the
signification of it in all other phrases may be reduced 
to the first signification.



Edoceo, diligenter doceo. Throughlie or perfectlie to
teache.



Effata, sunt vltimæ precationes augurum, post fi­
nem auspiciorum extra vrbem dictæ. The pray­
ers that Southsaiers saide, after notes taken of birds
flienge, before they entred the Citie. 



Egeo, careo To neede. 



Elephas, elephantus, animal fama notum. An Elephante. 



Elis, ciuitas Archadiæ A citie in Arcadia, or a coun­
trey in Peloponnesus.



Emineo, præ aliis appareo, vel excello. To appeare
before others, and to passe them. 



Emo, comparo, mercor. To buie. 



Ensis, gladius. A sworde. 



Epasco. To eate vppe, to consume with feedinge, and 
to leaue nothinge.



Epulum, quasi edipulum, ast celebre conuiuium. A 
banket or feaste



Eques, homo equo insidens. An horseman, or hee or
shee that rideth.



Eremus, locus desertus. A desert or Wildernes.



Eripio, extra rapio. To pull out. 



Esurio, famem patior. To hunger. 



Euentus, euentum, quod casu aut fortuna nobis euenit. Happe, or that that commeth to passe. 



Excludo, extra claudo. To shutt out. 



Excubiæ, vigiliæ diurnæ & nocturnæ Watchinges  
and Wardinges. 



Exculpo, perfectè scalpo, vel scalpendo conficio. 
To carue, to graue, to cut out, to scratche out, as Ocu­
lum exculpe. to wreste or wringe out, as, Verum ex­
culpere. 



Excurro, extra curro, vel pre&ecedil;curro. To runne out, 
or to out runne before, to amount to a greate deale, 
to make an outerode, or an excursion. 



Excequiæ, funebre officium The ceremonies of the bu­
riall. 



Excuso, extra culpam reddo. To excuse. 



Excutio, eiicio, emitto. To smite out. 



Exlex, sine lege viucus. A lawlesse man, or woman. 



Expergiscor, euigilo. To awake. 



Experior, tento, vel tentor. To proue, or be proued.



Explico, extendo, & declaro. To streatche out and
to declare.



Exta, proprie cor, iecur, & pulmo dicuntur. The in­
traiels. 



Extorris, exul. A banished Man or Woman.



Exul, qui vel quæ exulat. A banished man or wo­
man.



Exuo, exoluo, denudo. To put of, to vnclothe. 



Exuuiæ, ab exuendo. The thinges that we put of. 



F.

Facies, A face. 



Facio, aliquid ago. To make. 



Facesso, facio, vel eo ad faciendum. To make or to go
to make.



Fallo, decipio. To deceaue. 



Fames, edendi cupiditas. Hunger. 



Far, Once a generall worde for anye kinde of graine or 
corne, as triticeum far, hordeaceum, siligineum, &c., 
But nowe it signifieth one certaine kinde called Ador,
which is breade corne.



Farcio, saturo, impleo, pinguefacio, sagino. To stuffe,
to fill, to satisfie, make fatte.



Fas, pium, relligiosum, & dignum fatu. Lawefull, right, godlie, and worthy the telling.



Fascis, lignorum aut alicuius rei congeries. A fagot. 



Fasti, libri in quibus totius annires populi Roma­
ni scriptæ continebantur, & caus&ecedil; festiuitatum 
explicabantur. A Register for the order of thinges
for the whole yeare, Fasti dies, were daies wherein
the iudges mighte giue sentence without offence of the
Gods, with these three solemne wordes of the lawe,
Do, dico, addico. Nefasti dies, were three con­
trarie daies. 



Fateor, annuo, concedo. To graunt and assent vnto.



Fatisco, deficio, aut defatigor. Abundantly to gape 



Fatiscor, fessus sum to be wearye. 




to faint and to be weake.



Faueo, recte alicui opto. To fauour. 



Fel, purgamentum sanguinis. The galle. 



Feri&ecedil;, dies cessationum ab opere. Holy daies, or time
of pastime vsed. 



Ferio, percutio. To strike. 



Fero, To beare, or to suffer, to leade, or tell, to giue, 
to couet, to aduaunce, to bring forthe, to haue, to
take awaie, to obtaine, to aske aduise, as Pompeius
tulit ad populum.



Ferueo, valde caleo. To be hote. 



Feruesco, calesco. To wexe hote. 



Ficus, arbor vel morbus. A figge tree, or a certaine
bile rising in the fundament.



Fides, constantia in omnibus rebus. Faith and truth.



Fido, fiduciam & spem habeo. To haue trust.



Figo, To fasten, to plant, to smite with arrow or suche
like.



Filum, illud subtile quod ex lino lanaue trahendo
ducitur. A thredde. 



Filix, herba sine caule, sine flore, sine femine, Ferne
wherof there bee two kindes, as in Herbaries
you shall see. 



Fimus, letamen & excrementa animalium, quibus 
agri stercorantur, Dunge. It is also Fimum in
the neutre gendre. 



Findo, disseco, dissindo. To cleaue. 



Fingo, formo. To fashion. 



Finis, extremitas, siue terminus in vnaquaque re. 
An ende. 



Fio, efficior. To be made 



Flaueo, flauus sum. To be yellowe. 



Flecto, inclino, volno, duco, moueo. To bow, to moue, 
and to cause to folowe.



Fleo, lachrymor. To weepe. 



Flo, spiro. To blowe. 



Flos, dictus qui ex arboribus vel herbis colligitur. 
A flower. 



Fluo, decurro, proprie vt liquores. To flowe. 



Fodio, terram eruo. To digge. 



Follis, instrumentum quo attrahitur atque emittitur
ventus. A paier of bellouse. 



Fons, scatebra. A welle. 



Forceps, instrumentum quo tenetur aliquid. A paier 
of tongues. 



Forfex, instrumentum sartorium, quo aliquid scin­
ditur. A paire of Scissers. 



Fors, fortuna, casus. Happe. 



Forum, à ferendo, quia lites & venalia illuc feran­
tur. The iudiciall place, and then it is named Fo­
rum iudiciale:: or the market place, and is called
Forum venale. 



Frango, rumpo, destruo. To breake. 



Frenum, vel frœnum, instrumentum quo equum in­
sessor coercet. A bridel. 



Frico, scalpo. To rubbe. 



Frigeo, frigidus sum. To be bolde. 



Frugi, indeclinable omnis generis, vtilis, necessa­
rius, frugalis. Good, profitable and thriftie.



Frugis, eius quod ex terr&ecedil; fructu in alimoniam
vertimus. Of corne or puls. Some make the nomina­
tiue hereof Fruges and some Frux, the foremoste
is not to be misliked.


Fruor, delectationem, & fructum capio, & alor. To 
take pleasure, fruite, and profitte of, and to be feadde.



Fundo, liquefacio vel liquidum spargo. To melte, or 
to powre.


Fugio, vito, currendo relinquor. To flee from, to auoide.


Fulcio, sustineo, munio. To vnderproppe, and to shore.



Fuga, fugiendi actus. Fleing, or runninge away.



Funis, restis. A rope. 



Fur, qui vel quæ alteri subtrahit. A Man or Wo­
man theefe. 



Furfur, purgamentum farinæ. Branne, or scurfe. 



Furo, insanio. To be madde. 



Fustis, baculus. A clubbe. 



G.

Gabii, Volstorum vrbs. A towne in Italie. 70. miles
from Rome. 



Gallia, Europæ pars, sita intra Pirenæos montes, in­
ter Hispaniam Germaniamque & duo Maria,
Oceanum Britannicum & mare nostrum. Fraunce. 



Garamas, Libyæ incola. A certaine inhabitaunte of
Afrike. 

An alternate spelling for "Africa," not independently bearing the sense of the country itself, according to the OED.




Gargarus, vnus ex collibus montis Idæ A very high
toppe of the hill Ida. There is also a towne of that
name at the foote of the same hille. 



Gaudeo, l&ecedil;tor To reioice. 



Gelu, proprie glacies. Frost or Ise.



Genu, curuatur a qua crus & femur committuntus. 
A knee. 



Gero, porto. To beare. 



Gibbus, & gibber, solidus in dorso tumer. A iubbe 
or a bunche. 

"iubbe" takes the expected sense of the OED "jibbe" or "gibbe."




Gigas, vir altissimæ statur&ecedil;. a Giant. 



Gigno genero. To begett. 



Gingiber, herba in Arabia nascens. Ginger. 



Glisco, Cresco, augeor, inualesco. To increase, and 
growe, to wexe stronge, to wexe fatte, or much to de­
sire, and sore to couet. 



Glis, animal muri simile. A dormouse. 



Gluten, glutinum, aut colla. Glue. 



Gorgon, nomen mulieris. A certaine terrible woman
 



Gradior, eo, incedo, progredior. To go. 



Græcia, the countrie of Grece, a greate peece of Eu­
rope, which is now vnder the Turke, 



Graiugena, Græcus. A Gretiane borne. 



Grando, gutta aquæ in aere congelata. Haile. 



Grates, gratiæ relat&ecedil; pro accepto beneficio. Thanks. 






Grex, pecudum multitudo. A flocke. 



Gryps, animal pennatuum, omni ex parte leoni simile.
A Griffyon. 



Grossus, ficus abortiua qu&ecedil; non maturescit. A rathe
ripe figge. 



Gruo, vt grues, gruere dicuntur. To cry like a crane. 



Grus, auis nota. A Crane. 



Gummi, liquor glutinosus ex arboribus resudans. Gumme. 



Gurgulio, pars gutturis a naribus ad pulmonem, vel
animal. The Wesande, or a Wesle.


H.

Habeo, possideo, teneo. To haue. 



H&ecedil;reo, arcte alicui rei infigor. To cleaue vnto. 



Hæres, qui succedit in hæreditatem alterius. An Heire. 



Halec, piscis qui sola aqua nutritur. A herring. 



Heros, vir illustris, & nobilis, A noble man, a man
of greate excellencie in worthie factes, and therein 
more like a god then a man.



Hesperus, serotina stella. The euening Starre. 



Heteroclitum, nomen secus quàm declinationum
canones poscunt flexum. A word declined otherwise
then the bare rules of the declensons doe require. 



Haurio, extraho humorem, & educo ex profundo
aliquo loco. To drawe. 



Hilaris, vel hilarus, iucundus, l&ecedil;tus. Mery. 



Hippomanes, uirus ab equa collectum, vel carun­
cula in fronte pulli equini, nominem ad insani­
am redigens. Poison to procure loue withal, or a little
piece of fleshe growing in the coltes forehead when it
is first foled. 



Hirundo, auis notissima. A swallow. 



Histrix, animal exherinaceorum genere. A porcupike. 



Homo, notæ significationis. A Man or Woman. 



Honor, vel honos, est reuerentia quam alicui ex
uibemus in virtutis testimonium. Honour, Worship 



Hordeum, ab horrore, quoniam hordeo quam frumen
to arista est mordacior. Barlye. 



Hospes, qui vel quæ ad hospitium recipit, aut reci­
pitur, & capitur pro peregrino. An hoste or an 
hostes, or a gest, man or woman. 



Hostis, inimicus, vel peregrinus. An enemye. 



Huber, fertilis, abundans, & mamma pecoris & ho­
minis. Pleentiful, or a dugg, or the vdder of any beast. 



Humus, tetra humefacta. The grounde. 



Hydrops, aqua intercus. The dropsie. 



Hyems, bruma. Winter. 



I.

Iaceo, decumbo. To lye. 



Iacio, Emitro, ac vi impello, To caste, to whurle,
to leye, as iacere fundamentum, or by translation it is to make a beginninge. Iacio, is somtime to 
spredde abroade by rumore, and sometime to ob­
iect againste one with an accusatiue, with this præ­
position in. 
 


Iaspis, lapis preciosus. A greene preciose stone, wher
of there be diuers kindes & degrees of colours di­
uers. 



Ico, ferio, percutio. To strike, to smite, as Icere
colaphum. Icere fœdus. Is to strike vppe a bargain. 



Icon, imago. An Image 



Ida, mons altissimus Troicisoli. An hill in the coun­
trey of Troye. 



Idus, dies qui diuidant mensem. In March, May, Iune,
and October, it is the .15. day, in the rest the .13. 



Iecur, hepar. The liuer. 



Ignis, vnum ex quatuor elementis. Fyre. 



Illex, qui sine lege viuit. A lawles body, man or wo­
man 



Imber, agmen aquarum largius ex nubibus effusum. 
A shooure. 



Imbrex, canalis, vel regula curua & obtorta, pe­
quam imber defluit, a gutter tile. 



Immineo, insto. To hange ouer. 



Impetis, violentiæ, inuasionis. Of violence, and boy­
steousnes. 


Incesso, accuso, impero. To accuse, to prouoke, to re­
uile, to inuade, and enter into. 



Incido, ferio, seco. To cut, to graue in. 



Incido, in aliquid, vel super aliquid cado, To fall 
into, by happe, to runne into, as Incidi in errorem., 
and sometime to happen or to chaunce. 



Incipio, inchoo, To begin, to take in hande, to en­
terprise. 



Inculco, eadem sæpius iterando ingero. Often to repeate 



Indo, impono. To put in. 



Indoles, facilis significatio futur&ecedil; probitatis. To­
wardenes, or likely disposition. 



Indulgeo, obsequor. To set much by, and to giue to. 



Induciæ, pax in paucos dies. A truce. 



Inermus, vel Inermis, qui armatus non est. Vnar­
med. 



Infans, homo per &ecedil;tatem nondum sciens fari. A babe. 



Inferiæ, sacrificia quæ inferis soluuntur, sacrifise
done vnto spirites in hell, where of Inferiae facere, 
is Manes sacrificiis placare, that is, to celebrate
Obites, & Obsequies. 



Inficias, negationem se vel debere quod actor pos­
cit, vel commisisse quod accusator obijcit. A de­
niall, and it foloweth onely the verbe Eo. 



Inficio, intingo, vitio ceu maculo. To dye, or to in­
fecte. 



Ingruo, inuado, impetum facio. To giue an onset, and 
to inuade. 



Iniussu, absque autoritate, & temere sine iussione. 
Without bidding. 



Irascor, ira stimulor. To be angry. 



Ismarus, mons Thraci&ecedil;, asper & incultus ex vna par­
te, ex alia fertilis vinetis & oliuetis A certain




hill in Thracia so named. 



Insidiæ, dolosa expectatio a hominem aggredien­
dum, fallacia. A lieng in waite for, or a deceiet. 



Instar, significat vel similitudinem vel æquipara­
tionem & mensuram. Like, or as bigge, or the I­
mage. 



Intelligo, capio. To vnderstande. 



Interpres, qui authores declarat, aut aliquid ex
lingua in linguam transfert.  An interpreter, man
or woman, or a translatour. 



Inuidia, Mœror ex aliena prosperitate, Enuie,
sorowe for another mans welfare, or els the euill
will and spite of a man. 



Iocus, est quidam lepor & festiuitas in verbis. A 
mery scoffe. 



Iter, itio, actus eundi. A iourney. 



Iubar, sol, vel ipsius splendor. The Sunne beame. 



Iubeo, impero. To commande. 



Iudex, qui vel quæ iudicat. A iudge, hee or shee. 



Iugeris, agri tantum quantum ab vno pari aut iugo
boum vno die arari potest. Plinius. Wee call it
an acre. The authors doe vary in the measure of it.
For commoditye of the nominatiue and other cases
wee may vse Iugerum. 



Iungo, cumulo, & quasi in vnum ago. To
ioine. 



Iugum, vertex, siue cacumen montis, The toppe of
an hille. It is also a yoke, or a yoke of oxen, that 
is a couple. By metaphore it is a seruitude or a bon­
dage. It is also a weauers beame, or a paire of gallowes
such as for ignomini the Romaines went vnder. Tribus
hastis iugum fit, humi fixis duabus, superque as
transuersa vna deligata. 



Iuno, dea, Iouis vxor. The Goddesse, Iupiters wife. 



Iuro, iuramentum facio. To sweare. 



Ius, quod natura, aut ciuitas, aut gens iubet, & li­
quor eorum quæ coquuntur. The law and right, 
and the brothe of any thinge sodden. 



Iussu, imperio, iussione. by commaundement. 



Iusta, idem quod exequiæ  



Iustitium, iuris dicendi intermissio. No terme. 



Iuuenis, qui adolescentium excessit ætatem One com­
men to mans age. 


Iuuentus, ætas iuuenilis. Man state. 



Iuuo, auxilium do. To helpe. 



L.

Labes, hiatus, macula, dedecus. A great shape, a
spotte, a dishonour or reproche. 



Labor, vel labos, opera, defatigatio. Laboure and
toile, painstaking, some time it is miserie, calamitie,
perill, daunger, trauaile. 



Lac, succus maternus, quo animalia nutriuntur. Mylke. 



Lacesso, vexo, incito, prouoco. To trouble, to pro­
uoke. 



Lacio, in fraudem duco. To allure, or to entise. 



Lactes, graciliora intestina. The smal guttes. 



Lacto, lac emitto, vel per blanditias decipio. To
giue milke, or to deceaue. 



Lacus, locus profundus cum aquis perpetuis ibidem
natis, qui efficit riuos. A Lake, a weare, or a
meyre. 



Lædo, verbo factone aliquem offendo, To hurte. 



Lelaps, nomen cuiusdam e canibus Actæonis. One of
Acteons dogges called Lelaps, for spedy furiousenes
For Lælaps signifieth a whourlwinde, a tempest and a
storme. 



Lambo, lingua lingo. To licke. 



Lampas, ignis aut solis splendor. A fire, or bright­
nes of the Sunne, or a lampe. 



Lanista, qui domi gladiatores docet, & populo ven­
dit. A Maiester of defence 



Laquear, pars superior cubiculi parum conuexa. 
A vauted roofe of a parlare 



Laser, herba quædam, & succus qui ex culmo laser
pitij exudat. The Herbe out of the which commeth
the iusse that the Apothecaries do call Asa dulcis
& Belzoe, or Belzoin, The common people called it
Beniamin. 



Lauo, aqua purgo. To wasche. 



Lateo, abscondor, non compareo. To lurke, or to bee
hidden. 



Laurus, genus arboris. A baye tree. 



Lebes, vas æneum. A calderone, or a panne. 



Lecythus, ampulla oleara. A box for oile and oint­
ment. It is taken also for eloquence in writing. 



Lego, notum est. To reade. 



Lemures, laruæ nocturnæ, & terrificationes ima­
ginum. Hobgoblines, or night spirites. 


Leo, animal ferox. A Lyon. 



Leo, imprimo, formo. To imprint, to forme Abusiuum. 



Lethum, mors, interitus. Death. 



Liberi, pignora, Children. One Sonne or one Daugh­
ter may be called Liberi, and so maye Neuewes
and their successours. 



Libet, placet. It pleaseth. 



Libs, ventus Aphricus. The southwest winde by west. 



Licet, fas est. It is lawfull. 



Lichen, herba, vel grauissimum morbi genus. Liuer­
wort, the Apothecaries calle it hepatica. It is also 
the kinde of leprie, called a saucefleame, in latine 
Impetigo. 



Lien, splen. The mealte. Dicitur & lienis in nomi­
natiuo. 



Ligur, incola Liguriæ. An Italian of the countrey
of Liguria. 



Limax, testudo & coclea terrestris. The shelled
snaile, and the dewe snaile. 


Limus, vestis genus ab vmbilico ad pedes, ceu lu­
tum, aut cœnum mollius. 
A kinde of garment, or 
els slime or
mudde. 






Lingo, limbo, id est aliquid lingua molliter tango. To licke. 



Lino, aliquid alicui rei superinduco. To dawbe. 



Linquo, committo, pecco To leaue. To trespasse. 


Linter, nanicula è cauata arbore facta. A cockboate. 



Linx, animal maculosum, acutissime videns. Our
men call this beast an Ounce. 


 
Liquefio, liquesco. To be molten. 



Liquor, liqueo. Idem. 



Liueo, liuidus sum, id est sordidus. To be wanne, or
filthye. 



Lixa, coquus in exercitu, vel qui sequitur quæ­
stus gratia. The scolion that waiteth on an army. 


Locri, vrbe in Brutijs. A towne in Italye. 



Locus, proprie illud quod aliquid continet. A place. 



Logos, sermo, ratio, verbum. Speache, reason, a worde. 



Loquor, verba qualiacunque profero, To speake 



Luceo, lucem emitto. To be light. 



Ludo, ludum exerceo, iocor. To play, or to sporte. 



Lues, cum in vrbe aut in agro febris, aliudue mor­
bi genus, homines aut pecora, aut vtrosque corrum­
pit. A commune disease or moriene. 



Lugeo, To bewaile, or lament a thinge, or els absolut­
lie to mourne, and somtime to be a mourner in ap­
arrell. 



Luo, soluo, pœnas do. To redeme, to clense, to pay for. 



Lustra, habitacula ferarum. Dennes of wilde beastes. 
or bordell howses, and petie typplinge houses of
baudrye. 



M.

Menalus, mons quidam Arcadiæ. An hille of that
name in Arcadia. 



Magnes, lapis ferrum attrahens. A stone that draw­
eth yron vnto it. It is called also Heraclius lapis,, or 
Sideritis. 



Maiores, aui, abaui, proaui, attaui, tritaui, & qui­
cunque ante hos in infinitum. Our Auncesters. 



Malo, magis, velim. To will rather. 



Mando, comedo, vel committo. To eate, or to commit. 



Maneo, fisto, & expecto. To tarry, or to tary for. 



Manes, dij inferi inter numina læua. Sprites or 
Deuils. 


Manubiæ, qu&ecedil; manu capiuntur ab hostibus. Spoiles
taken in warres. 



Manus, membrum notum. An hand. 



Mapalia agrestes cas&ecedil; Sheepecotes, or smal cotages. 



Mare, pelagus. The Sea. 



Margo, cuiusque rei extremitas. The brinke or skirt
of any thing, or the banke of a riuer or Sea. 


Marmor, lapidis genus. Marble. 



Mars,deus belli. The name of the God of warre. 



Martyr, testis. A witnesse, man or woman. 



Mas, vir. A man. 



Massicus, mons Campaniæ, optimi vini ferax. An 
hill in that parte of Italye that is called Campa­
nia, fruitefull of pleasant wines. 



Mater, nota est significatio. A Mother. 



Medeor, do medelam. To cure. 



Medicor, medeor, remedium adfero. Idem 



Meio, mingo. To pisse. 



Mel, liquamen dulce. Honye. 



Meleager, vel meleagrus, Oenei Atoli&ecedil; regis fi­
lius. A mans name. 



Menda, & mendum, error, erratum, A faulte. 



Menses, mulierum profluuium. Womens flowers. 



Mensis, tempus lunæ curriculo confectum. A moneth. 



Mereor, aliquid facio, quamobrem dignus sum ob­
tinere pr&ecedil;mium, vel pœnam pati. To deserue. 



Meridies, dies medius. Noone, or the noone steede. 



Metior, pondero, mensuro, considero. To measure. 



Meto, seco, amputo, herbam, vel segetem. To mowe 



Metuo, timeo. To feare. 



Metuor, timeor. To be feared. 



Meus. Myne. 



Mico, fulgeo cum motu vel tremore. Often with
certaine intermissions to shine, and likewise to bee
moued, to put forth fingers to him with whom we
play wil put forth, which is called Micare digitis. 



Miles, qui vel qu&ecedil; militiam exercet, A Warrier,
a souldior. 



Mingo, vrinam facio. To pisse, to make water. 


Min&ecedil; metus uncussiones per verba aut signa. 
Threateninges. 



Minores, posteri, etiam post trinepotes futuri. Our 
successours. 



Misceo, To mingle, to serue drincke, somtime to tro­
bil. 



Misereor, misericordia assicior. To take pitie on. 



Miteo, ad aliqueum do. To sende. 



Mœnia murus vrbis. The walles of a towne, and fi­
gurately the towne it selfe. 



Mœreo tristor, dolore afficior, To be heauie, sad, 
in a dumpe or a mourninge. 



Monoptoton, nomen non flexum, sed carens omni
casu preterquam vno, & eo obliquo. A noune ha­
uing one termination, and that in one oblique case. 



Mons, terræ tumor altissimus. An hille. 



Mordeo, dentibus l&ecedil;do. To bite. 



Morior, è. vita discedo. To die. 



Mos, vit&ecedil; institutum consuetudine firmatum. A 
custome. 



Mulceo, lenio. To asswage. 



Mulgeo, lac e mammis exprimo. To milke. 



Mulier, qu&ecedil; non est virgo. A Woman. 



Mulsum, potus ex vino & melle, A certaine wine
confect with honie. 



Multiplico, adaugeo. To multiplie, to encrease. 



Munia, onera legi debita, & officia qu&ecedil; publice
pr&ecedil;stantur. A dutie or office. 



Mus, exiguum animal. A Mowse. 






N.

Nanciscor, acquiro. To get, and to obtaine. 



Nascor, orior, in mundum venio, To be borne. 



Natales, conditio sanguinis & famili&ecedil;. The degree
of bloud and gentree, as generosi natales, natales 
obscuri. It is also taken for yeares. Sex mihi na­
tales ierant, There were passed vi. yeares. It is 
also vsed for the origine or first springe of thinges. 



Natalis, dies alicui natalis. A birthe date. 



Natrix, serpens aquaticus. A water serpent that 
with poison infecteth the water. 



Natu, &ecedil;tate, partu. By age, or by birth. 



Neco, quacunque re te occido. To kill. 



Necto, ligo, coniungo, To knitt. 



Negligo, contemno, non curo. Not to passe on. 



Nefrens, porculus per &ecedil;tatem fabam frangere non­
dum potens. A yonge pigge. 



Nigreo, niger fio. To becum blacke. 



Nemo, nullus homo. No body, man or woman. 



Neo filum torqueo, To spinne 



Neuter, Neither of bothe. 



Neruus, motus sensusque instrumentum. A sinowe. 



Nexo, ligo vel necto. To bynde. 



Nicticorax, coruus nocturnus. A night Rauen. 



Nideo, splendeo. To shine. 



Nihil, rei cuiusuis priuatio. Nothinge. 



Nihilum, rei cuiusuis priuatio. 



Nil, vide nihil. 



Nitor, conor, ago sedulo. To go about, to endevour. 



Niueo, est oculorum & aliorum membrorum nisu
aliquid conari. To giue a token with the eyes, to 
winke, to endeuour. 



No, nato. To swimme. 



Noceo, malum infero. To hurt or to harme. 



Noctu, nocte. By night. 



Nolo, renuo, non volo. To nill. 



Non&ecedil;, quæsi nou&ecedil;, propter initium obseruationis.
Erant autem in Martio, Maio, Iunio, & Octobri,
sex illi dies qui calendas sequebantur, in reli­
quis quatuor. The names of a moneth. 



Nosco, rem certam habeo. To knowe. 



Noster. Oures. 



Nostras, Of our country, secte, or fashion. 



Notus, ventus meridionalis, quem nos austrum
appellamus, The south winde. 



Nubes, vapor humidus sublime egressus. A cloude. 



Nubo, viro trador. To be maried to a man, For it is
in the Womans partes onely. 



Nugæ, cum nihil agimus. Trifles. 



Nullus, Noone. 



Nundinium, dies & conuentus status rerum mer­
catui. A faire. 



Nuo, A verbe not much in vse, the compoundes there
of be commonly receaued, and it signifieth to nodde. 



Nupti&ecedil;, legitima coniunctio maris & fœminæ in 
vit&ecedil; societatem. Mariage. 



Nurus, filij vxor. A daughter in lawe. 



O.

Obdo, oppono, siue appono. To sett against. 



Obex, obiectum aliquod, vel obstaculum, vt pessu­
lum, sera. A barre or stoppe. 



Obliuiscor, e memoria aliquid excidere sino. To 
forgette. 



Obes, qui vel qu&ecedil; traditur in fidem alteri. An 
hostage or pledge, man or woman. 



Occido, To fall, or perishe, and to bee slaine. 



Occiput, posterior pars capitis. The hinder parte of 
the Heade. 



Occludo, claudo. To shutte. 



Occulo, abscondo, abdo To hide. 



Odor, vel odos, quasi olor ab oleo, est autem infe­
ctus aer. A sauour. 



October, mensis octauus a martio, The tenth moneth
in our year called Octobre. 



Oleaster, olea siluestris. A certaine shrubbe like the
Oliue tree. the Greekes call it the wilde Oliue, or
the grounde oliue, for the lownesse. 



Oleo, odorem spiro, & emitto, To giue a smell, &
that indifferentlie so that the differences bee made
with bene or male. 



Olfacio, odoror, To smell, or to sauour a thinge, 
by translation it is to perceaue, and finde, to foresee. 



Omen, augurium quod fit ore. Halsoninge and fore­
speaking.

"Halsoninge" antedates the earliest OED citation (1587).




Omnis, Euery one. 



Onus, pondus alicui iniunctum. A burden. 



Onyx, vnguis, & gemma. The naile of a mans honde, 
a preciouse stone white lyke a naile, the hawe in a 
mans eye. 



Operio, tego. To couer. 



Opis, adminiculi, pr&ecedil;sidij. Of ayde and helpe. 



Opifex, qui opus facit. A workeman. 



Oppango, circumfigo, circumplanto. To fasten or to
ioine vnto, or to plante aboute. 



Opus opuntis, nomen ciuitatis in Locris. A townes
name in the countrie of Locris. 



Orbis, circulus mundi, res rotunda. A Globe or a
bowle, and therof the world is called orbis, because
it is euery way rounde like a bowle. 



Ordior, incipio. To beginne or to commence 



Ordior, id est texo, To weaue. 



Oriens, regio orientalis. The Easte. 



Orior, nascor, surgo, incipio. To springe, to rise, to beginne. 



Orontes, nomen viri, & fluuij. A mans name, or a
certaine riuer in Syria, now called Tarfaro. 



Os oris, concauum illud intra quod sunt dentes &
linguia. A mouth. 



Os ossis, solidamentum corporis durum. A bone. 



Ostreum, conch&ecedil; species. An Oister. 






Ouum, An egge. 



P.

Paciscor, pactum facio, conuenio. To make a bar­
gaine, to fall to an accorde, sometime to promise. 



Palleo, parum albeo. To be pale. 



Pampinus, vitis ramus. A Vine branche. 



Pando, aperio, patefacio. To open. 



Pango, paciscor, cano, iungo, plango, figo. To bar­
gaine, to singe, to ioine, to waile, to fasten. 


Panis, quo pascimur. Breade. 



Panther, & panthera, animal quoddam pardo simi­
le. A certaine beast. 



Papauer, genus herbæ soporiferum. Popie. 



Papyrus, charta qua vtimur in literis scribendis 
A certaine sorte of rushe growing in the marisshe
of Egipte somwhat hyghe, whereof they made a
kinde of papire and called it Papyrus, whereof our 
papire now is called likewise. 



Paradisus, locus amœnissimus. A place of pleasure. 



Partio, diuido, & quasi partes facio, To parte or 
diuide.



Pareo, abstineo ab vltione. To spare. 



Pareo, obedio To obey. 



Pario, prolem produco. To bring forth. 



Parens, pater aut mater, auus, auia. A Father or 
Mother, A Graundefather, or Graunde mother. 



Pernassus, mons in Phocide, duos vertices habens. 
An hill in Phocis a countrey of Greece. 



Parturio, cupio aut conor parere. To be towarde la­
bour. 



Pasco, nutrio. To feede, to nourrishe. 



Pascor, nutrior, alor, To be fedde. 



Passer, auis salacissima. A Sparrowe. 



Pateo,apertus sum. To be open. 



Patior, sustineo, tolero. To suffer or to abide. 



Patro, aliquid mali committo. To commit some euill. 



Patrucles, patruorum filij. Brothers children. 



Paueo, timeo. To feare. 



Pecten, instrumentum textorum, & dentatum. A 
combe, or a weauers sleye. 



Pecto, orno capillos To coame the heare. 



Pecus, cudis, oris, omne animal quod sub hominis
imperijs pabulo terræ pascitur. All cattell. 



Pedes, qui pedibus incedit, A footeman. 



Pedo, ventris crepitum facio. 



Pelagus, mare. The Sea(n) 



Pellex, mulier impudica. An Harlott. 



Pello, eijcio, remoueo. To driue or put away.



Penates, dij domestici, quod penes nos nati sunt. 
Householde Goddes. 



Pendeo, suspensus sum. To be hanged. 



Pendo, suspendo, vel pondero, æstimo, To hange, to
waye, to price. 



Penis, cauda, A taile, and at the laste is not taken
for a mans yarde. 


Penus, vel penum, omne esculentum, poculentum
quo homines vescuntur. All maner of victuall. 



Perago, perficio. To finishe and to perfect businesse. 



Perlego, totum lego. Wholy and thoroughly to reade. 



Percutio, ferio. To smite. 



Perdix, auis nota. A Partridche. 



Perdo, amitto. To leese. 



Perduellis hostis, An Enimie in the warres. 



Pergamus, ciuitas insignis Asiæ, in ditione Tro­
ianorum. The citie of the Troianes, otherwise cal­
led Ilium, or Ilion. 



Pergo, in re procedo, abeo. To go forewarde. 



Permissu, permissione, cum nemo aduersatur. By suf­
feraunce, with leaue and licence. 



Perpetior, multum cum labore ac dolore patior. 
Thoroughly to beare or suffer. 



Perplaceo, valde placeo, To please verie muche,  
or thorowlie to please. 


Persis, orientalis regio. The countrey of Persia. 



Pes, ima pars corporis qua gradimur. A foote. 



Peto, oro, obsecro, volo. To aske. 



Phaleræ, ornamenta equorum. Horse trappinges. 



Pharus, curris altissima in portu, quæ lucet naui­
gantibus. A watchetower. 



Phaselus, nauicula velox & oblonga. A Brigan­
dine. 



Philotis, nomen mulieris. A womans name. 



Phœnix, auis in oriente, a Phœnice o pennarum
colore dicta, toto orbe celeberrima, in Arabia
nascens, aquilæ magnitudine, Phœnix the birde. 



Phrix, vir Phrigiæ. A Troiane. 



Pietas, pius cultus. Godlines. 



Piget, dolet, seu molestum est. It yrketh. 



Pingo, formam alicuius rei ductis lineis repræsen­
to. To painte. 



Pinso, tundo, panem conficio. To smite with the beake
to beate in a mortar, as once thei did theyr graine, 
& thereof to bake. 



Pinus, arbor est picei generis, nucesferens omni­
um maximas, quas latini ineas uocant, A pine 
tree. 



Pier, herba. Pepper. 



Piscis, animal quod continue sub aquis degit. A 
Fishe. 



Pix, resina ex arboribus fluens. Pytche. 



Python, serpens e putredinenatus. A Serpent. 



Placeo, gratus sum. To please. 



Plagæ, retia rarior ad capiendas feras. Hunting nettes  
or wide meashed nettes to take beastes. 



Plaudo, manibus percutio, ac gestu l&ecedil;ticiam indi­
co. To clappe handes for ioye. 



Plebes, vel plebis, idem quod vulgus. The com­
mune people. 



Plecto, supplicio afficio, punio, ferio, To punnish 




to beate. 



Pleo, plenum facio. To fill. 



Plico, contraho, & rugas facio. To foulde or to pleite. 



Pluo, aquam dimitto. To raine. 



Plus, vox incrementi. More. 



Polleo, possum, valeo, To be able, to bee of powre, 
and somtime it is taken for to passe, or to bee better, or 
more profitable. 



Pons, asser vel quoduis aliud per quod super aquas
transimus. A bridge. 



Pono, colloco, constituo. To sett or to put. 



Pontus, mare. The Sea. 



Porticus, ampla domus propter repentinos imbres
deambulationis gratia ædificata. A galery, or an ambulatorie. 


Posco, peto. To aske and to require. 



Postis, latus portæ siue ianuæ. A post. 



Poto, bibo. To drinke. 



Præcordia, quæ exta separant ab inferiore visce­
rum parte. The Midderiffe. 



Præcurro, antecurro, siue cito anteco. To runne 
before. 



Pr&ecedil;lego, ante lego, vt solent præceptores suis
discipulis, To bee an Interpreter or a reader, and
somtime to cut or to saile by. 



Præmineo, præcello To excell other. 



Præsul, qui vel qu&ecedil; præest. Hee or shee that super­
intendeth. 



Præses, qui vel qu&ecedil; præsidet. Idem. 



Prandeo, prandium sumo, vel ante prandium cibum
sumo. To dyne. 



Precis, precationis, obsecrationis. Of praier, of peti­
cion. 



Premo, To presse, to be againste, and to vexe, to pur­
sue to be harde at hande with, to driue, to hide, 
to expell, to shutte, to deflowre, to kil, &c. 


Preneste, nomen vrbis. A towne in Italie. 



Pres, sponsor qui se obligat, id est fidei iustor in lite
nummaria. A suertie. 



Princeps, qui vel quæ principatum obtinet. The Prince or Princes. 



Primiti&ecedil; primi fructus ex agro percepti, qui deo
offeruntur, First frutes, of a mans groundes, or the 
firstlinges of anie other thinge. 



Problema, propositio interrogationem annexam
habeus. A demaunde 



Prodo, manifesto. To betraie, to make manifest. 



Proficiscor, eo alio. To go forthe. 



Proluo, multum siue multo temporelano. to al to wash. 



Promineo, procul appareo. To hange out in sight. 



Promo, profero, eloquor. To set abroach, or to vtter. 


Promptu, parare, sine mora. With readines or speede. 



Psallo, cano instrumento musico. To sing or to plaie
on an instrument. 



Puber, vel Pubes, proprie lanugo quæ maribus
decimoquarto anno, fæminis duodecimo circa
pudenda oriri incipit. Ripenes of age. 



Pudet, pudore afficior. It shineth. 



Puerasco, exacta infantia pueritiam inchoo. To wax
a childe. 



Pugil, qui vel qu&ecedil; pugnandi artem nouit. A cham­
pian, man or woman. 



Puluis & puluer, notum est. Duste. 



Punctus & punctum, minima indiuiduaque lineæ
pars. A pricke, or a point, a little centre 


Pungo, stimulo, morsum ac aculeum infigo. To prick 
or to stinge. 



Pumex, lapis cauernosus. A pummis stone. 



Pus, sanies, & quicunque humor in putredinem ver­
sus. Matter or core. 



Q.

Quæro, innestigo, interrogo. To seeke for, to search.
 


Quario, moueo, concutio. To shake. 



Quercus, An oke. 



Queror, lamentor. To complaine and lament. 



Qui, The which. 



Quies, vacatio a labore, aut cessatio a quouis ope­
re. Reast, it pertaineth to the body. Tranquillitas 
vnto the minde.



Quilibet, Eueryone, or whosoeuer ye will. 


Quinisco, caput inclino, moueo. To hange the head. 



Quisquili&ecedil;, purgamenta & quicquid ex arboribus surculorum foliorum aut florum minitim deci­
dit. Thinges of no waight. Thinges not worth, re­
garde, or chippinges. 



Quot. How many. 



R.

Rabula, homo futilis. A brawler, or 
a smaterer in the
lawe. 



Rado, cultro vel quauis re acuta decerpo. To shaue 



Ramex, ruptura, & distentio interstinorum. Burstnes. 



Rapio, per vim traho, aufero. To snatche awaie, 



Rastrum, instrumentum dentatum, quo vtimur in
fœnificio ad corradendum fœnum. A rake. 



Raucio, raucus sum, To be hoarse. 



Recido, retro siue iterum in eadem cado. To fal back­
warde, or to fall into the same againe. 



Recordor, rursus in mentem reuoco. To call to minde
againe. 



Reddo, acceptum vel ablatum restituo. To render or
to restore. 



Redoleo, odorem alicuius rei refero, vel multum
oleo. To beare the sauer of a thing, or to sauour strong­
lie, and by metaphore to resemble and to taste of. 



Refringo, iterum frango. To breake open. 



Rego, guberno. To rule or gouerne. 


Relego, rursus lego. To reade againe. 



Reminiscor, recordor, memini. To remember. 



Ren, viscus quoddam. The kidney. 



Renuo, refuto, reijcio. To refuse. 






Reor, arbitror, puto. To suppose. 



Repango, dissoluo, reiungo. To vnloose, to disiointe. 



Reperio, inuenio. To finde. 



Replico, dissoluo. To vnfoulde. 



Repetundarum, alienarum pecuniarum, de quibus
pr&ecedil;ses prouinciæ a prouincialibus accusatur,
si quas vi aut dolo expilauit. Of bribery and pil­
lage, or of extorsion. 



Repungo, iterum stimulo, vicem reddo. To pricke
againe. 



Res, omnia siue corporalia siue incorporalia com­
prehendit. A thinge. 



Rescio, rursum percipio. To knowe againe. 



Respuo, repudio, sperno. To refuse. 



Restis, funis vel lorum. A rope or a with. 


Resulto, resilio, reuertor, in contrarium salio, To 
rebounde. 



Rete, iustrumentum quo pisces capiuntur. A nette. 



Rex, nota est significatio. A kinge. 



Rideo, cachinno. To laughe. 



Ringo, os troqueo vt canes. To make an euill fauo­
red face like a narring dogge, and to vexe. 


Robur, species quercus durissim&ecedil;. An oke. 



Rodo, mordeo, comedo. To gnawe. 



Roma, vrbs Italiæ quondam a pastoribus condi­
ta, olim gentium domina cum floreret, quarta
& postrema Monarchia. Rome. 



Ros, humor qui sereno tempore è cœlo fluit. A dewe. 



Rostra, templum seu forum iudiciale, ante curiam
Hostiliam, in quo erat pulpitum ex quo concionari
solebant. The place where matters be declamed. 



Rudens, funis nauticus. A Cable. 



Rudo, grauiter sono vt afini. To cry like an asse. 



Rumpo, frango. To breake. 



Ruo, cado. To fall. 



Rus, locus extra vrbem, vbi agrisunt & vell&ecedil;. The countrey. 



S.

Sacer, quod venerabile. Holy. 



Sacerdos, deo dicatus ad sacrificia facienda. A 
priest or a Nunne. 



Sacro, deo dedico, sacrum facio. To dedicate. 



Sal, quo vtimur in cibis condiendis. Salte. 



Salio, salto, To leape, or to leape as brute beastes do
when the male couereth the female. 


Sallo, sale condio, ac conspergo. To salte, to powder, 
or to season with salte. 



Salto, To leape, or to daunce. 



Salum, mare, a sapore salis, The Sea. 



Salus, incolumitas. Health. 



Samnis, nomen gentis. A Samnite. 



Sancio, firmo, & proprie effuso sanguine per hostiæ
immolationem. To make sure, and to establishe. 



Sanguis, cruor qui ex vulnere spargitur. Bloode. 



Saphyrus, preciosus lapis. A Saphire. 



Sapientia, rerum diuinorum atque humanarum sci­
entia Wisedome. 



Sapio, saporem habeo. To haue a taste. 



Sarcio, purgo, reficio, integrum facio. To patche and 
amende. 



Sardonyx, A certaine preciouse stone. 



Satago, satis ago, laboro, solicitus sum. To do endeuour. 



Satrapas, princeps. A prince. 



Scabo, frico. To scratch, or to rubbe. 


Scalpo, sculpo & fodio vnguibus ac manibus. To 
claw, or to scratche. 



Scando, in altum tendo. To clime. 



Scindo, seco, findo. To cutt, or to diuide 



Scio, To knowe. 



Scobis & scobs, est id quod ab aliqua materia deci­
dit per serram, terebram, aut limam. Duste. 



Scriba, qui literas vel gesta, vel tabellas, & simi­
lia scribit alterius nomine. A Scribe or 
Notarie. 



Scribo, literas formo. To write. 



Scrobs, fossa aut puteus.  A ditche, or a pitte. 



Scurra, qui risum ab auditoribus captat, non ha­
bita ratione verecundiæ, aut dignitatis, A scoffer, 
a gesture, a parasite. 



Secerno, abiungo, separo. To diuide, to seperate. 



Seco, diuido. To cut. 



Sedeo, quiesco. To sitt. 



Seges, frumentum in spicis. Corne yet standing. 



Selego, seorsum colligo. To gather a part. 



Senecta vel senectus, senium, ætas. Olde age. 



Senex, senio confectus. An olde man. 



Senio, quod sex puncta continet. The sise, 



Senium, idem quod senecta.  



Semis, id est, semias, sex vnciæ dimidium assis. Halfe
a pounde, or the halfe of any whole summe. 


Sentio, aliquo sensu percipio, pro intelligo poni­
tur. To perceaue by some sence, or to vnderstande. 



Sentis, spina. A thorne. 



Sepelio, defunctum terra condo. To burie. 



Sepio, obstruo, circundo, munio. To compasse, to hedge.



Seps, serpens paruus. A little Serpent, after whose
stroke the membres doe rott. 



Sequor, abeuntem subsequor. To folow. 



Sermo, loquela. Speache. 



Ser, populus Asi&ecedil;. One of a certaine people in Asia
called Seres. 



Sero, semino, planto. To sow or plante, or to grafft, 
and somtime by translation to begette, by translation 
also we say serere bella, serere certamina. id est
mouere lites & puguas. 



Serpens, anguis. A dragon or a serpent, or a snake. 



Sensus & sensum, organum sentiendi, & quod mente
concipitur. Any of the fiue wittes, called the sen­
ses, or that the minde conceaueth, called a
meaning. 



Sibilus, est quidam stridor oris per angustam spi­




ritus emissionem, inter dentes fere. An hissing. 



Sido, descendo ad sedendum To pitche or to lie down. 



Siler, arbor quam vulgo salicem vocant. An osier,
with this difference Montanum, it signifieth a sim­
ple that the Apothecaries doe vse, in Latine called
Seceli Massiliense. 



Silex, lapis durissimus, vnde ignis excutitur. A flinte stone. 



Sinapis, & sinapi, herba est semen ferens, tanta a­
crimonia, vt lachrymas cieat comedenti. Sinute, 

"sinute" is unidentified, possibly Dutch.




Singultio grauiter tussio, & singultum emitto. To
sobbe. 



Sino, permitto. To suffer. 



Sinus & sinum, genus vasis sinuosi. A boul or a ship 
for milke or wine to drinke of. 



Siren, monstrum maris. A Mearemaide. 



Siser, herba cuius radix præcipue est in vsu. A per­
sneppe. 



Sifto, stare facio, To bring before. 



Stirps, truncus vel progenies. The stocke of a tree, 
or kindrede. 



Sitis, desiderium potionis. A thirst. 



Syndon, velum subtilissimum. Sendall. 



Synodus, conuentus. A councell congregate. 



Soboles, successio. An ofspringe. 



Socrus, vxoris vel mariti mater. A mother in lawe. 



Sodalis, eiusdem sortis socius. A felowe. 



Sol, qui Phœbus dicitur. The Sunne. 



Soleo, suctus sum. To be wount. 



Solium, sella regia, in qua reges ius dicentes sede­
bant. A throne or chaier of state. 


Soluo, quod ligatum erat dissoluo, ac enodo. To loose. 



Somnus, sopor quies. Sleepe. 



Sono, sonum facio. To sownde. 



Sorbeo, delutio quicquam molle. To suppe. 



Soror, notum est. A Syster. 



Spargo, late proijcio, ac passim iacto. To sparkle or 
sprinkle. 


Species, effigies, aromata, genus, visio. A forme, spice, 
the kinde of a thing, or an apparaunte. 

"apparaunte" bears a sense that is not obvious in the OED. 




Specio, video. To see. 



Specus, spelunca, vnde spectare licet. A denne to a­
waite a praie. 



Splen, lien, viscus quoddam. The mealte. 



Sperno, despicio, contemno. To despise. 



Spinus, agrestium prunorum arbor, A Sloe tree. 



Spondeo, sponte promitto. To promise, and some­
time to betroth. 



Sponsalia, promissio siue stipulatio futurarum nup­
tiarum. Betrothing with conditions taken. 



Spontis, natruæ & ingenij proprij. Of nature and owne disposition. 



Statuo, pono, colloco, erigo, To place, to sette vp, 
somtime to decree and appointe, somtime to dedicate 
and set before. 



Sterno, proijcio in terram To throw down or to spreade. 



Sterto, dormio, & somnum altum dormiendo capio 
To sleepe till we snorte. 



Stipis, & stipes, pecuniæ genus quod per capita col­
ligere solent. A money gathered by the polle for
the vse of the Gods, or for the poore, and therefore it
signifieth also a rewarde or a profite. 


Stirps, origo, progenies, soboles, A stock, a tribe, 
a descent, and somtime it is the bodie of a tree, idem
quod truncus. 


Sto, erectus sum, vel manco. To stande. 



Strepo, sonum facio. To make a noise. 



Strido, strepitum edo, To make a noise, a wissinge or
a crekinge. 



Strideo, facio stridorem, sonum violentum. To make
a great noise, or to gnashe with teeth. It is applied
also to wheeles, to dore hookes, to serpentes, to the 
Sea, and such other thinges.


Stringo, premo, arcto. To make straite, to pul, som­
time to strike. 



Struo, To builde, to pile vppe, and somtime to ende­
uoure, and to go about, or to sette in aray. 



Stultitia, imprudentia, stoliditas. Foolishenesse. 



Suadeo, hortor ad id quod intendo. To counsell. 



Suber, genus ligni quod nautis vtile est vt super
natent retia. A corke tree. 



Sublego, furto aliquid surripio. Privily to lese away. 



Suboleo, leuiter oleo, siue adoratus sensu leui­
ter percipio, To sauer or to smell a thinge a little, 
and by translation to be espied, and to be smelled out. 



Suffero, sustineo, patior. To susteine, or abide. 



Suesco, soleo. to be accustomed 



Sugo, spiritu attraho succum. To sucke. 



Sulmo, oppidum in Brutijs. A towne. 



Sum, To be. 



Sumo, multum, & pœne nimium mihi. To take. 



Supellex, res domestica. Householde stuffe. 



Supplico, humiliter & cum reuerentia precor. To 
entreate. 



Suppetiæ, auxilium, subsidium. Aide, helpe, succour 



Surgo, erigo me, To arise, somtime to springe or to
growe, or increase. It is also to arise by little and
little, as thinges do in buildinge. 


Sus, animal sordidum. A Boare, Sowe, or Hogge. 


T.

Taceo, sileo, non loquor. To keepe silence. 



Tædet, pertæsum est, displicet. It yrketh or warieth 


Tænarus, locus vmbrosus in radice Malex, pro­
montorij Laconi iuxta Spartam ciuitatem, in
quo quia hiatus magnus est, & strepitus quasi
progredientum sentitur, dixerunt veteres per
hunc esse descensum ad inferos. A promontorie
in Laconia, wherein is an entraunce to go downe
to Helle. 



Tagus, fluuius Lusitani&ecedil;, habens arenas aurear. A




certaine riuer in Portingale. 



Talio, vindicta, hostimentum Auengement, or like
for like. 



Talpa, animal captum oculis, muri simile. A Moule or Want. 


Tango, percutio. To tutche 



Tartarus, demissior inferni locus. Helle. 



Tantundem, &ecedil;que tantum. As muche. 



Tapes vel tapetum vel tapete, id est panni depicti
regimen, mire pictum varijs coloribus. A carpet 
or cloth of Arase. 



Taygetus, mons in Laconide, Baccho sacer, sub quo
Sparta & Amiclæ An hille in Laced&ecedil;monia,
where Sparta and Amiclæ the cities doe stande. 



Teges, vile stragulum, matta scirpea. A matte. 



Thebæ, nomen quarundam vrbium. the name of a 
citie in Egypte, and of an other in Boætia. you 
shall finde also in Authors Thebe and Theba. 



Thermæ, loca aquas habentia, aut natur&ecedil; sponte
calentes, aut fornace calefactas fundendi lauan­
diue vsibus seruata. Whoate bathes. 



Temno, sperno. To dispise 



Tempe, pulcherrimus ager in Thessalia, quem Peneus
alluit. A very faire fielde in Thessalia most plea­
saunt to beholde, and therfore appellatiuely it maye
be vsed for a place of delite, as Paradise and Eli­
sium is. There is also Tempe in Bœotia, called
Temnesia Tempe, another in Sicile named for
difference Helorix. The firste be called Thessala
Tempe. 

"appellatively" antedates the earliest OED citation (1613).




Tendo, expando. To stretche and to bende. 



Teneo, apprehendo. To holde. 



Tepeo in medio inter tepidum & frigidum sum, To be, warme. 



Tepesco, tepidus flo. To wexe hoate. 



Ternio, numerus ternarius. . The three. 



Tero, comminuo, consumo, tundo. To weare by dimi­
nishinge. 



Tesqua, loca ædita, aspera.  



Teucrus, Teucer, nomen proprium Troianorum re­
gis. A name of a certaine kinge of Troie. 



Trado, in potestatem alterius transfero. To deliuer
vnto a mother. 



Tros, nomen viri. A Troiane. 



Testis, qui vel qu&ecedil; testimonium profert. A witnes,
man or woman. 



Texo, telam struo ac paro. To weaue. 



Tignus, tignum, trabs qua varie disposita domus
extruitur. A rafter



Tonitrus & tonitru, nubis ict&ecedil; ceu potius dirup­
t&ecedil; sonus. Thunder. 



Torqueo, To writh, to wreaste, to winde or turne a­
bout, to gouerne, to torment, to spinne, to vexe and tro­
ble, to whurle, &c. 



Tot, So many, or many. 


Thorax, pectus, & pectoris munimentum. The breast 
and breastplate. 



Thrax, vir Thraci&ecedil;. A Thraciane. 



Thus, incensum, libamen quo deum veneremur, a­
liquando ipsa arbor. Frankencense, and the tree. 



Tibris, fluuius Itali&ecedil;  



Tibur, oppidum Italiæ.  



Tigris, animal velocissimum & truculentum. A
Tigre. 



Timeo, metuo. To feare. 



Timeor, metuor. To be feared 



Titubo, lingua vel pedibus vacillo. To stumble or 
stammer. 



Tollo, eleuo, subleuo. To lift vp, to bring vp as chil­
dren are by nursing, or else to sley and take away. 



Tondeo, crines vel lanam seco forcipe. To clippe 
or sheare. 



Tono, valde sono ac facio tonitrum. To thunder. 



Torpeo, languidus sum & remissus. To be sluggishe 
and weake. 



Torquis, circulus aureus, collique ornamentum. 
A chaine to adourne the necke. 



Torreo, vro, asso. To roste. 



Torrens, fluuius per pluuiam collectus A lake with
out springe, begunne by raine. 



Torres, lignum ardens vel adustum. A firebrande 



Tracto, traho vel sursum traho. To pull to draw
vp, or to handle by faire or foule meanes. 



Traho, vi ad me rapio ac duco. To drawe. 



Translego, legendo transcurro ac perlego. To reade
ouer. 



Tremo, commoueor, agitor. To tremble. 



Tres, Three. 



Tribus, progenies. A kinreade. 



Tric&ecedil;, capilli pedibus pullorum Gallinaceorum
inuoluti. Lettes or stoppes or hinderances of that,
that chicken so vsed, could but euill go. 



Triptoton, nomen quod tribus quibuscunque ca­
sibus inflectitur. A Noune declined with three ca­
ses. 



Trudo, manibus pedibusue impello. To thrust. 



Tu, Thou. 



Tuber, ditum a tumendo, & priore longa, terræ callus. A swellinge in any thinge, a musshrim, or 
that whereof the puffe is. 



Tucor, defendo. To defende. 



Tuor, video. To see. 



Tundo, decutio, pulso. To beate, or to knocke. 



Tussis, vehemens spiritus eruptio, ea quæ meatum suum obstruunt excutere conantis. The coughe. 



V.

Vado, eo. To go. 



Valeo, possum, validus ac sanus sum. To be in helth,
or to be able. 






Valuæ, sunt fores geminas habentes partes in se
coeuntes. A two leafed dore. 



Vannus, A vanne to wenowe corne with.
 



Vas vadis, vadimonium. A suretie in a matter of
death. 



Vas vasis, instrumentum ad aliquid capiendum ido­
neum. A vessell. 



Vates, poeta, & qui futura prædicit. A Prophet or 
Prophetesse. 



Vber, The adiectiue signifieth plentifull, abundant, 
copiouse. The substanctiue signifieth a pappe or a
dugge, or an vdder, 
and somtime it is founde for
plentifullnesse, as Vber agri, for fertilitas agri. 



Verberis, hoc non videtur defici vllo casu. vide
verber. 



Vectis, instrumentum quo clauditur ostium. A dore
barre. 



Veho, naui, plaustro, quadrupede porto. To carie. 



Vello, traho, extirpo. To pull or to plucke vp. 



Vendo, venundo, alieno. To sell. 



Væneo, vendor. To be solde. 



Venio, ad aliquem accedo. To cum. 



Venter, qui a pectore ad pubem terminatur. A belly. 



Venus, dea amoris, & venustatis. The Goddesse of
loue and beautie. 



Ver, anni pars temperatior. The spring time. 



Verber, instrumentum longum verberandi. Anye
thing that we beate withal as rodde, whippe, wande, 
or other, it signifieth also the stripe. 


Vergo, tendo, declino. To bende, to go, or to encline
some waie. 



Vermis, a vertendo, quia sese torquendo repit. A Worme. 



Verna, ex ancilla domi natus seruus. A bonde man
borne of a bonde woman at home. it is vsed adie­
ctiuely for that that is domesticall or not straunge,
as. vinum verna. 



Verres, porcus non castratus. An Hogge. 



Verro, purgo, traho. To swepe. 



Verto, muto, voluo. To tourne or to chaunge. 



Veruex, mas inter oues, cui adempti sunt testiculi. A Weather. 



Vescor, vtor cibo, & pasco. To eate. 



Vesper, idem quod Hesperus. It is called also ves­
perugo, and it is taken for the euening tide. 



Veto, prohibeo. To forbidde. 



Vicem, vicissitudinem. An interchaunge when turnes be. 



Video, oculis, intueor. To see. 



Vieo, ligo seu inflecto, To binde, or to bowe, Ther
of Vietores be called cuppers, qui vasa vinaria
religant 



Vigil, qui vel quæ vigilat. A watcher, man or woman 



Vincio, ligo. To binde. 



Vinco, supero. To ouercome. 



Vindex, qui vel qu&ecedil; vindicat. An auenger Man or
Woman. 



Vir notum est. A Man. 



Virgilius, poeta. A Poets name. 



Virgo, quæ non est passa virum. A Virgine. 



Vitrum, materia translucida, quæ ex arena & cinere 
fit Glasse. 



Virtus, ars recte beneque viuendi. Vertue or great
power. 



Virus, venenum, & grauis odor. Poison, or stenche. 



Vis, virtus, robur, fortitudo, natura, violentia. 
Strength, power, nature, violence. 



Viso, eo ad videndum. To go to see. 



Viscum, vel viscus. i. glutinum ad auecupium. Birde
lime. 



Viuo, vitam ago. To liue. 



Vlciscor, vindico. To auenge. 



Vnguis, duricies digitorum, tam in auibus cæteris­
que bestijs, quam in homine, A naile, an houe, and
a talaunt. 



Vocito, frequenter voco. Often to call. 



Volo, as, To flee, or to go a pase, as Nauis volati
Fama volat. But volo, vis, is to will or to bee
willinge. 



Voluo, verto. To roulle. 



Vomis vel vomer, nomen habet quod terram vo­
mat. The plowe teathe. 



Vomo, per os eijcio. To vomite or to parbrake. 



Vrgeo, premo, compello. To thrust. 



Vro, ardore aut frigore nonnunquam alia vilædo 
and by translation to hurte or to greue not. 



Vtor, vsum rei habeo. To vse. 



Vulgus, multitudo ignobilis. The base and
common
people. 



Vulpes, animal astutum. A Foxe or a Fixen. 



Vxor, viri coniunx. A Wife. 



FINIS INTERPRETATIONIS
omnium Nominum & Verborum
Grammatices Regiæ.






