



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 9 9 4

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )



The Fraternitye of 
Vacabondes.
As wel of ruflyng Vacabondes, as of beg­
gerly, of women as of men, of Gyrles as 
of Boyes, with their proper names and qualities.
With a description of the crafty com­
pany of Cousoners and Shifters.

Wherunto also is adioyned the .xxv. Or­
ders of Knaues, otherwyse called a Quartern of Knaues.
Confirmed for euer by Cocke Lorell.


(*)


The Vprightman speaketh.


Our Brotherhood of Vacabondes,
If you would know where dwell: 
In graues end Barge which syldome standes,
The talke wyll shew ryght well. 


¶ Cocke Lorell aunswereth.


¶ Some orders of my knaues also 
In that Barge shall ye fynde: 
For no where shall ye walke I crow, 
But ye shall see their kynde.


¶ Imprinted at London by Iohn Aw­
deley, dwellyng in little Britayne 
streete without Aldersgate.
1575.







¶ The Printer to the Reader.


THis brotherhood of Vacabondes,
To shew that there be such in deede: 
Both Iustices and men of Landes,
Wyll testifye it if it neede. 
For at a Sessions as they sat, 
By chaunce a Vacabond was got.

¶ Who promysde if they would him spare, 
And keepe his name from knowledge then:
He would as straunge a thing declare,
As euer they knew synce they were men.
But if my fellowes do know (sayd he) 
That thus I dyd, they would kyll me.

¶ They graunting him this his request, 
He dyd declare as here is read,
Both names and states of most and least, 
Of this their Vacabondes brotherhood. 
Which at the request of a worshipful man
I haue set it forth as well as I can.


FINIS.







¶ The Fraternitye of Vacabondes both
rufling and beggerly, Men and women, 
Boyes and Gyrles, wyth their proper names and
qualities. Whereunto are adioyned the 
company of Cousoners and Shifters.


¶ An Abraham Man. 
AN Abraham man is he that walketh bare 
armed, and bare legged, and fayneth hym 
selfe mad, and caryeth a packe of wool, or 
a stycke with baken on it, or such lyke toy, 
and nameth himselfe poore Tom.
 
¶ A Ruffeler. 
 A Ruffeler goeth wyth a weapon to seeke seruice,
 saying he hath bene a Seruitor in the wars, and beg­
geth for his reliefe. But his chiefest trade is to robbe 
poore wayfaring men and market women.
 
¶ A Prygman 
 A Prygman goeth with a stycke in hys hand like an
 idle person. His propertye is to steale cloathes of the 
 hedge, which they call storing of the Rogeman: or els 
 filtch Poultry, carying them to the Alehouse, whych 
 they call the Bowsyng In, & ther syt playing at cardes 
 and dice, tyl that is spent which they haue so fylched.
 
¶ A Whipiacke 
 A Whypiacke is one, that by coulor of a counterfaite
 Lisence (which they call a Gybe, and the seales they cal 
 Iarckes) doth vse to beg lyke a Maryner, But hys 
 chiefest trade is to rob Bowthes in a Faire, or to pilfer 
 ware from staules, which they cal heauing of the Bowth
 
¶ A Frater. 
  A Frater goeth wyth a like Lisence to beg for some
Spittlehouse or Hospital. Their pray is comonly vpon







poore women as they go and come to the Markets. 
 
¶ A Quire bird. 
 A Quire bird is one that came lately out of prison, & 
goeth to seeke seruice. He is commonly a stealer of Hor­
ses, which they terme a Priggar of Paulfreys.
 
¶ An Vpright man. 
 An Vpright man is one that goeth wyth the trun­
chion of a staffe, which staffe they cal a Filtchman. This 
man is of so much authority, that meeting with any of 
his profession, he may cal them to accompt, & commaund 
a share or snap vnto him selfe, of al that they haue gai­
ned by their trade in one moneth. And if he doo them 
wrong, they haue no remedy agaynst hym, no though 
he beate them, as he vseth commonly to do. He may also 
commaund any of their women, which they cal Doxies, 
to serue his turne. He hath the chiefe place at any market 
walke & other assembles, & is not of any to be controled.
 
¶ A Curtall. 
 A Curtall is much like to the Vpright man, but hys 
authority is not fully so great. He vseth commonly to 
go with a short cloke, like to grey Friers, & his woman 
with him in like liuery, which he calleth his Altham if 
she be hys wyfe, & if she be his harlot, she is called hys 
Doxy.
 
¶ A Palliard. 
 A Palliard is he that goeth in a patched cloke, and 
hys Doxy goeth in like apparell.
 
¶ An Irishe toyle. 
  An Irishe toyle is he that carieth his ware in hys 
wallet, as laces, pins, poyntes, and such like. He vseth 
to shew no wares vntill he haue his almes. And if the 
good man and wyfe be not in the way, he procureth of 
the children or seruants a fleece of wool, or the worth of 
xij. d. of some other thing, for a peniworth of his wares 






 
¶ A Iack man. 
 A Iackeman is he that can write and reade, and 
somtime speake latin. He vseth to make counterfaite li­
cences which they call Gybes, and sets to Seales, in 
their language called Iarkes.
 
¶ A Swygman. 
 A Swygman goeth with a Pedlers pack.
 
¶ A washman. 
 A Washman is called a Palliard, but not of the right 
making. He vseth to lye in the hye way with lame or 
sore legs or armes to beg. These men the right Pilliards 
wil often times spoile, but they dare not complayn. They 
be bitten with Spickworts, & somtime with rats bane
 
¶ A Tinkard. 
 A Tinkard leaueth his bag a sweating at the Ale­
house, which they terme their Bowling In, and in the 
meane season goeth abrode a begging.
 
¶ A wylde Roge. 
 A wilde Roge is he that hath no abiding place but 
by his coulour of going abrode to beg, is commonly to 
seeke some kinsman of his, and all that be of hys corpo­
ration be properly called Roges.
 
¶ A Kitchen Co. 
 A Kitchin Co is called an ydle runagate Boy.
 
¶ A Kitchen Mortes.
  A Kitchin Mortes is a Gyrle, she is brought at her 
 full age to the Vpryght man to be broken, and so she is 
 called a Doxy, vntil she come to the honor of an Altham.
 
¶ Doxies. 
 Note especially all which go abroade working laces 
and shirt stringes, they name them Doxies.
 
A Patriarke Co. 
  A Patriarke Co doth make mariages, & that is vntill







death depart the maried folke, which is after this sorte 
When they come to a dead Horse or any dead Catell, 
then they shake hands and so depart euery one of them 
a seuerall way. 


¶ The company of Cousoners and 
Shifters. 


¶ A Curtesy man. 
  A Curtesy man is one that walketh about the back 
lanes in London in the day time, and some time in the 
broade streetes in the night season, and when he mee­
teth some handsome yong man clenly apareled, or some 
other honest Citizen, he maketh humble salutations and 
low curtesy, and sheweth him that he hath a worde or 
two to speake with his mastership. This child can be­
haue him selfe manerly, for he wyll desire him that he 
talketh with all, to take the vpper hand, and shew him 
much reuerence, and at last like his familier acquain­
taunce will put on his cap, and walke syde by syde, and 
talke on this fashion: Oh syr, you seeme to be a man, 
and one that fauoureth men, and therefore I am the 
more bolder to breake my mind vnto your good mai­
stership. Thus it is syr, ther is a certaine of vs (though 
I say it both taule and handsome men of theyr hands) 
which haue come lately from the wars, and as God 
knoweth haue nothing to take to, being both maister­
les and moniles, & knowing no way wherby to yerne 
one peny. And further, wher as we haue bene welthely 
brought vp, and we also haue beene had in good esti­
matioon, we are a shamed now to declare our misery, and 
to fall a crauing as common Beggers, and as for to 
steale and robbe (God is our record) it striketh vs to







the hart, to thinke of such a mischiefe, that euer any 
handsome man should fall into such a daunger for thys 
worldly trash, Which if we had to suffise our want and 
necessity, we should neuer seeke thus shamefastly to 
craue on such good pityfull men as you seeme to be, nei­
ther yet so daungerously to hasarde our liues for so 
vyle a thing. Therefore good syr, as you seeme to be a 
handsome man your selfe, and also such a one as pitieth 
the miserable case of handsome men, as now your eyes 
and countenaunce sheweth to haue some pity vppon 
this my miserable complainte: So in Gods cause I 
require your maistershyp, & in the behalfe of my poore 
afflicted fellowes, which though here in sight they cry 
not with me to you, yet wheresoeuer they bee, I am 
sure they cry vnto God to moue the heartes of some 
good men to shew forth their liberality in this behalfe. 
All which & I with them craue now the same request 
at your good masterships hand. With these or such like 
words he frameth his talke. Now if the party (which 
he thus talketh withall) profereth hym a peny or .ii. d. 
he taketh it, but verye scornfully, and at last speaketh 
on this sorte: Well syr, your good will is not to be re­
fused. But yet you shall vnderstand (good syr) that this 
is nothing for them, for whom I do thus shamefastly 
entreate. Alas syr, it is not a greate or .xii. d. I speake 
for, being such a company of Seruiters as wee haue 
bene: yet neuertheles God forbid I should not receiue 
your gentle offer at this time, hoping hereafter through 
your good motions to some such lyke good gentleman 
as you be, that I, or some of my fellowes in my place, 
shall finde the more liberality. These kind of ydle Va­
cabondes wyll go commonly well appareled, without  







any weapon, and in place where they meete together, 
as at their hosteryes or other places they wyll beate 
the port of ryght good gentlemen, & some are the more 
trusted, but commonly thei pay them with stealing a paire of 
sheetes, or Couerlet, & so take their farewell earely in 
the morning, before the mayster or dame be sturring. 

"curtesy man" not found in OED.


 
¶ A Cheatour or Fingerer.
   These commonly be such kinde of idle Vacabondes 
 as scarcely a man shall discerne, they go so gorgeously, 
 sometime with waiting men, and sometime without. 
 Their trade is to walke in such places, where as gen­
tlmen & other worshipfull Citizens do resorte, as at 
Poules, or at Christes Hospital, & somtime at the Royal 
exchaunge. These haue very many acquaintaunces, 
yea, and for the most part will acquaint them selues 
with euery man, and fayne a society, in one place or o­
ther. But chiefly they wil seeke their acquaintaunce of 
such (which they haue learned by diligent enquiring 
where they resort) as haue receyued some porcion of 
money of their friends, as yong Gentlemen which are 
sent to London to study the lawes, or els some yong 
Marchant man or other kynde of Occupier, whose 
friendes hath geuen them a stock of mony to occupy 
withall. When they haue thus found out such a pray, 
they will find the meanes by theyr familiarity, as very 
curteously to bid him to breakefast at one place or other, 
where they are best acquainted, and closely amonge 
themselues wil appoint one of their Fraternity, which 
they call a Fyngerer, an olde beaten childe, not onely in 
such deceites, but also such a one as by his age is pain­
ted out with gray heares, wrinkled face, crooked back, 
and most commonly lame, as it might seeme with age,  







yea and such a one as to shew a simplicity, shal weare a 
homely cloke and hat scarce worth .vi. d. This nimble 
fingred knight (being appointed to this place) commeth 
in as one not knowen of these Cheatours, but as vn­
wares shal sit down at the end of the bord where they 
syt, & call for his peny pot of wine, or a pinte of Ale, as 
the place serueth. Thus sifting as it were alone, mum­
blyng on a crust, or some such thing, these other yonc­
kers wil finde some kind of mery talke with him, some 
times questioning wher he dwelleth, & sometimes en­
quiring what trade he vseth, which conmonly he telleth 
them he vseth husbandry: & talking thus merely, at 
last they aske him, how sayest thou Father, wylt thou 
play for thy breakfast with one of vs, that we may haue 
some pastime as we syt? Thys olde Karle makyng it 
straunge at the first saith: My maysters ich am an old 
man, and halfe blinde, and can skyl of very few games, 
yet for that you seeme to be such good Gentelmen, as 
to profer to play for that of which you had no part, but 
onely I my selfe, and therefore of right ich am worthy 
to pay for it, I shal with al my hart fulfyl your request. 
And so falleth to play, somtime at Cardes, & sometime 
at dice. Which through his counterfait simplicity in the 
play somtimes ouer counteth himself, or playeth som­
times against his wyl, so as he would not, & then coun­
terfaiteth to be angry, and falleth to swearing, & so lee­
sing that, profereth to play for a shillyng or two. The 
other therat hauing good sport, seming to mocke him, 
falleth againe to play, and so by their lergerdemane, & 
counterfaiting, winneth ech of them a shilling or twain, 
& atlast whispereth the yong man in the eare to play 
with hym also, that ech one might haue a fling at him.  







This yong man for company falleth againe to play also 
with the sayd Fyngerer, and winneth as the other did 
which when he had loste a noble or .vi. s. maketh as 
though he had lost al his mony, and falleth a intreating 
for parte thereof againe to bring him home, which the 
other knowing his mind and intent, stoutely denieth 
and iesteth & scoffeth at him. This Fingerer seeming 
then to be in a rage, desireth them as they are true gen­
tlemen, to tarry till he fetcheth more store of money, 
or els to point some place where they may meete. They 
seeming greedy hereof, promiseth faithfully and clap­
peth handes so to meete. They thus ticklyng the young 
man in the eare, willeth him to make as much money 
as he can, and they wil make as much as they can, and 
consent as though they wil play booty against him. But 
in the ende they so vse the matter, that both the young 
man leeseth his part and as it seemeth to him, they lee­
sing theirs also, and so maketh as though they would 
fal together by the eares with this fingerer, which by 
one wyle or other at last conueyeth him selfe away, & 
they as it were raging lyke mad bedlams, one runneth 
one way, an other an other way leauing the loser in 
deede all alone. Thus these Cheatours at their accu­
stomed hosteries meete closely together, and there re­
ceiue ech one his part of this their vile spoyle. Of this 
fraternity there be that be called helpers, which com­
monly haunt tauernes or alehouses, and commeth in as 
men not acquainted with none in the companye, but 
spying them at any game, wil byd them God spede and 
God be at their game, and will so place him selfe that 
he will shew his fellow by sygnes and tokens, with­
out speech commonly, but sometime with far fetched  







wordes, what cardes he hath in his hand, and how 
he may play against him. And those betwene them both 
getteth money out of the others purse. 
 
¶ A Ring faller. 
  A Ryng faller is he that getteth fayre copper rings, 
some made like signets, & some after other fashions, ve­
ry faire gylded, & walketh vp and down the streetes, til 
he spieth some man of the country or some other simple 
body whom he thinketh he may deceaue, and so goeth 
a lyttle before him or them, and letteth fall one of these 
ringes, which when the party that commeth after spi­
eth and taketh it vp, he hauing an eye backward, crieth 
halfe part, the party that taketh it vp, thinking it to be 
of great value, profereth him some money for his part, 
which he not fully denieth but willeth him to come in­
to some alehouse or tauerne, and there they will com­
mon vpon the matter. Which when they come in, and 
are set in some solitary place (as commonly they call for 
such a place) there he desireth the party that found the 
ring to shew it him. When he seeth it, he falleth a en­
treating the party that found it, and desireth him to 
take money for his part, and telleth him that if euer he 
may do him any frendship hereafter shal commaund 
him, for he maketh as though he were very desirous 
to haue it. The symple man seeing him so importune 
vpon it, thinketh the ring to bee of great valure, and 
so is the more lother to part from it. At last this ring 
faller asketh him what he will geue him for his part, 
for saith he, seeing you wyl not let me haue the ring, a­
lowe me my part, and take you the ring. The other as­
keth what he counteth the ring to be worth, he answe­
reth .v. or .vi. pound. No saith he it is not so much worth  







Well (saith this Ringfaller) let me haue it, and I wyll 
alow you .xl. s . for your part. The other party standyng 
in a doubt, and looking on the ryng, asketh if he wyll 
geue the money out of hand. The other answereth, he 
hath not so much ready mony about him, but he wil go 
fetch so much for him, if he wil go with him. The other 
that found the ring, thinking he meaneth truly, begin­
neth to profer him .xx. s . for his part, sometymes more, 
or les, which he verye scornfullye refuseth at the first, 
and styl entreateth that he might haue the ring, which 
maketh the other more fonder of it, and desireth him to 
take the money for his part, & so profereth him money. 
This ring faller seing the mony, maketh it very straunge, 
and first questioneth with him wher he dwelleth, and 
asketh him what is his name, & telleth him that he se­
meth to be an honest man, and therfore he wil do som­
what for friendships sake, hoping to haue as friendly 
a pleasure at his hand hereafter, and so profereth hym 
for .x. s . more he should haue the ryng. At last with en­
treatye on both partes, he geueth the Ring faller the 
money, and so departeth, thinkyng he hath gotten a 
very great Iewell. These kynde of deceyuing Vaca­
bondes haue other practises with their rings, as som­
times to come to buy wares of mens Prentesies, and 
somtimes of their Maisters, and when he hath agreed 
of the price, he sayth he hath not so much money about 
him, but pulleth of one of these rings of from his fyn­
gers, and profereth to leaue it in pawne, tyl hys Mai­
ster or his friendes hath sent it, so promising to bring 
the money, the seller thinking he meaneth truly, letteth 
him go, and neuer seeth him after, tyll perhaps at Ty­
burne or at such lyke place. Ther is another kinde of  







these Ring choppers, which commonly cary about them 
a faire gold ring in deede, and these haue other coun­
terfait rings made so lyke this gold ring, as ye shal not 
perceiue the contrary, tyl it be brought to the touch stone. 
This child wyl come to borow mony of the right gold 
ring, the party mistrusting the Ryng not to be good, 
goeth to the Goldsmith with the partye that hath the 
ryng, and tryeth it whether it be good golde, and also 
wayeth it to know how much it is worth. The Gold­
smith tryeth it to be good gold, and also to haue hys ful 
weight like gold, and warenteth the party which shall 
lend the money that the ring is worth so much money 
according to the waight, this yoncker comming home 
with the party which shall lend the money, and hauing 
the gold ring againe, putteth vp the gold ring, and pul­
leth out a counterfaite ring very like the same, & so deli­
uereth it to the party which lendeth the money, they 
thinking it to be the same which they tryed, and so de­
liuereth the money or sometimes wares, and thus 
vily be deceiued. 



	
¶ The .xxv. Orders of Knaues, otherwise
called a quarterne of Knaues, confirmed 
for euer by Cocke Lorell.

1 Troll and Troll by. 
 TRoll and Trol by, is he that setteth naught by no 
man, nor no man by him. This is he that would 
beare rule in a place, and hath none authority nor 
thanke, & at last is thrust out of the doore like a knaue.
 
2 Troll with. 
  Troll with, is he that no man shall know the seruaunt 
from the Maister. This knaue with his cap on his head  







lyke Capon hardy, wyll syt downe by his Maister, or 
els go cheeke by cheeke with him in the streete.
 
3 Troll hazard of trace. 
 Troll hazard of trace is he that goeth behynde his 
Maister as far as he may see hym. Such knaues com­
monly vse to buy Spicecakes, Apples or other trifles, 
and doo eate them as they go in the streetes lyke vaca­
bond Boyes.
 
4 Troll hazard of tritrace. 
 Troll hazard of tritrace, is he that goeth gaping af­
ter his Master, looking to and fro tyl he haue lost him. 
This knaue goeth gasyng about lyke a foole at euery 
toy, and then seeketh in euery house lyke a Maisterles 
dog, and when his Maister nedeth him, he is to seeke.
 
5 Chafe Litter. 
 Chafe Litter is he that wyll plucke vp the Fether­
bed or Matrice, and pysse in the bedstraw, and wyl ne­
uer ryse vncalled. This knaue berayeth many tymes 
in the corners of his Maisters chamber, or other pla­
ces inconuenient, and maketh cleane hys shooes with 
the couerlet or curtaines.

"chafe litter" not found in OED as a phrase.



6 Obloquium. 
 Obloquium is hee that wyll take a tale out of his 
Maisters mouth and tell it him selfe. He of right may 
be called a malapart knaue.

"obloquium" not found in OED as an English word.


 
7 Rince Pytcher. 
 Rince Pytcher is he that will drinke out his thrift 
at the ale or wine, and he oft times dronke. This is a 
licoryce knaue that will swill his Maisters drink, and 
brybe his meate that is kept for him.
 
8 Ieffrey Gods Fo. 
  Ieffery Gods Fo is he, that wil sweare & maintaine  







othes. This is such a lying knaue that none wil beleue 
him, for the more he sweareth, the les he is to be beleued. 

"Jeffrey God's foe" not found in OED as a phrase.


 
9 Nichol Hartles. 
 Nichol Hartles is he, that when he should do ought 
for his Maister hys hart faileth him. This is a Tre­
wand knaue that faineth himselfe sicke when he should 
woorke.

"Nicol Heartless" not found in OED as a phrase.


 
10 Simon soone agon. 
 Simon soone agon is he, that when his Mayster 
hath any thing to do, he wil hide him out of the way. 
This is a loytring knaue that wil hide him in a corner 
and sleepe or els run away.

"Simon Soon Again" not found in OED as a phrase.


 
11 Grene winchard. 
 Greene Winchard is he, that when his hose is bro­
ken and hange out at his shoes, he will put them into 
his shooes againe with a stick, but he wyll not amend 
them. This is a slouthfull knaue, that had leauer go 
lyke a begger then cleanly.

"winchard" not found in OED.



12 Proctour. 
 Proctour is he, that will tary long, and bring a lye, 
when his Maister sendeth him on his errand. This is 
a flibber gibber Knaue, that doth fayne tales.
 
13 Commitour of Tidinges. 
 Commitour of Tidings is he, that is ready to bring 
his Maister Nouels and tidinges, whether they be 
true or false. This is a tale bearer knaue, that wyll re­
port words spoken in his Maisters presence.

"commitour of tidings" not found in OED.



14 Gyle Hather. 
  Gyle Hather is he, that wyll stand by his Maister 
when he is at dinner, and byd him beware that he eate 
no raw meate, because he would eate it himselfe. This 
is a pick thanke knaue, that would make his Maister  







beleue that the Cowe is woode. 

Neither "Gyle Hather" nor "hather" found in OED.


 
15 Bawde Phisicke. 
 Bawde Phisicke, is he that is a Cocke, when his 
Maysters meate is euyll dressed, and he challenging 
him therefore, he wyl say he wyll eate the rawest mor­
sel there of himselfe. This is a sausye knaue, that wyl 
contrary his Mayster alway.

"Baud Physic" not found in OED as a phrase.


 
16 Mounch present. 
 Mounch present is he that is a great gentleman, for 
when his Mayster sendeth him with a present, he wil 
take a tast thereof by the waye. This is a bold knaue, 
that sometyme will eate the best and leaue the worst 
for his Mayster.
 
17 Cole Prophet. 
 Cole Prophet is he, that when his Maister sendeth 
him on his errand, he wyl tel his answer therof to his 
Maister or he depart from hym. This tittiuell knaue 
commonly maketh the worst of the best betwene hys 
Maister and his friende.
 
18 Cury fauell. 
 Cory fauell is he, that wyl lye in his bed, and cory the 
bed bordes in which hee lyeth in steede of his horse. 
This slouthfull knaue wyll buskill and scratch when 
he is called in the morning, for any hast.
 
19 Dyng thrift. 
 Dyng thrift is he, that wil make his Maisters horse 
eate pies and rybs of beefe, and drinke ale and wyne. 
Such false knaues oft tymes, will sell their Maisters 
meate to their owne profit.
 
20 Esen Droppers. 
  Esen Droppers bene they, that stand vnder mens 
wales or windowes, or in any other place, to heare the  







secretes of a mans house. These misdeming knaues 
wyl stand in corners to heare if they be euill spoken of, 
or waite a shrewd turne. 
 
21 Coplogyke. 
 Choplogyke, is he that when his mayster rebuketh 
him of hys fault he wyll geue hym .xx. wordes for one, 
els byd the deuils Pater noster in silence. This proude 
prating knaue wyll maintaine his naughtines when he is rebuked for them.
 
22 Vnthrifte. 
 Vnthrift, is he that wil not put his wearing clothes 
to washing, nor black his owne shoes, nor amend his 
his own wearing clothes. This rechles knaue wyl al­
way be lousy: and say that hee hath no more shift of 
clothes, and slaunder his Maister.
 
23 Vngracious. 
 Vngracious, is he that by his own will, will heare no 
maner of seruice, without he be compelled therunto by 
his rulers. This Knaue wil sit at the alehouse drinking 
or playing at dice, or at other games at seruice tyme.
 
24 Nunquam. 
 Nunquam, is he that when his Maister sendeth him 
on his errand he wil not come againe of an hour or two 
where he might haue done it in halfe an houre or lesse. 
This knaue will go about his owne errand or pastime 
and saith he cannot speede at the first.
 
25 Ingratus. 
 Ingratus, is he that when one doth all that he can 
for him, he will scant geue him a good report for his 
labour. This knaue is so ingrate or vnkind, that he consi­
dreth not his frend from his fo, & wil requit euil for good 
& being put most in trust, wil sonest deceiue his maister.


FINIS.








Imprinted at Lon­
don by Iohn Awdely dwelling in little
Britaine streete without Aldersgate. 

(.·.)





 