


A briefe and true re­
port of the new found land of Virginia: of 
the commodities there found and to be raysed, as well mar­
chantable, as others for victuall, building, and other necessa­
rie vses for those that are and shalbe the planters there; and of the na­
ture and manners of the naturall inhabitants: Discouered by the 
English Colony there seated by Sir Richard Greinuile Knight in the 
yeere 1585. which remained vnder the gouernment of Rafe Lane Esqui­
er, one of her Maiesties Equieves, during the space of twelue monethes; at
the speciall charge and direction of the Honourable SIR
WALTER RALEIGH Knight, Lord Warden of 
the stanneries; who therein hath beene fauou­
red and authorised by her Maiestie and 
her letters patents.

Directed to the Aduenturers, Fauourers,
and Welwillers of the action, for the inhabi­
ting and planting there:

By Thomas Hariot; seruant to the abouenamed
Sir Walter, a member of the Colony, and
there imployed in discouering.

Imprinted at London 1588.









The first part of Marchantable 
commodities.


SIlke of grasse or grasse Silke. There is a kind 
of 
grasse in the countrey vppon the blades 
whereof there groweth very good silke in 
forme of a thin glittering skin to bee stript 
of. It groweth two foote and a halfe high or 
better: the blades are about two foot in length, and half 
inch broad. The like groweth in Persia, which is in the 
selfe same climate as Virginia, of which very many of the





silke workes that come from thence into Europe are 
made. Hereof if it be planted and ordered as in Persia, it 
cannot in reason be otherwise, but that there will rise in 
shorte time great profite to the dealers therein; seeing 
there is so great vse and vent thereof as well in our coun­
trey as els where. And by the meanes of sowing & plan­
ting it in good ground, it will be farre greater, better, and 
more plentifull then it is. Although notwithstanding 
there is great store thereof in many places of the coun­
trey growing naturally and wilde. Which also by proof 
here in England, in making a piece of silke Grogran, we 
found to be excellent good.

For "grasse Silke" see OED, "grass," n.1, 2.b., "silk-grass."



Worme Silke: In manie of our iourneyes we found silke 
wormes fayre and great; as bigge as our ordinary wal­
nuttes. Although it hath not beene our happe to haue 
found such plentie as elsewhere to be in the countrey we 
haue heard of; yet seeing that the countrey doth natural­
ly breede and nourish them, there is no doubt but if art be 
added in planting of mulbery trees and others fitte for 
them in commodious places, for their feeding and nou­
rishing; and some of them carefully gathered and hus­
banded in that sort as by men of skill is knowne to be ne­
cessarie: there will rise as great profite in time to the Vir­
ginians, as thereof doth now to the Persians, Turkes, Ita­
lians and Spaniards.

"Worme Silke" not found as a phrase in the OED.

 

Flaxe and Hempe: The trueth is that of Hempe and 
Flaxe there is no great store in any one place together, 
by reason it is not planted but as the soile doth yeeld it of 
it selfe; and howsoeuer the leafe, and stemme or stalke 
doe differ from ours; the stuffe by the iudgement of men 
of skill is altogether as good as ours. And if not, as fur­
ther proofe should finde otherwise; we haue that expe­
rience of the soile, as that there cannot bee shewed anie





reason to the contrary, but that it will grow there excel­
lent well; and by planting will be yeelded plentifully: see­
ing there is so much ground whereof some may well be 
applyed to such purposes. What benefite heereof may 
growe in cordage and linnens who can not easily vn­
derstand?

Allum: There is a veine of earth along the sea coast 
for the space of fourtie or fiftie miles, whereof by the 
iudgement of some that haue made triall heere in Eng­
land, is made good Allum, of that kinde which is called 
Roche Allum. The richnesse of such a commoditie is so 
well knowne that I neede not to saye any thing thereof. 
The same earth doth also yeelde White Copresse, Nitrum,
and Alumen plumeum, but nothing so plentifully as the 
common Allum; which be also of price and profitable.

Wapeih, a kinde of earth so called by the naturall in­
habitants; very like to terra Sigillata: and hauing beene 
refined, it hath beene found by some of our Phisitions 
and Chirurgeons to bee of the same kinde of vertue and 
more effectuall. The inhabitants vse it very much for the 
cure of sores and woundes: there is in diuers places great 
plentie, and in some places of a blewe sort.

Pitch, Tarre, Rozen, and Turpentine: There are those 
kindes of trees which yeelde them abundantly and great 
store. In the very same Iland where wee were seated, be­
ing fifteene miles of length, and fiue or sixe miles in 
breadth, there are fewe trees els but of the same kind; the 
whole Iland being full.

Sassafras, called by the inhabitantes Winauk, a kinde of 
wood of most pleasant and sweete smel; and of most rare 
vertues in phisick for the cure of many diseases. It is found 
by experience to bee farre better and of more vses then 
the wood which is called Guaiacum, or Lignum vitæ. For 





the description, the manner of vsing and the manifolde 
vertues thereof, I referre you to the booke of Monar­
dus, translated and entituled in English, The ioyfull newes 
from the West Indies.

"Lignum vitae" antedates the earliest OED citation (1597).



Cedar, a very sweet wood & fine timber; wherof if nests 
of chests be there made, or timber therof fitted for sweet 
& fine bedsteads, tables, deskes, lutes, virginalles & ma­
ny things else, (of which there hath beene proofe made 
already,) to make vp fraite with other principal commo­
dities will yeeld profite.

Wine: There are two kinds of grapes that the soile doth 
yeeld naturally: the one is small and sowre of the ordina­
rie bignesse as ours in England: the other farre greater & 
of himselfe lushious sweet. When they are planted and 
husbanded as they ought, a principall commoditie of 
wines by them may be raised.

Oyle: There are two sortes of Walnuttes both holding 
oyle, but the one farre more plentifull then the other. 
When there are milles & other deuises for the purpose, 
a commodity of them may be raised because there are 
infinite store. There are also three seuerall kindes of 
Berries in the forme of Oke akornes, which also by 
the experience and vse of the inhabitantes, wee finde to 
yeelde very good and sweete oyle. Furthermore the 
Beares of the countrey are commonly very fatte, and in 
some places there are many: their fatnesse because it is so 
liquid, may well be termed oyle, and hath many speciall 
vses.

Furres: All along the Sea coast there are great store 
of Otters, which beeyng taken by weares and other en­
gines made for the purpose, will yeelde good profite.
Wee hope also of Marterne furres, and make no doubt 
by the relation of the people but that in some places 





of the countrey there are store: although there were 
but two skinnes that came to our handes. Luzarnes 
also we haue vnderstanding of, although for the time we 
saw none.

Deare skinnes dressed after the manner of Chamoes or 
vndressed are to be had of the naturall inhabitants thou­
sands yeerely by way of trafficke for trifles: and no more 
wast or spoyle of Deare then is and hath beene ordinari­
ly in time before.

Ciuet cattes: In our trauailes, there was founde one to 
haue beene killed by a saluage or inhabitant: and in an o­
ther place the smell where one or more had lately beene 
before: whereby we gather besides then by the relation 
of the people that there are some in the countrey: good 
profite will rise by them.

"Ciuet cattes" antedates the earliest OED citation (1607)



Iron: In two places of the countrey specially, one 
about fourescore and the other sixe score miles from 
the Fort or place where wee dwelt: wee founde neere 
the water side the ground to be rockie, which by the tri­
all of a minerall man, was founde to holde yron 
richly. It is founde in manie places of the countrey 
else. I knowe nothing to the contrarie, but that it 
maie bee allowed for a good marchantable commo­
ditie, considering there the small charge for the la­
bour and feeding of men: the infinite store of wood: 
the want of wood and deerenesse thereof in England: & 
the necessity of ballasting of shippes.

Copper: A hundred and fiftie miles into the maine in 
two townes wee founde with the inhabitaunts diuerse 
small plates of copper, that had beene made as wee vn­
derstood, by the inhabitantes that dwell farther into 
the countrey: where as they say are mountaines and 





Riuers that yeelde also whyte graynes of Mettall, 
which is to bee deemed Siluer. For confirmation where­
of at the time of our first arriuall in the Countrey, I 
sawe with some others with mee, two small peeces of 
siluer grosly beaten about the weight of a Testrone, 
hangyng in the eares of a Wiroans or chiefe Lorde that 
dwelt about fourescore myles from vs; of whom tho­
rowe enquiry, by the number of dayes and the way, I 
learned that it had come to his handes from the same 
place or neere, where I after vnderstood the copper was 
made and the white graynes of mettall founde. The 
aforesaide copper wee also founde by triall to holde sil­
uer.

Pearle: Sometimes in feeding on muscles wee founde 
some pearle; but it was our hap to meete with ragges, 
or of a pide colour; not hauing yet discouered those 
places where wee hearde of better and more plentie. 
One of our companie; a man of skill in such matters, 
had gathered together from among the sauage peo­
ple aboute fiue thousande: of which number he chose 
so many as made a fayre chaine, which for their like­
nesse and vniformitie in roundnesse, orientnesse, and 
pidenesse of many excellent colours, with equalitie in 
greatnesse, were verie fayre and rare; and had there­
fore beene presented to her Maiestie, had wee not by 
casualtie and through extremity of a storme, lost them 
with many things els in comming away from the coun­
trey.

"ragges": speculatively, pieces of shell (a sense not found in OED). 



Sweete Gummes of diuers kindes and many other A­
pothecary drugges of which wee will make speciall 
mention, when wee shall receiue it from such men 
of skill in that kynd, that in taking reasonable paines 





shall discouer them more particularly then wee haue 
done; and than now I can make relation of, for want 
of the examples I had prouided and gathered, and are 
nowe lost, with other thinges by causualtie before men­
tioned.

Dyes of diuers kindes: There is Shoemake well kno­
wen, and vsed in England for blacke; the seede of an 
hearbe called Wasewówr; little small rootes called Cháp­
pacor; and the barke of the tree called by the inhabi­
taunts Tangomóckomindge: which Dies are for diuers 
sortes of red: their goodnesse for our English clothes 
remayne yet to be proued. The inhabitants vse them 
onely for the dying of hayre; and colouring of their 
faces, and Mantles made of Deare skinnes; and also 
for the dying of Rushes to make artificiall workes with­
all in their Mattes and Baskettes; hauing no other 
thing besides that they account of, apt to vse them 
for. If they will not proue merchantable there is no 
doubt but the Planters there shall finde apte vses for 
them, as also for other colours which wee knowe to be 
there.

Oade; a thing of so great vent and vse amongst Eng­
lish Diers, which cannot bee yeelded sufficiently in our 
owne countrey for spare of ground; may bee planted in 
Virginia, there being ground enough. The grouth therof 
need not to be doubted, when as in the Ilandes of the A­
sores it groweth plentifully, which is in the same climate. 
So likewise of Madder.

We carried thither Suger canes to plant which beeing 
not so well preserued as was requisit, & besides the time 
of the yere being past for their setting when we arriued, 
wee could not make that proofe of them as wee desired. 





Notwithstanding, seeing that they grow in the same cli­
mate, in the South part of Spaine and in Barbary, our 
hope in reason may yet continue. So likewise for Orenges,
and Lemmons: there may be planted also Quinses. Wher­
by may grow in reasonable time if the action be diligent­
ly prosecuted, no small commodities in Sugers, Suckets, 
and Marmalades.









The second part, of suche commodities
as Virginia is knowne to yeelde for victuall and su­
stenance of mans life, vsually fed vpon by the 
naturall inhabitants: as also by vs during the 
time of our aboad. And first of such as are 
sowed and husbanded.



PAgatowr, a kinde of graine so called by 
the inhabitants; the same in the West 
Indies is called Mayze: English men 
call it Guinney wheate or Turkie wheate, 
according to the names of the coun­
treys from whence the like hath beene
brought. The graine is about the bignesse of our ordi­
nary English peaze and not much different in forme and 
shape: but of diuers colours: some white, some red, some 
yellow, and some blew. All of them yeelde a very white 
and sweete flowre: beeing vsed according to his kinde it 
maketh a very good bread. Wee made of the same in the 
countrey some mault, whereof was brued as good ale as 
was to bee desired. So likewise by the help of hops ther­
of may bee made as good Beere. It is a graine of maruei­
lous great increase; of a thousand, fifteene hundred and 
some two thousand fold. There are three sortes, of which 
two are ripe in an eleuen and twelue weekes at the most: 
sometimes in ten, after the time they are set, and are then 
of height in stalke about sixe or seuen foote. The other 
sort is ripe in fourteene, and is about ten foote high, of 
the stalkes some beare foure heads, some three, some 
one, and two: euery head containing fiue, sixe, or seuen 
hundred graines within a fewe more or lesse. Of these 
graines besides bread, the inhabitants make victuall ey­





ther by parching them; or seething them whole vntill 
they be broken; or boyling the floure with water into a 
pappe.

"Guinney wheate" and "Turkey wheat" antedate the earliest OED citations (1598, 1598).



Okindgíer, called by vs Beanes, because in greatnesse & 
partly in shape they are like to the Beanes in England; sa­
uing that they are flatter, of more diuers colours, and 
some pide. The leafe also of the stemme is much diffe­
rent. In taste they are altogether as good as our English 
peaze.

Wickonzówr, called by vs Peaze, in respect of the beanes 
for distinction sake, because they are much lesse; although 
in forme they little differ; but in goodnesse of tast much, 
& are far better then our English peaze. Both the beanes 
and peaze are ripe in tenne weekes after they are set. 
They make them victuall either by boyling them all to 
pieces into a broth; or boiling them whole vntill they 
bee soft and beginne to breake as is vsed in England, ey­
ther by themselues or mixtly together: Sometime they 
mingle of the wheate with them. Sometime also beeing 
whole sodden, they bruse or pound them in a morter, & 
thereof make loaues or lumps of dowishe bread, which 
they vse to eat for varietie.

Macócqwer, according to their seuerall formes called 
by vs, Pompions, Mellions, and Gourdes, because they are 
of the like formes as those kindes in England. In Virginia 
such of seuerall formes are of one taste and very good, 
and do also spring from one seed. There are of two sorts; 
one is ripe in the space of a moneth, and the other in two 
moneths.

There is an hearbe which in Dutch is called Melden.  
Some of those that I describe it vnto, take it to be a kinde 
of Orage; it groweth about foure or fiue foote high: of 
the seede thereof they make a thicke broth, and pottage 





of a very good taste: of the stalke by burning into ashes 
they make a kinde of salt earth, wherewithall many vse 
sometimes to season their brothes; other salte they 
knowe not. Wee our selues vsed the leaues also for pot-­
hearbes.

There is also another great hearbe in forme of a Ma­
rigolde, about sixe foote in height; the head with the 
floure is a spanne in breadth. Some take it to bee Planta 
Solis: of the seedes heereof they make both a kinde of 
bread and broth.





There is an herbe which is sowed a part by it selfe & 
is called by the inhabitants vppówoc: In the West Indies 
it hath diuers names, according to the seuerall places & 
countries where it groweth and is vsed: The Spaniardes 
generally call it Tobacco. The leaues thereof being dried 
and brought into powder: they vse to take the fume or 





smoke thereof by sucking it through pipes made of claie 
into their stomacke and heade; from whence it purgeth 
superfluous fleame & other grosse humors, openeth all 
the pores & passages of the body: by which meanes the 
vse thereof, not only preserueth the body from obstructi­
ons; but also if any be, so that they haue not beene of too 
long continuance, in short time breaketh them: wherby 
their bodies are notably preserued in health, & know not 
many greeuous diseases wherewithall wee in England 
are oftentimes afflicted. 

This Vppówoc is of so precious estimation amongest 
them, that they thinke their gods are maruelously deligh­
ted therwith: Wherupon sometime they make hallowed 
fires & cast some of the pouder therein for a sacrifice: be­
ing in a storme vppon the waters, to pacifie their gods, 
they cast some vp into the aire and into the water: so a 
weare for fish being newly set vp, they cast some therein 
and into the aire: also after an escape of danger, they cast 
some into the aire likewise: but all done with strange ge­
stures, stamping, somtime dauncing, clapping of hands, 
holding vp of hands, & staring vp into the heauens, vtte­
ring therewithal and chattering strange words & noises.

We ourselues during the time we were there vsed to 
suck it after their maner, as also since our returne, & haue
found manie rare and wonderful experiments of the ver­
tues thereof; of which the relation woulde require a vo­
lume by it selfe: the vse of it by so manie of late, men & 
women of great calling as else, and some learned Phisiti­
ons also, is sufficient witnes.






Of Rootes.

OPenauk are a kind of roots of round forme, some of 
the bignes of walnuts, some far greater, which are 
found in moist & marish grounds growing many 
together one by another in ropes, or as thogh they were 
fastnened with a string. Being boiled or sodden they are 
very good meate.

Okeepenauk are also of ro ond shape, found in dry grounds: 
some are of the bignes of a mans head. They are to be ea­
ten as they are taken out of the ground, for by reason of 
their drinesse they will neither roste nor seeth. Their tast 
is not so good as of the former rootes, notwithstanding 
for want of bread & somtimes for varietie the inhabitants 
vse to eate them with fish or flesh, and in my iudgement 
they doe as well as the houshold bread made of rie heere 
in England. 

Kaishúcpenauk a white kind of roots about the bignes of
hen egs & nere of that forme: their tast was not so good 
to our seeming as of the other, and therfore their place 
and manner of growing not so much cared for by vs: the 
inhabitants notwithstanding vsed to boile & eate many.

Tsinaw a kind of roote much like vnto that which in Eng­
land is called the China root brought from the East Indies. 
And we know not anie thing to the contrary but that it 
maie be of the same kind. These roots grow manie toge­
ther in great clusters and doe bring foorth a brier stalke, 
but the leafe in shape far vnlike; which beeing supported 
by the trees it groweth neerest vnto, wil reach or climbe 
to the top of the highest. From these roots while they be 
new or fresh beeing chopt into small pieces & stampt, is 
strained with water a iuice that maketh bread, & also be­
ing boiled, a very good spoonemeate in maner of a gelly, 
and is much better in tast if it bee tempered with oyle. 





This Tsinaw is not of that sort which by some was caused 
to be brought into England for the China roote, for it was 
discouered since, and is in vse as is aforesaide: but that 
which was brought hither is not yet knowne neither by 
vs nor by the inhabitants to serue for any vse or purpose; 
although the rootes in shape are very like.

Coscúshaw, some of our company tooke to bee that 
kinde of roote which the Spaniards in the West Indies 
call Cassauy, whereupon also many called it by that name: 
it groweth in very muddie pooles and moist groundes. 
Being dressed according to the countrey maner, it ma­
keth a good bread, and also a good sponemeate, and is v­
sed very much by the inhabitants: The iuice of this root 
is poison, and therefore heede must be taken before any 
thing be made therewithall: Either the rootes must bee 
first sliced and dried in the Sunne, or by the fire, and 
then being pounded into floure wil make good bread: or 
els while they are greene they are to bee pared, cut into 
pieces and stampt; loues of the same to be laid neere or 
ouer the fire vntill it be soure, and then being well poun­
ded againe, bread, or spone meate very god in taste, and 
holsome may be made thereof.

Habascon is a roote of hoat taste almost of the forme 
and bignesse of a Parseneepe, of it selfe it is no victuall, 
but onely a helpe beeing boiled together with other 
meates.

There are also Leekes differing little from ours in Eng­
land that grow in many places of the countrey, of which, 
when we came in places where they were, wee gathered 
and eate many, but the naturall inhabitants neuer.







Of Fruites.



CHestnuts, there are in diuers places great store: some 
they vse to eate rawe, some they stampe and boile 
to make spoonemeate, and with some being sodden 
they make such a manner of dowe bread as they vse of 
their beanes before mentioned.

Walnuts: There are two kindes of Walnuts, and of them 
infinit store: In many places where very great woods for 
many miles together the third part of trees are walnut­
trees. The one kind is of the same taste and forme or litle 
differing from ours of England, but that they are harder 
and thicker shelled: the other is greater and hath a verie 
ragged and harde shell: but the kernell great, verie oy­
lie and sweete. Besides their eating of them after 
our ordinarie maner, they breake them with stones and 
pound them in morters with water to make a milk which 
they vse to put into some sorts of their spoonmeate; also 
among their sodde wheat, peaze, beanes and pompions 
which maketh them haue a farre more pleasant taste.

Medlars a kind of verie good fruit, so called by vs chief­
lie for these respectes: first in that they are not good vn­
till they be rotten: then in that they open at the head as 
our medlars, and are about the same bignesse: otherwise 
in taste and colour they are farre different: for they are 
as red as cheries and very sweet: but whereas the cherie 
is sharpe sweet, they are lushious sweet.

Metaquesúnnauk, a kinde of pleasaunt fruite almost of 
the shape & bignes of English peares, but that they are 
of a perfect red colour as well within as without. They 
grow on a plant whose leaues are verie thicke and full of 
prickles as sharpe as needles. Some that haue bin in the 
Indies, where they haue seen that kind of red die of great





price which is called Cochinile to grow, doe describe his 
plant right like vnto this of Metaquesúnnauk but whether 
it be the true cochinile or a bastard or wilde kind, it cannot 
yet be certified; seeing that also as I heard, Cochinile is not 
of the fruite but founde on the leaues of the plant; which 
leaues for such matter we haue not so specially obserued.

Grapes there are of two sorts which I mentioned in the 
marchantable commodities.

Straberies there are as good & as great as those which 
we haue in our English gardens.

Mulberies, Applecrabs, Hurts or Hurtleberies, such as wee 
haue in England.

Sacquenúmmener a kinde of berries almost like vnto ca­
pres but somewhat greater which grow together in clu­
sters vpon a plant or herb that is found in shalow wa­
ters: being boiled eight or nine hours according to their kind 
are very good meate and holesome, otherwise if they be 
eaten they will make a man for the time franticke or ex­
tremely sicke.

There is a kind of reed which beareth a seed almost like 
vnto our rie or wheat, & being boiled is good meate.

In our trauailes in some places wee founde wilde peaze 
like vnto ours in England but that they were lesse, which 
are also good meate.

"wilde peaze" not found as a noun in the OED.






Of a kinde of fruite or berrie in forme of 
Acornes.


THere is a kind of berrie or acorne, of which there 
are fiue sorts that grow on seuerall kinds of trees; the 
one is called Sagatémener, the second Osamener, the 
third Pummuckóner. These kind of acorns they vse to drie 
vpon hurdles made of reeds with fire vnderneath almost 
after the maner as we dry malt in England. When they are 





to be vsed they first water them vntil they be soft & then 
being sod they make a good victual, either to eate so sim­
ply, or els being also pounded, to make loaues or lumpes 
of bread. These be also the three kinds of which, I said 
before, the inhabitants vsed to make sweet oyle.

An other sort is called Sapúmmener which being boiled 
or parched doth eate and taste like vnto chestnuts. They 
sometime also make bread of this sort.

The fifth sort is called Mangúmmenauk, and is the a­
corne of their kind of oake, the which beeing dried after 
the maner of the first sortes, and afterward watered they 
boile them, & their seruants or sometime the chiefe them­
selues, either for variety or for want of bread, doe eate 
them with their fish or flesh.




Of Beastes.


DEare, in some places there are great store: neere vn­
to the sea coast they are of the ordinarie bignes as 
ours in England, & some lesse: but further vp into 
the countrey where there is better feed they are greater: 
they differ from ours onely in this, their tailes are longer 
and the snags of their hornes looke backward.

Conies, Those that we haue seen & al that we can heare 
of are of a grey colour like vnto hares: in some places 
there are such plentie that all the people of some townes 
make them mantles of the furre or flue of the skinnes of 
those they vsually take.

Saquenúckot & Maquówoc; two kindes of small beastes 
greater then conies which are very good meat. We ne­
uer tooke any of them our selues, but sometime eate of 
such as the inhabitants had taken & brought vnto vs.

Squirels which are of a grey colour, we haue taken ?& eaten.





Beares which are all of black colour. The beares of this 
countrey are good meat; the inhabitants in time of win­
ter do vse to take & eate manie, so also somtime did wee. 
They are taken commonlie in this sort. In some Ilands or 
places where they are, being hunted for, as soone as they 
haue spiall of a man they presently run awaie, & then be­
ing chased they clime and get vp the next tree they can, 
from whence with arrowes they are shot downe starke 
dead, or with those wounds that they may after easily be 
killed; we sometime shotte them downe with our calee­
uers.

I haue the names of eight & twenty seuerall sortes of 
beasts which I haue heard of to be here and there disper­
sed in the countrie, especially in the maine: of which there 
are only twelue kinds that we haue yet discouered, & of 
those that be good meat we know only them before men­
tioned. The inhabitants somtime kil the Lyon & eat him: 
& we somtime as they came to our hands of their Wolues 
or woluish Dogges, which I haue not set downe for good 
meat, least that some woulde vnderstand my iudgement 
therin to be more simple than needeth, although I could 
alleage the difference in taste of those kindes from ours, 
which by some of our company haue beene experimen­
ted in both.




Of Foule.


TVrkie cockes and Turkie hennes: Stockdoues: Partridges: 
Cranes: Hernes: & in winter great store of Swannes &
Geese. Of al sortes of foule I haue the names in the 
countrie language of fourescore and sixe of which num­
ber besides those that be named, we haue taken, eaten, & 
haue the pictures as they were there drawne with the 
names of the inhabitaunts of seuerall strange sortes of 





water foule eight, and seuenteene kinds more of land foul, 
although wee haue seen and eaten of many more, which 
for want of leasure there for the purpose coulde not bee 
pictured: and after wee are better furnished and stored 
vpon further discouery, with their strange beastes, fishe, 
trees, plants, and hearbes, they shall bee also published.

There are also Parats, Faulcons, & Marlin haukes, which 
although with vs they bee not vsed for meate, yet for o­
ther causes I thought good to mention.




Of Fishe.


FOr foure monethes of the yeere, February, March, 
Aprill and May, there are plentie of Sturgeons: And 
also in the same monethes of Herrings, some of the 
ordinary bignesse as ours in England, but the most part 
farre greater, of eighteene, twentie inches, and some two 
foote in length and better; both these kindes of fishe in 
those monethes are most plentifull, and in best season, 
which wee founde to bee most delicate and pleasaunt 
meate.

There are also Troutes: Porpoises: Rayes: Oldwiues: 
Mul­
lets: Plaice: and very many other sortes of excellent good 
fish, which we haue taken & eaten, whose names I know 
not but in the countrey language; wee haue of twelue 
sorts more the pictures as they were drawn in the coun­
trey with their names.

The inhabitants vse to take them two maner of wayes, 
the one is by a kind of wear made of reedes which in that 
countrey are very strong. The other way which is more 
strange, is with poles made sharpe at one ende, by shoo­
ting them into the fish after the maner as Irishmen cast 
dartes; either as they are rowing in their boates or els as 





they are wading in the shallowes for the purpose.

There are also in many places plentie of these kindes 
which follow. 

Sea crabbes, such as we haue in England.

"Sea crabbes" antedates the earliest OED citation (1601).



Oysters, some very great, and some small; some rounde 
and some of a long shape: They are founde both in salt 
water and brackish, and those that we had out of salt wa­
ter are far better than the other as in our owne countrey.

Also Muscles: Scalopes: Periwinkles: and Creuises. 

Seékanauk, a kinde of crustie shell fishe which is good 
meate, about a foote in breadth, hauing a crustie tayle, 
many legges like a crab; and her eyes in her backe. They 
are founde in shallowes of salt waters; and sometime on 
the shoare.

There are many Tortoyses both of lande and sea kinde, 
their backes & bellies are shelled very thicke; their head, 
feete, and taile, which are in appearance, seeme ougly as 
though they were members of a serpent or venemous: 
but notwithstanding they are very good meate, as also 
their egges. Some haue bene founde of a yard in bredth 
and better.


And thus haue I made relation of all sortes of victuall 
that we fed vpon for the time we were in Virginia, as also 
the inhabitants themselues, as farre foorth as I knowe 
and can remember or that are specially worthy to bee re­
membred.








The third and last part of such other
thinges as is be hoofull for those which shall 
plant and inhabit to know of; with a descrip­
tion of the nature and manners of the 
people of the countrey.



Of commodities for building and 
other necessary vses.


THose other things which I am more to 
make rehearsall of, are such as concerne 
building, and other mechanicall neces­
sarie vses; as diuers sortes of trees for 
house & ship timber, and other vses els: 
Also lime, stone, and brick, least that be­
ing not mentioned some might haue bene doubted of, or 
by some that are malicious reported the contrary.


Okes, there are as faire, straight, tall, and as good tim­
ber as any can be, and also great store, and in some places 
very great.

Walnut trees, as I haue saide before very many, some 
haue bene seen excellent faire timber of foure & fiue fa­
dome, & aboue fourescore foot streight without bough.

Firre trees fit for masts of ships, some very tall & great.

Rakíock, a kind of trees so called that are sweet wood of 
which the inhabitans that were neere vnto vs doe com­
monly make their boats or Canoes of the form of trowes; 
only with the helpe of fire, hatchets of stones, and shels; 
we haue known some so great being made in that sort of 
one tree that they haue carried well xx. men at once, be­
sides much baggage: the timber being great, tal, streight, 
soft, light, & yet tough enough I thinke (besides other v­
ses) to be fit also for masts of ships. 

Cedar, a sweet wood good for seelings, Chests, Boxes, 





Bedsteedes, Lutes, Virginals, and many things els, as I 
haue also said before. Some of our company which haue 
wandered in some places where I haue not bene, haue 
made certaine affirmation of Cyprus which for such and 
other excellent vses, is also a wood of price and no small 
estimation.

Maple, and also Wich-hazle, wherof the inhabitants vse 
to make their bowes.

Holly a necessary thing for the making of birdlime.

Willowes good for the making of weares and weeles to 
take fish after the English manner, although the inhabi­
tants vse only reedes, which because they are so strong 
as also flexible, do serue for that turne very well and suf­
ficiently.

Beech and Ashe, good for caske, hoopes: and if neede 
require, plow worke, as also for many things els.

Elme. 

Sassafras trees. 

"Sassafras trees" antedates the earliest OED citation (1597).



Ascopo a kinde of tree very like vnto Lawrell, the barke 
is hoat in tast and spicie, it is very like to that tree which 
Monardus describeth to bee Cassia Lignea of the West 
Indies.


There are many other strange trees whose names I 
knowe not but in the Virginian language, of which I am 
not nowe able, neither is it so conuenient for the pre­
sent to trouble you with particular relation: seeing that 
for timber and other necessary vses I haue named suffici­
ent: And of many of the rest but that they may be appli­
ed to good vse, I know no cause to doubt.






Of the nature and manners of 
the people.







In some places of the countrey one onely towne be­
longeth to the gouernment of a Wiróans or chiefe Lorde; 
in other some two or three, in some sixe, eight, & more; 
the greatest Wiróans that yet we had dealing with had but 
eighteene townes in his gouernment, and able to make 
not aboue seuen or eight hundred fighting men at the 
most: The language of euery gouernment is different 
from any other, and the farther they are distant the grea­
ter is the difference.





They beleeue that there are many Gods which they 
call Montóac, but of different sortes and degrees; one 
onely chiefe and great God, which hath bene from all 
eternitie. Who as they affirme when hee purposed 
to make the worlde, made first other goddes of a prin­
cipall order to bee as meanes and instruments to bee v­
sed in the creation and gouernment to follow; and af­
ter the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, as pettie goddes 
and the instruments of the other order more princi­
pall. Fiirst they say were made waters, out of which 
by the gods was made all diuersitie of creatures that are 
visible or inuisible.





They thinke that all the gods are of humane shape, 
& therfore they represent them by images in the formes 
of men, which they call Kewasówok one alone is called 
Kewás; Them they place in houses appropriate or tem­
ples which they call Machicómuck; Where they woor­
ship, praie, sing, and make manie times offerings vnto 
them. In some Machicómuck we haue seene but one Ke­
was, in some two, and in other some three; The common 
sort thinke them to be also gods.

They beleeue also the immortalitie of the soule, that 
after this life as soone as the soule is departed from the 
bodie according to the workes it hath done, it is eyther 
carried to heauen the habitacle of gods, there to enioy 
perpetuall blisse and happinesse, or els to a great pitte or 
hole, which they thinke to bee in the furthest partes of 
their part of the worlde towarde the sunne set, there to 
burne continually: the place they call Popogusso. 




