
	




l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 4 7 2 6

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )


WHen as in thys treatise I entend to declare thoccasion of Agues
(almost no degrees excepted that in our time it hath not vexed) it
behoueth fyrst to define what an ague is folowing Cicero, which
saith that euery thing which we purpose to speake of must rise of
his definition. an ague  is anothing els but an vnnatural heate or
caliditie, which taketh his beginninge at the harte, disperseth
all ouer the body by the artiers and veines, and so hurtheth
the actions therof. Thys laste parte of the definition
is necessarily adioined to the same. 





... so al so there be thre kindes of simple agues, for why, if an
immoderate and vnnaturall heate be kindled in spirits, this of the
grekes is called [Greek] of the Latines Diaria, in English an
ague of one daye,  which may well be likened as sayeth Galen,
Fuctius, & Bartholomeus, to hot wind included within a
bottell, for as it heteth vehemently the bottell wherein it is put:
So the spirites chafed wyth an vnnaturall heate, more than
nature can beare, inflameth al the body wherin they be conteyned,
it is called Diaria, bicause it hathe but one accesse, and endeth
by his owne nature in the space of one day, if it be duly handled.





Furthermore, watches, crudity, sadnes, feare, anger, greate
cares of the minde, burning of the sun, cold, famine, drunkennes,
impostumations, of the grekes terme [Greek], & of the Latines,
of the Barbarians vndimia, of vs byles or pushes, of these and
such lyke causes which may kindle the spirits is this Feuer
engendred.





... wherevpon more faculty of the animall spirit is absumed or
wasted, which at last is resolued & spent in doing actions. &c.
whiche the Grekes call [Greek], the Latins Actio, we
operations or working, by the whych as testifieth Galen, is
made the efficient mouing procedinge of facultyes, & facultas,
of the Grekes is termed [Greek], of vs powers. 





They which haue the Ague of Vndimia  which is an impostemation
of windy fleume and vaporous, those haue great pulses, bicause
necessity pricketh, that is feuerous heat, and faculty obeyeth
necessity ...





THere is another Ague of this kind whiche is called of the
Latin writers Diaria plurimum dierum that is an Ague of
manye dayes  bycause it contineweth vnto the third day, and
somtimes longer, as witnesseth Galen, yea oftentymes it
lasteth to the fowrth day fyft and seuenth, and thus is it
then whych the Latines termeth Synochus non putrida.





But humors are said to putrifye either within or without
the vesselles, and within the vessels they putrify two waies,
namely altogether at ones, or one alone, if all humors
putrifye in all vessels equally: but especially in the greatest,
then is it called in Greke [Greek] in Latin synochus,  in
Englyshe a hot rotten Ague. 





[Greek] after the Grekes, of the Latines termed Synochus siue
continens putrida, in English a continual rotten Ague,  which as
Galen sayeth continueth without anye mutacion or verye littell,
and for that reason as is sayd in the Chapter afore it is called
continens which happeneth where all the vessels, but most
chieflye in the greatest, which are anexed about the flaps
of the lunges and spiritual members, al equally putrifiing,
which often happeneth as Fuctius writeth of vehemente bindinge
and retaining the filth in the cauitye or hollownesse of the
vessels, enducinge a burninge heate.





THere be thre kinde of simple agues, which priuatly of the Grekes
is termed [Greek] of vs continuall.  For when red choler doeth
putrifye wythin the vessels, then is it called a continual
Tertian, in greke [Greek] in Englyshe a burninge Ague.
And when fleume doth putrify within the vessels, it is named
a continuall quotidian. if black color do suffer putrifaction
in the vessels, then is it a continuall quartayne. 





THe feuer which the Grekes terme [Greek], the Latines Ardens
febris, of vs a burning feuer,   as is shewed partlye afore, whyche
chaunseth when as yelow choler is putrifyed in the veynes
continually burning, and yet chieflye, is of the same kind
wyth the exquisite tertian intermitting, bycause it cometh of
the same humor ... 





Rigor est vniuersi corporis inequalis concussio quassatio ve,
that is: Rigor   is a vehement and an vnegall motion together
of the hole body.





THere is also of the kinde of putrifying feuers, a feuer pestilential,
of the Grekes called [Greek], of the Latines pestilens febris of vs
properlye the pestilence,  so called, bicause it spryngeth and
groweth by inspiration and venemous ayre, for as Galen
testifieth, the ayre being corrupt, maketh the humor of the bodye
to corrupt and putrify also. 





George Agricola writeth, that the Grekes do vse to cal euery kind of
plage [Greek], whiche I thinke of vs is termed Murren. 





THe bastarde or false Tertian  is when that red choler speciallye
mixed with flewme doeth putrify, without the vessels, so that
herevpon it is that euery note or syn doth not pretende the nature
of pure and sincere choler, as in the true and exquisit Tertian ...





AN exquisite or true quotidian  is where swete flewme putrifieth
without the vessels, this the Grekes call [Greek] bicause it
cometh by fyts euery daye. 





QVartana exquisita, or intermittinge quartaine:  groweth or
commeth of black choler putrifying wythout the vesselles, so
called bicause it ceaseth two days, and returneth euery fowrth
day. 





Nowe besydes these kindes of intermitting a quartayn agues
aforesayd, there be other some called Quitaines, Sexties,
Septuianes and Nonanes.  Whereof Hipp. mencioneth, so called
bycause they were wont to come euery fift, sixte, seuenth
and ninth daye. 





IF an ague come thorow the impostume Plegmon, which besydes
that it is an impostume in the inward parts of the body, of hard
red and painful swelling, it signifyeth boyling heat,  named then
of the Grekes [Greek], as Galen witnesseth, and in it (as the
said most noble prince Galen, writeth) extreme heate doeth reigne
inwardly, and the outward members very cold ... 





[Greek] and [Greek] after the Grekes, must of vs be
termed a certaine moyst ague,  in the accompt and number of
one of the continual putred agues, for no other cause, then
that it doth continuallye resolue the bodye wyth moysture
and sweates ... 





... & this said consuming feuer is termed both of the grekes &
Latines Hectica, of vs a consuming fast fyxed ague,  bicause it
corrupteth the habite, forme or substance of the whole body.





 