



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 4 5 7 9 

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )




The Cobler of 
Caunterburie,
Or 
An Inuectiue against Tarltons Newes
out of Purgatorie.

A merrier Iest then a Clownes Iigge, and 
fitter for Gentlemens humors.

Published with the cost of a dickar 
of Cowe hides.

AT LONDON, 
Printed by Robert Robinson.
1590.











The eight orders of Cuckolds.


Cuckold.
1 Machomite.
2 Hereticke.
3 Lunaticke.
4 Innocent.
5 Incontinent.
6 By consent.
7 By Act of Parliament.
8 Quem facit Ecclesia.

And because quoth the Smith they may seeme darke
and obscure to you, I will briefly make an exposition of 
them to you, and that is in this manner.

The exposition of the eight degrees
of Cuckolds.


1 Cuckolde Machomite is an auncient Cuckold, who hath beene married some thirty or forty yeares, and euer
since his first marriage hath continued content in that 
estate, being so knowen and notified amongst his neigh­
bours, therefore being the oldest, he is the formost.

"Machomite" (meaning "Mohammedan") not found in OED.


heretic
2 Cuckold Hereticke, is he that hauing a faire wife








and honest, is so blinded with Iealousie and suspition, as 
he thinkes hir to be as dishonest as the best, but indeed is
none, and therefore consumes himselfe in an heresie.

3 Cuckold Lunaticke, is he that being a Cuckold con­
ceiues such inward griefe, that he suffers his passions to 
take no rest, but as a man distrackt from his senses doth 
all things so out of order, as though he were Lunaticke:
and therefore hath this title for his humours frenzie.

4 Cuckold Innocent, is hee that being simple of him­
selfe suspecteth nothing, but what soeuer hee heares of 
his wife, beleeueth no more then hee sees, knowing no­
thing, and therefore suspecting nothing.

5 Cuckold Incontinent, is hee that marries himselfe
to a wife of a light disposition, who maketh him a Cuc­
kold the very first day of his marriage.

6 Cuckold by consent, is he that of al other Cuckolds
is most infamous, who is not onely headed as brauely
as the rest, and hath one of light conuersation, but fo­
stereth his wife vp in hir follies, and is content to keepe 
the doore to his wiues lasciuious wantonnesse, consen­
ting to more then the strumpet is ashamde to performe.

7 Cuckold by Act of Parliament, is such a one that 
when he takes his wife faulty is not content secretly to 
punish the offence, but goes to lawe with the man for 
recompence: the Quest giuing him perhaps for dam­
mage some i.d. ob. whereby it is registred in the Court 
by his owne proofe that he is a Cuckold, and therefore is
he called Cuckold by Act of Parliament.

8 Cuckolde Quem facit Ecclesia, is hee
whome
the Church maketh a Cuckold, and that is this, when a yong








man marrieth a maide or a wife, whome hee sup­
poseth to be a maide, and yet hath plaid false before, and 
perhaps hath had a childe or two: In marrying him to 
such a one he is Cuckolde in the Church, and therefore 
called Cuckold Quem facit Ecclesia.








