



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

e s t c t 0 8 3 0 6 9 

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )




AN
APPENDIX
TO THE 
NOTES.

The Names of the Villages, Towns, and Cities, that are
mentioned in ÆTHELFLEDE'S and ÆLFLEDE'S
Testaments, disposed in an Alphabetical Order, with To­
pographical Descriptions of them, so far as they could
be well made out by a diligent Inspection into the Maps.




Æ

ÆLesforda,  now Alesford, situate in the East Part
of Essex, not far from the River Colne, in the
Hundred of Tendering (or Tendring)
 "alesford(n)" not found in OED. 


B

Beorcinga.  Byorcinga. Now Berking, or Barking,
near Ilford in Essex, dedicated formerly to Holy Virgins
by Erkenwald, Bishop of London.
 Sense of "barking(n)" not found in OED. 





Biderices-ƿeorðe.  Bydericæs-ƿyrðe. Now a little
City, called many Ages ago Edmundi-Burgus; in En­
glish, St. Edmund's Bury; from St. Edmund, the King and
Martyr.
 "st. edmund's bury(n)" not found in OED. 

Bucys-heale.  Buxhall, a Village in the County of Suf­
folk, in Stow-Hundred.
 "buxhall(n)" not found in OED. 

Bylinges-dune.  Bylies-dyne, Perhaps Bilston, situate
in the Hundred of Cosford in Suffolk.
 "bilston(n)" not found in OED. 


C

Cantƿare-byrig.  Cantƿara-byrig. Dorobernia, Canter­
bury, the Metropolitical City of all England, too famous
for its Antiquities and Saints to need a Description.

Ceolsige.  Perhaps Chelsey, too well known to require a 
Description.
 "chelsey(n)" not found in OED. 

Cochan-felda.  Cohan-feldæa. Cockfield, situate in the
Hundred of Baberg in Suffolk,
 "cockfield(n)" not found in OED. 

Colne.  There are four Places of this Name in Essex,
that are so called from the River Colne, or Colon, near
which they lye; namely, Earles-Colne, Wakes Colne,
Colne-Engain, Whites Colne; to which may be added
Colne-Ceaster, in British Caer-Colin, a City which at this
present Time we call Colchester, situate hard by the River
Colne. But which of these Towns or Villages it is that
Ælflede gave to the sacred Burial-Place of her Ancestors
at Stoce, I cannot certainly say. But I think that Colchester
was the Chief of the Colnes.
 "colne(n)" not found in OED. 


D

Dictunæ.  Dictune. Of which Cambden perhaps in
his Account of Suffolk writes thus: "Ixning began to
decline by the Nearness of Novum Forum, that is,





New-Market. That this is the more modern, the very
Name implies; but its Situation is such, that the South
Part belongs to Cambridgeshire, the North to Suffolk, and
each has its own Church, whereof this owns Ixning for
its Mother, that Ditton, or Dichton."

Douor-cortæ.  Even now Dover-court, which, on a 
Promontory near the Mouth of the Stour, lies by Har­
wich, a very safe Harbour for Ships, in Tendring-Hundred.
 "dover-court(n)" and "harwich(n)" not found in OED. 


E

Eadmundes-Stoƿ.  In Æthelflede's Charter, into Sce
Edmundes-Stoƿ to Byderices-ƿyrðe. See Biderices
in the Notes.


F

Fingingra-ho.  Now Fingrinhoo, which lies upon the
River Colne, not far from Colchester, in the Hundred of
Winstree.
 "fingrinhoo(n)" not found in OED. 

Fresantune.  Freston in Suffolk, which lies below Ips­
wich, upon the River called Gipping. Or it may be Fris­
ton, situate in the East Part of Suffolk, facing the Sea, in 
Plumsgate-Hundred.
 "freston(n)" and "friston(n)" not found in OED. 


G

Glestinga-byrig.  Glastonia or Glasconia, Glaston or
Glascon, Glastenbury.
 "glastonia(n)", "glaston(n)", and "glastenbury(n)" not found in OED. 

Grenstyde.  Grenstede. Now Grenstede, a Town in
Essex, which lies near Colchester, upon the Eastern Shore
of the River Colon (or Colne) in Lexden-Hundred.
 "grenstede(n)" not found in OED. 


H

Hedham.  As we may reasonably believe, either Hed­





ham Magna, or Hedham Parva, near Bishop's Stortford
in the County of Hartford.
 "hedham(n)" not found in OED. 

Hedlege.  Of which Cambden writes thus in Suffolk:
"Below this, Hadley, in Saxon Headlege, is situate a
Town, famous in these Days for making of Cloths."
Or perhaps Hadleigh in Essex, in Rochford-Hundred.
 Sense of "hadley(n)" not found in OED. "hadleigh(n)" not found in OED. 

Hæðfælda.  Hatfield. There are two Places of this
Name in Essex, Hatfield-Peverel, in the Hundred of Wi­
them, and Hatfield-Brodock, in the Hundred of Harlow,
the first of which I believe is the old Hæðfælda.
 "hatfield(n)" not found in OED. 


L

Lamburna.  Now Lamburn, a little Market Town in 
Berkshire, so called from a little River of the same Name,
which loseth its Course and Name in the River Kunet,
not far from Newbury.
 "lamburn(n)" not found in OED. 

Lavenham.  Lavenham in Suffolk, situate in Baberg­
Hundred.
 "lavenham(n)" not found in OED. 

Lexa-dyne,  now Lexden, situate on this Side the River
Coln (or Colne) near Colchester, the Chief of the Hun­
dred to which it gives the Name.
 "lexden(n)" not found in OED. 

Lundene.  Lundænæ. Londinum, London, the Capital
of Great-Britain at this Time and of the British Empire,
as far as it extends; under the Protection of the Almighty,
the EVERLASTING CITY.


M.

Myres-iga.  Myræs-ege. Myres-ie. In the Saxon
Chronicle, at the Year 895, Mæres-ige, Insula palustris vel
marina, a Marshy or Marine Island, called Mersey-Land,
or Mersey, situate at the Mouth of the River Colne in Essex.
Of which before in the Notes, and in William Somner's 





Saxon Dictionary, and in the Explication of the Names of
Places by the learned Edmund Gibson, at the End of the
Saxon Chronicle published by him at Oxford, in 1692.
 "mersey-land(n)" not found in OED. 


P

Paulus-byrig.  In Æthelflede's Testament, into Paulus­
byrig æt Lundænæ: Id est, Civitas Paulina, vel Mon­
asterium Ædis Paulinæ, that is to say, Paul's City, or
Paul's Minster, by Reason the City was dedicated to St.
Paul. Paulus-byrig, may be translated also Mons Pau­
linus, Paul's Mount, in which Sense it denotes Paul's
Church, which was built in an high Place, as in the Chief
Part of the City of London.
 "paul's city(n)" not found in OED. 

Peltandune.  Peldon, situate right over against Mersey­
Island, from which it is not far distant, in the Hundred of
Winstree.
 Sense of "peldon(n)" not found in OED. 

Polstede.  Polstyde, Polsted, situate North of the River
called Stour, not far from Neyland, in Baberg-Hundred.
 "polstyde(n)" not found in OED. 


R

Redinga,  now Reading or Reding, the principal Town
of Berkshire, most elegantly described by William Cambden.
 Sense of "reading(n)" not found in OED. 

Rettendune.  Rettendon, a Village in Essex, in the Hun­
dred of Chelmsford.
 "rettendon(n)" not found in OED. 


S

Sægham.  Perhaps Soham, seated Eastward of the City
of Ely in Cambridgeshire, in the Hundred of Staple-boo.
 "soham(n)" not found in OED. 

Suðbyrig,  Sudbury, a Town in the County of Suffolk,
in Baberg-Hundred.
 "sudbury(n)" not found in OED. 

Stoce.  Stocæ. Stocy. Stoke Clare in Suffolk, in Ris­
bridge-Hundred, as it hath been observed in the Notes; or it
may be another Stoke in the same County, situate East of








Stoke-Clare, near Polsted, and Shelley, in Baberg-Hun­
dred; or in fine, Stoke, belonging to the Same County, in
Sampford-Hundred.

Stanƿæga.  Now Stanway, or Stanway-Hall, both near
one another, not far from Colchester, on the Western Coast
of Essex, on this Side the River Colne, in the Hundred of
Lexden.
 "stanway(n)" not found in OED. 

Strætforda.  Stretforde. Stretford in Suffolk, seated
North of the River Stour, near which it lies, in the Hun­
dred of Samford; or perhaps Stratford in the same Coun­
ty, which lies by the River called Ald, in Plumsgate­
Hundred.
 "stretford(n)" and "stratford(n)" not found in OED. 


T

Tiga.  In Ælflede's Testament, Colne & Tigan. Tiga
then (the Sazon g, dissolving into y, and the 1 being easi­
ly changed into o,) seems to have been one of the three
Villages, Great-Toy, Toy-Parva, Mark-Toy, which lie
near the River Colne in Essex, and in the Neighbourhood
of the five Colnes; or perhaps Tye-Hall in Chelmsford-­
Hundred.
 "great-toy(n)", "toy-parva(n)", "mark-toy(n)", and "tye-hall(n)" not found in OED. 

Toðam.  There are two Villages of this Name in Essex,
situate on the North of a River-Island, not far from Mal­
don, near one another.


W

Ƿeælding-fæda.  Ƿealding-felda. THere are two Places
of this Name in Suffolk, Waldingfield-Great, Walding field-­
Little, in Baberg-Hundred.
 "waldingfield-great(n)" and waldingfield-little(n)" not found in OED.  

Ƿicforda.  If I am not mistaken, Wicford in Cam­
bridgeshire, situate near the City of Ely, the Principal of
an Hundred that takes its Name from it.
 "wicford(n)" not found in OED. 

Ƿifer-myrsce,  or Ƿyfer-mersce. The Name (with­
out doubt) of some Marshy-place; for Mersc is a Con­







traction of Merisc, which, from Mere, signifies Palus
Stagnum, Lacus, Terra Paludosa; a Fen, a Pool, a Lake,
a Marshy Land. This is named in Ælflede's Testament
amongst other Places in Essex. Whence I conjecture, that
Ƿifer-Myrsce was one of those Marshy or Fenny-Places,
that in a great Number, and under many Names, inviron
that County on all Sides from the Sea, the Thames, and
the Mouth of the Thames.

Ƿisƿiðetun.  Perhaps Wiston in Suffolk; which lies up­
on the River Stour on the South of the Town of Neyland.
 "wiston(n)" not found in OED. 

Ƿudahamme.  Ƿudahame. There are three Places of this
Name in Essex, lying South of Maldon, namely, Wood­
ham-Walter, Woodham-Mortimer, lying in the Hundred of
Dengie, and Woodham-Feries, situate in the Hundred of
Chelmsford. But which of these is our Ƿuda-hamme, it
is not easy to guess.
 "woodham-walter(n)", "woodham-mortimer(n)", and "woodham-feries(n)" not found in OED. 


Y.

Ylig.  Ely, the City of Ely, the Chief of a Fenny Island
that gave Name to it, and famous for the Number of Saints
that are mentioned both in the Testaments of the illustri­
ous Sifters, and in Bede's History.
 "ely(n)" not found in OED. 

Ylm-sæton.  Elmeset, in Suffolk, lying in Cosford-Hun­
dred.
 "elmeset(n)" not found in OED. 


Ð. TH.

Ðorpe.  Thorp, still situate on the East-part of Essex, and
in the Hundred of Tendring; or perhaps Thorp, situate on
the Western Coast of the same County, on this Side the
River Colne in the Hundred of Lexden. There are three
Villages of the same Name also in Suffolk, one whereof lies
in the Hundred of Blithing, a Second in the Hundred of
Baberg, and a Third in the Hundred of Thredling.







Thus have I endeavoured, for the Benefit of the Reader
studious of this Country's Antiquities, to describe most of
the Villages, Towns, and Cities, mentioned in the Testa­
ments of the most pious Sifters. But there are some Places,
in finding out of which my Labour has been fruitless,
either because they lie hid perhaps under new Names, or
are utterly lost, or in a word, because I overlookt them.
It is your Business then, Reader, especially if you are of
Essex, Suffolk, or Ely, to try, whether you can have the
good luck to find the Places, that have either escaped my
Scrutiny, or defeated my Diligence. Here then are their
Names: Babbingðyrna. Biræ-tune. Ceafle. Ceorles­
ƿorðe. Domar-hamme. Dunninclanda, or Dunninglan­
da. Fulan-pettæ. Hamme. Hnydding. Hƿifersce. Illan­
lega. Lellinga. Lissing-tune. Tidƿelding-tune.



