




To the Reader.


In the reading of the Orientall histo­
ries, I finde two things oft times to trou­
ble euen those that would seeme to bee
great schollers; to wit, the Names of ho­
nour, dignity, office, &c. and the Ti­
tles or inscriptions of the Chapters of the Alkoran. For
these both being for the most part called and cited as they
are termed by the Turks and Arabians, are not easily vn­
derstood of any, but such as are skilfull of that language.
How oft, I pray you, in the histories and writers of their
affairs, & in what page almost shal you not meet with some
exoticke and strange terme or other, as Mussleman, Al­
kade, Hakkim, Alfaqui, Azoara, and others like? And
what one amongst many hundreds is there that doth con­
ceiue what is meant by them? For the better vnderstan­
ding therefore not onely of this present Treatise of ours,
but generally of all histories of the Saracens, Persians, In­
dians, Turks, & Africans : as also of all bookes and trea­
tises written of their superstition and ceremonies, I have,
for thy good, gentle Reader, in the midst of my many and
great troubles, procured by the fraudulent practises of the 
wicked, according to my best ability, and small helpe that I 
haue, out of those kinde of writings gathered and com­
posed these two Treatises ensuing; The one containing a



Catalogue of all such Arabicke termes and words vsed by
historians: The other an Index of the Chapters of the Al­
koran. But some man may say, That in those histories there
are many other strange words found that here I haue not
mentioned; I answer, it is true. But those being for the 
most part Turkish or Persian, that is, barbarous and out
of the compasse of my skill, I leaue them to be handled by 
others. Againe, if any man shall finde that we haue omit­
ted diuerse, euen of this nature here by vs nominated, let
him know, that we could not seriously reade ouer all books
of that argument; onely wee did for this purpose but
lightly cast our eye ouer some of the principallest, and such
as we could haue the vse of at this time.Our studies at this
time are imployed otherwise. If any thing be wanting
I doubt not but ere long we shall supply it abundantly,
and I hope, to the satisfaction of all.
Farewell.






The Arabian Trudgman.


A


 ABA'LKIBLA,  was an idoll in the Alcaaba or
temple of Mecha; which before Moham­
meds time the Arabians did all generally wor­
ship, and offer sacrifice vnto. See the booke De
generatione Mohammedis.



ABASSINI, looke Alhabassi.



ABELKIBLA, and Abel, the same that Aba'lkibla.



ADMIRANS, see Amir.



ADMIRALLIVS, see Amirallius.



AGBEL, or Agbal, signifieth a mountaine, as some do
affirme, and is the same with Gabel, Gebel, or Gibel.



ALAMBELI, a sect of Saracens professing Moham­
meds superstitious lawes. See Melici.



ALCAABA, Alkaaba, or Alkaba, is the name of that
Church, Temple, or Mesgid in the city Mecha in Arabia
Felix, which the Mohammetanes do from all parts yearly
visit. Of this that forenamed booke doth thus write: An­
no vicesimo quinto fundatum est Alkaba: Anno verò quadra­
gesimo Machumet Propheta datus est. In the 25 yeare, the
Alcaaba was begun to be built; and in the 40 yeare Mo­
hammed our Prophet was borne. And like as we reade
that Daniel, and other of the Saints of God, being in exile
or in forraine countries, did make their prayers and ori­
sons toward Ierusalem: so the Turks, in imitation of them,
do vsually pray with their faces toward this temple.



ALCABIR, elcabir, elguibir, signifieth Great, as Gua­
da'lcabir, The great riuer, Casar elcabir, The great palace,
Marsa'lcabir, The great hauen.





ALCASAR, Alkazar, The Palace, the kings house:
There are diuerse places of this name in Africa. See Casar.



ALCAIR, Alkair, Alchaira, The citie. The name of a
great city of Egypt, so called, Cat'hexochen: although Leo
be of another opinion. Cairo, Cairus, oppidum Ægypti
prope Memphis ruinas ædificauit Muauias. Muauias, a Chalife
of Egypt, saith mine author, built the city Cayro, neare
vnto the place, where somtime Memphis did stand.



ALCASAVA, see Kasaua.



ALEFRANGI, Alfrangi, Frangi, or Phrangi, are pro­
perly those people, which now do inhabite that king­
dome, which the Romanes and all ancient historians did
call Gallia Celtica, which at this day are called Franci, The
Frenchmen: But in the histories of the Saracans and Turks
it hath a larger acceptation. Franci enim in recentiorum
Græcorum historijs, quæ res fefellit plurimos, non Galli solùm
intelligendi sunt, sed Itali & Siculi: Eò quod Siciliæ regnum
illis temporibus, & pars Italiæ à Francis tenebatur. By the
Franci, saith Iunius, in the histories of the latter Greeke
writers, which is a matter that hath deceiued many, are
not vnderstood the French-men onely, but the Italians &
Sicilians: because that at that time the kingdome of Sici­
lia, yea & a part of Italy too, was possessed by the French.
Yea in the letters of the king of Achem vnto our king, it
signifieth the Spaniards: And I doubt not but generally
they include in it all the Christians of the West.



ALESALEM, Lex Dei salutaris, Thus they say the Sa­
racens call the Alkoran. Ipsi autem Saraceni vocant eam
(suba. legem) denominatiuè Elesalem, quod interpretatur Lex
salutaris Dei, [GREEK] The Saracens
themselues do call their law Elesalem, which by inter­
pretation is as much to say, as the law of saluation, or
the law of God. If he had said, the law of damnation, and
of the deuell, he had said well. Cydon. 131.



ALFAKIH, Alfaqui, Fakih, Faqui, or Faquinus, as the
learned Viues conceiueth it, is in the Mosquits or temples



of the Mohametanes, one, that in the manner of a Priest,
doth their diuine Seruice, readeth the Law, and doth in­
terpret and expound the same. In the plurall number they
call them Elfocowah. [GREEK]
[GREEK] hoc est Elphocaa, id est, magni doctores, &
expositores, Cydon. 142. Summi apud eos, saith Cantacuze­
nus, perditissimorum dogmatum doctores, [GREEK]
[GREEK] hoc est quos illi Helphocaa, id est, eximios
nominant. Cantacu.orat.ij. Now what manner of men these
be, the historians shall tell thee: Turcici sacerdotes, à laicis
haud multum differunt: Satis enim illis est, si Alcoranum legere,
& Turcicè ad verbum interpretari norint. The Turkish priests
do not much differ from their lay-men: For it is enough
for them, if they can reade the Alkoran, and also interpret
it word for word into Turkish. Which also M. Syluaticus
doth affirme: Alfachi, est qui docet matrimonium contrahere
Arabes; & qualiter debeant orare. Et est doctor legis, qui non
probat quicquam. Nam præceptis legis credere oportet sine argu­
mentatione. Mutali verò est philosophus, qui probat quod docet
necessarijs argumentis. An Alfakih, saith Matt. Syluaticus, is
he that amongst the Arabians doth solemnise mariages,
and teacheth them how they ought to pray. He is a doctor
or teacher of their law, but he need not prooue or de­
monstrate ought that he teacheth. For a man ought to be­
leeue the grounds of the law without any proofe. Now
the Mutaali is a Philosopher or scholar, which prooueth
by necessary consequences that which he goeth about to
teach.



ALFAQVI, see Alfakih.



ALFVRKAN, Alphorkan, Furkan, Forchan, the booke
of the Law of Mohammed, that is the same that Alkoran
is. Heare the Author of the booke intituled, De doctrina
Mohammedis; Dic, inquit, si placet, quid misit Deus scriptum?
Respondit sic, Quod? dicit, Alfurkan. Cur dictum Alfurkan?
Dixit, quia discretæ sunt sententiæ, & figure eius. Est
liber legis Arabum Alchoran, saith Cardinall Cusa, ob præ­



ceptorum collectionem: Atque Alfurkan, ob discretam capitum
serparationem nominatus. pag. xxvi. These lawes written by
Mohammed, as they say, in schedules & litle scroles, were
afterward by Omar digested into one volume; which by
Othoman was reuised, corrected, & reduced into that or­
der and forme, as now we see to this day: For thus saith 
mine Author: Omar collegit schedas Muamedis: Othmenus
verò in meliorem ordinem redegit, in capita distribuit, exijsque
librum, qui Alkoran, siue Alfurkan vocatur, componi curauit,
in quo omnia Muamedicæ sectæ dogmata & instituta conti­
nentur.



ALGARBII, or Garbij, are a people belonging to the
kingdome of Portugall, whose countrey or prouince
where they dwel is called Regnum Algarbiorum. The word
signifieth, the Western-men. And indeed they possesse
the vttermost part of Spaine toward the West. And for
the same reason was the whole countrey called Spaine, of the
Greeks, called Hesperia; because it lieth not onely on the
West of Italy; but is also of all the maine land or conti­
nent of Europe, the most Westerly part: yea of the whole
world, I meane of that which was at that time knowne to 
the Romanes or Greeks. This kingdome is bounded, as
we haue said, vpon the West and South by the Ocean sea,
vpon the East by the riuer Guadiana: how farre it exten­
ded Northward, he doth not tell, neither dare I deter­
mine. Sub Portugallia hoc tempore, ait doctissimus Ortelius,
ALGABIAE regnum, quæ eius pars maritima est versus Me­
ridiem, pertinet. Eius enim Rex se Regem Portugalliæ Al­
garbiæ, Guineæ, Æthiopiæ, Arabiæ, Persiæ, & Indiæ, scribit.
Hoc regnum primùm circa annum 1100 initium habuit. Ad ea
enim vsque tempora sub Hispaniæ nomine, vti & antiquitus,
censebatur Sic autem de eo Marineus scribit: Henricus quidam
Lotharingiæ Comes, vir in bello fortissimus, è Gallia veniens,
magnas aduersus Mauros res gessit. Pro quibus Alfonsus VI,
Castellæ rex permotus, filiam suam notham, nomine Tiresiam,
ei matrimonio collocauit: & Galleciæ partem, quæ in regno Por­



tugalliæ continetur, nomine dotis assignauit. Ex eo postea matri­
monio natus est Alphonsus, qui primus Portugalliæ Rex est ap­
pellatus: Primus qui Vlixbonam à Mauris recepit. Quorum
quinque simul regibus vno prælio superatis, quinque scutorum
insigne facti monumentum reliquit. To Portugal at this time,
saith the learned Ortelius, doth belong the kingdome of
the Algarbij, which is the sea coast of it toward the South.
For that king doth stile himselfe, King of Portugallia, Al­
garbia, Guinea, Æthiopia, Arabia, Persia and India.
This kingdome did first begin in the yeare of our Lord
1100. For euen vnto that time, as anciently it hath bene,
it was accounted as a part of Spaine. For thus doth Mari­
neus describe this history: One Henry Earle of Loraine, a
valiant man, well experienced in warlike affaires, coming
thither out of France, did great seruice against the Sara­
cens. For the which Alphonsus the VI , king of Castile
gaue him in mariage a bastard daughter of his, called Ti­
resia, & withall did assigne in lieu of a dowrie, that part of
Gallecia, which is contained within the kingdome of
Portugall. Of this mariage did afterward spring Alphon­
sus which ws the first king of Portugall, and was he that
recouered Lisbone out of the hands of the Moores. Who
also ouercoming in one set battaile fiue of their kings in
one day, left vnto his successors for the armes of that
kingdome fiue scutcheons, for a memoriall of that hono­
rable atchieuement of his.



ALHABASI, or Alhabaës, are those people which the
Geographers commonly call Abassini, that is, the Æthi­
opians, which at this day are for the most part vnder the
gouernment and command of Prester Iohn, as they vul­
garly call him.



ALHACCAM, see Haccam.



ALHAGE, is a title of honour and dignitie amongst
the Turkes, and is giuen to all such as haue visited the Al­
caaba or sepulcher of Mohammed: And therefore is an­
swerable to that degree of knight-hood amongst the



Christians which they call Sancti sepulchri. We may call
them Knights of Mecha.



ALHEGIRA, Alhegire, and Taricha'lhegira, is the Epo­
cha of the Mohammetists, or beginning of time from
whence they beginne their account, as the Iewes do from
the Creation, and the Christians from the birth of Christ.
This æra or epocha of the Arabians beginneth, as many do
thinke, from the time that Mohammed their Prophet fled
from Mecha, to Iethrab: ( following herein, as seemeth,
the nature of the word, which signifieth a flight, or run­
ning away: ) or from the time of the first publication of 
his cursed law, which the learned do rather applaud.



ALKABIS, see Kabis.



ALKIBLA, see Aba'lkibla.



ALKORAN, Alchoranus, Alchoranum, & sine articulo
Korranus, Chorranum , the booke of the law of the false
Prophet Mohammed: [GREEK] saith Canta­
cuzenus, [GREEK]
hoc est Liber Arabicè Korràn nominatur: Latinè; verò Lex Dei
salutaris. Item alibi, [GREEK] 
hoc est, Retinense interprete, Collectionem Præceptorum: Clu­
niacense autem, Collectaneum præceptorum. All of them do
thus interpret the word; although falsly, as the learned
can beare mee witnesse. For grammer doth teach vs,
That the thema is not KARANA ,coniunxit , collegit , as
they would make vs beleeue: but KARA , which signi­
fieth, to reade: So that Alkoran in Arabicke is iust as much
as Hammikrà is in Ebrew; that is, The text , corpus iuris,
the authenticall body of their law. As the Psalmes of Da­
uid in our Church , are read ouer euery moneth, that is,
euery thirtie daies: and in the ancient Churches of the
Greeks and Syrians, euery 20 daies: So is the Alkoran, by
the decree of Omar, in their Mosquits read ouer once in a 
moneth; Doctr. Mohammedis. Omar primus legem tu­
lit , vt in omnibus templis (Mercitas, ipsi vocant) per totum
Septembrem mensem supplicationes fierent. Omar was the first



that made a law, that in all their synagogues( Mesgids, they 
call them ) prayers should bee read euery day through­
out the moneth of September. This moneth they call 
Ramadhan, which also is their Lent: Ieiunium mensem totum
seruari voluit , tantumque noctibus cibum capi. They fast an
whole moneth together, eating nothing all day long, but 
in the night onely.



ALMEDEN, see Elmeden.



ALMOHALLA, signifieth the Campe, or an armie, that
is, a company of souldiers led and conducted by one Ge­
nerall, and lodging within the same trenches.



AMIR, Amira, Amiras, or Admirans, as some haue it,
signifieth a commander, lieutenant or president. Imperium
obinens, or admirans regni, as others interpret it. Athemate
AMARApræcepit. Quidam Calyfa, creauit quatuor tribunos
militum, vulgo Admirantes appellatos, quibus singulis multos
duces & Centuriones at tribuit: Eosque quatuor duces Acutos
Dei gladios nuncupauit. One of the Chalifs created & made
as the historians do testifie, foure lieutenants, (Amir's
they call them,) which had the command and leading of 
many Captaines and Centurions. These he called The
sharpe swords of God. Herehence is that title of the kings
of Barbary, one of whose titles is, Amira'lmowminin, or as
Leo Africanus doth conceiue and write it, Miralmumi­
nus, that is, Præses fidelium, The prouost of the faithfull. Of
which one speaketh, Miralmuminus, quæ vox Princi­
pem credentium significat: Historici nostri corruptè vocant Mi­
ramulinum. Primus omnium qui se hoc titulo insigniuit fuit A­
bedramon, qui Maroci vrbem maximam condidit.



AMIRALIVS, the Admirall. A title of honour, or
name of an office hauing command and charge of sea bu­
sinesses, or of the Kings nauie. And therefore is compoun­
ded, as generally all the learned do affirme, of the Ara­
bicke word Amir, aforesaid: and of [GREEK] a greeke word,
which signifieth Marinus, of or belonging to the sea.



ANTIOCHIA Syriæ, one of the foure cities, which at



this wicked impostor would haue the world beleeue, did
come from hell into this world. See Elmeden.



ARABES, Arabes, Larbes, are those people which 
from the confusion of tongues inhabited that countrey
of Asia, which is called Arabia. As the countrey is large,
so haue these people spred themselues into many coun­
tries, made many conquests, and planted sundrie colonies,
both in Asia and Africa. The Arabians, as Leo testifieth,
are of three sorts: For either they are Arabi araha, or
Arabes arabici, that is, true and naturall Arabians: or else
they are Arabi mostaaraba, Arabes inarabati, that is, Ara­
bes per accidens: quia non sunt Arabes natiui. Or lastly they
are Arabi Mustehgeme, Arabes Barbari. Item, Mozarabes,
are Arabians mingled with other nations. Item Mozara­
bica, hoc est, as mine author doth informe me, cum Arabico
mixta.



ASAFII, a sect of Saracens subiecting themselues to
Mohammeds lawes. See Melici.



AZZEKOM, or as it is sometime ignorantly written,
Alzekom, it is a tree whose fruite is exceeding bitter; of
which the blasphemer saith, that the wicked shall feed on
in hell. Mansio eorum ( intellige infidelium ) puteus Abyssi:
Potus omni felle amarior: Cibus de arbore quæ appellatur A­
zachum [aliâs, Alzekon] & est omni pessimo sapore deterior:
Author libri do Hæres. Heraclij, &c. Item infra, Arbor Aza­
chum data est pro delectatione impijs. Ipsa est enim quæ in pro­
fundo Abyssi nascitur , cuius fructus quasi dæmoniorum. De
quo manducantes ventrem suum implebunt. This is cited 
out of the 37 Chapter of the Alkoran, which is intituled
Assora Assaphet; The words there according to Retinensis
are these, Arbor Ezetus (tu scribe, Ezecus, vel rectiùs, Ez­
zecum ) ob malos plantata cyros, sicut diabolorum capita gestans,
& ex suaradice Gehennæ focum emittens. Vnde cibandi incre­
duli, ventres suos farciunt. pag.139. Here you see one rare
plant, to be added as a supplement vnto Clusius, or Mo­
nardus, which haue written of this argument.





AZOARA, Azzoara, Assora, is as much as a Chapter or
section. See the Treatise following.



B


BABE'LMANDEB, (falsly written in all mappes, Ba­
belmandel) is the mouth of the Arabian gulfe, ( sinus Ara­
bicus, or as the Arabians call it, Bahri'lkulzom ) by which
it openeth & falleth into the Red sea. See Nubiensis Geo­
graphy. The word signifieth, The flood-gate.



BARAK, Borak, Albarak, or as the Greeks do write it
[GREEK] Elmparac, was the beast which Mohammed 
rode vpon when he receiued his commission. Asserebat,
saith Ricoldus, quod à Deo ad eum missus est Gabriel, ducens
ad eum quoddam animal, maius quidem asino: minus autem
mulo. Nomen autem animali erat Elmaparac. Loquebatur au­
tem animal, ambulábatque in hora viam quinque millium anno­
rum; & hæc faciebat in nocte.cap.vij. See more of this beast­
ly fable, at the 14. Chapter of Ricold. Florent. Item see
the 4 cration of Cantacuzenus.



BAR, signifieth a desert or solitary place. It is the same
that Sarra.



BAZESTAN, is an hortyard, or garden, as Bellonius 
testifieth.



BEBE'LBAHAR, that is, Porta marina. It is one of the
suburbs of the city Tunis in Africa.



BEBE'LMANERA, is one of the suburbs of the citie
Tunis.



BEBE'LSVVAICA, is one of the suburbs of the citie
Tunis in Africa, which standeth neare vnto the place
where sometimes Carthage stood.



BELD, Belid, Bled, or as the Spaniards do pronounce
it, Velez, signifieth, a countrey, shire or prouince ; and is
preposed, as you see in the examples following, contrary
to the vse of our English word shire.



BELDhuneb,  hoc est, ciuitas vel regio Zizyphorum, a ci­
tie in Africa, so called, as Leo Africanus doth testifie, of 



the abundance of Iuiubes which do grow thereabout.



BELIDV'LGERID, vel Bellidulgerida regio, hoc est,
Locustarum regio; not as some would haue it, and which 
you shall find approoued generally by all Cosmogra­
phers, Dactylifera regio. For Gerid signifieth, a Locust or
Grashopper. Truth it is, that here do grow the best and
greatest plenty of Dates in the world, which the same
Author doth auerre in these words: Secunda pars Africæ,
quæ Latinis Numidia dicta erat, Arabibus bodiè Belidulgerid
vocatur. Hæc ea regio est quæ dactylos producit. Yet it taketh
not the name or denomination from thence: For then it
should haue bene called Bleda'ttamar, or Bleda'nnachel.
For as in Ebrew, so in Arabicke, Tamar with tau, signifi­
eth a Date: so that the fruite that is called a Tamarind, is
nothing else but a Date of India. Item, the same fruit is in
Arabicke named Nachel, not Gerid, as they would haue 
vs beleeue.



BEITHA'LMIKDAS, Domus sanctuarij. Thus the Ara­
bians do vulgarly call Ierusalem. Neither do I remember 
it called by any other name, but by the Christians, who
do follow the steps of the writers of the bookes of the 
holy Scripture.



BEITHE'LMEL, Bitelmel, The exchequer, the treasury.



BENI, or Bani, signifieth sonnes, or nephewes, that is,
grandchildren. It is a word often read preposed before
other words: which therefore do not properly signifie
any set place: but rather some name of a family, nation,
kindred, or cast as they call it.



BVANIFI, is one of the sects of Mohammetists. See
Melici.



C


CAABA, see Alcaaba.





CAFFILA, is the same almost that Karawan is: that is
to say, a conuoy, or company of men, with weapons hired
to defend and gard others from the violence of theeues
and robbers.



CAIRO, Cairus, see Alcair.



CARTEIA, a citie in the South part of Spaine, neare
to the promontory Calpe, now called Tarifa. See Tarif.



CARAVANNA, est frequens mulionum turma. A Carauan,
is a great company of such as do driue Mules and Camels
loden with some merchandise or other, saith Bellonius.
Item in another place he saith, Turcæ magno numero per
turmas, quas ipsi Carauannas nominant, incedunt. The Turks
do trauell and go together by great companies, which
they call Carauans.



CASAR, see Alcasar.



CASAR elcabir, that is, Palatium magnum or as Leo's
interpreter hath, Palatium regium, a great large towne,
built as the same Author saith, by Mansor the King of
Marocco. See Alcasar.



CASAR ezzaghir, that is, Palætium minus, a citie in
Barbarie built in the time of the aboue named Mansor, or 
Almansor, king of Marocco.



CHALIFA, Califa, Chalibas, is the title of honor attri­
buted to the successors of Mohammed; it is commonly
interpreted by the Historiographers Pontifex, that is, Bi­
shop: The word signifieth a successour. Moriens Muame­
des Alim generum, saith the history, successorem suum decla­
rauit, & Calyfam, hoc est, Pontificem, sectæ suæ esse voluit. I­
tem, Salinus (fortè Saladinus) Ægypti imperium adeptus,
edixit vt Calyfæ Ægypti vocarentur Sultani, quæ vox sum­
mum principem & regum regem significat.



CHORAN, see Alkoran.



CVDSI mubarrak, that is, Sanctuarium benedictum, is
one of the names of Ierusalem; and is æquipollent to that
which is more commonly vsed amongst them, Beith al­
mikdas, that is, Domus sanctuarij.



D


DHI'LHAGIA, Dilhaia, Dulhage, the name of the
twelfth moneth of the Arabian yeare, containing com­
monly but 29 dayes.





DHI'LKAADA, Dilkada, Dulcada, Dulkada, the name
of the eleuenth moneth of the Arabian yeare, containing
alwaies 30 daies.



DHI'LKARNAIN, Duorum cornuum, thus the Arabi­
ans do call the Æra or Epocha of Alexander the Great,
that is, the computation of yeares from this time. See
Caluisius, or Scalig. de Emend. tempor.



DIWAR, Dwar, a company of tents orderly placed in
forme of a towne, in which a nation, family, or stocke
descended from the same father, do dwell.



E


EHBERAM, a city of Armenia, one of the foure which 
came out of hell into this world. See Elmeden.



ELESALEM, see Alesalem.



ELMEDEN Chaldææ , one of the foure wicked cities,
as the false Prophet Mohammed doth auerre, which came
from hell into this world: Vastat, saith he, ciuitas Ægyp­
ti, Antiochia Syræ, Ehberam Armeniæ, & Elmeden Chaldææ,
sunt quatuor ciuitates quæ in hunc mundum venerunt ex Infer­
no. Doctrin. Moham pag. 196.



ELMVDEVVANA, est magnum quoddam Saracenicæ le­
gis volumen, quod Legum farraginem interpretantur. Item
infrà,Elmudeuuana totius iuris corpus est: Vide Leonem.



ELMADINA, vel Elmedina, hoc est ciuitas, as Leo in­
terpreteth it. See Medina.



ELPHOCAA, see Alfakih.



F


FRANGI, see Alephrangi.



FOKAA, see Alfakih.



FVRKAN, see Alfurkan.



G


GABEL, is a mountaine in Arabia. The word signifieth
as Curio testifieth, an hill, and so it is the same with Gibel.





GARBII, see Algarbij.



GEZIRA, or Giesera, signifieth, as Leo testifieth, an
Iland. Herehence do many and sundry places take their
denomination, as Gezirat Eldeheb, Insula aurea, in Egypt.



GESEIR, hoc est, Algira. Geseir autem Afris, atque nobis,
saith Leo, insulam sonat, sic dicta quod insulis Maioricæ,
Minoricæ & Geuisæ adiæceat.



GEZIRA Taref, (not Gelzira, as there you shall find it
falsly written) est insula parua in sinu Calpæ, quæ à Tarife di­
cta est. See Taref.



GIEBEL, or Gibel, the name of diuerse places in Eu­
rope, Africa, and Asia. The word signifieth a mountaine. 
Herehence the name of the mouth of the narrow seas,
( Fretum Gaditanum, the Straights ) is after the Arabicke
name vulgarly, by the seamen & others called Estrecho de
Gibraltar, strictum Zibeltar, or Zibeltara, as some call it. See
Tarif. The famous hill in Sicilia, of the ancients called
Ætna, is now called Mon-gibello. &c. Item, Gabel elhadi­
dus (not Gebelehadichus, as it is there falsly written) that
is, Mons ferreus, is an hill in Arabia Felix, as I remember.



GIVMAA, is in Arabicke the name of the Turkes sab­
bath, which alwaies is our Friday. The word signifieth
Conuentum, congregationem; quasi dicas, Diem conuentus. Di­
em veneris, saith a learned man, Arabes appellant Diem con­
gregationis, quòd ea die in templis suis ad sacra peragenda, con­
gregari soleant.



ANNVS Aliema, is a certaine yeare, much celebrated
amongst the Mohammetanes or Turks, of which yeare
their Chronographers do thus speake, Hic Moauui pace
firmata, communi fauore sublimatus, omnia redegit in melius.
Ad quem omnes Orientales & Occidentales confluxerunt, illi
parentes. Annum autem in quo contigit illud, annum Aliema, id
est, annum congregationis, appellarunt.



GIVMADI ewel , the first Giumadi , that is, the fifth
moneth of the Arabian yeare, containing 30 dayes.



GIVMADI achar, The latter Giumadi, that is, the sixth



moneth of the Arabian yeare, containing but 29 dayes.



ALGEZIRA d'alfrada, (or as it is written, Alzira Dal­
frada)that is, as I conceiue it, Insula freti, is the Iland Gadiz
on the cost of Spaine. Est insula quæ olim Gades, in exteriore
Oceano, propè fretum, sita.



GWADI, signifieth a riuer: And hereof the riuer Bætis,
which runneth by Siuill in Spaine, is to this day called
Guadi'lkebir, that is to say, The great riuer.	,



GWADI, and Gwadiana, The riuer Anas, that runneth
along by the east of te Algarbij.



GVADALAGIRA,  a place neare to Medina.



GVADALGVIBIR, the same that Guadalkebir is.



H


HACCAM, Alhaccam, a Iudge; It answereth to that of­
fice which we do call the Maior and Bayliffe of a towne
or corporation. It differeth much from Kadi, or Alkadi,
which signifieth also a Iudge: For this is an honourable
title, giuen onely vnto the Nobility. The Haccams oft­
times are men of meaner degree.



HALEB, Heleb, Halep, is that famous city or mart­
towne, which we commonly call Haleppo, or Aleppo. Haleb
vel Halep, saith Bellonius, totius orientis maximum empori­
um, est caput Comagenes. Ex neotericis nonnulli, veterum Hie­
rapolim esse existimant. At P. Gillius Berrhœam esse censet.
And in deed the Arabian paraphrast of the new Testa­
ment, for Berrhæa, wheresoeuer he found it, did translate
it Haleb.



HARAM, Haran, Elharam, Elaram, is a temple in Me­
cha, built as they do verily beleeue, by Abraham the Pa­
triarch. Of which the deceiuer speaketh in the Chapter A­
braham, on this manner: Templum Haram ædificatum est in
terra Aman. Where Bookman in the margent hath these
words; Amonitidi attribuit Mecham, Geographiæ imperitus.
But if I be not deceiued, in the Arabicke it is Ayaman,
which is the name whereby Arabia Felix is knowne to 



these people. Item, the authour of the booke intituled De
Gener. Moham. of this place writeth thus; Fibeit Alharam
( hoc est, in domo, Haram ) idolum adorans, repentè resonante va­
lido fragore perterritus est. That is, worshiping the idoll A­
bel in the temple Haram, hee was affrighted at a great
cracke of thunder, which suddeinly then happened.



HELARAM, see Haram.



HELPHOCAA, see Alfakih.



HIERVSALEM, was one of the three cities, which, as
the impostour feigneth, came from Paradise, into this
world. De doctr. Moham. pag. 196.



I


IESRAB, or more truly Iethrab, Ietripum, and sometime
Itraripum, Meccæ vrbis agri oppidum, as the historians do
tell vs, was one of the three cities, which as Mohammed 
would haue vs beleeue, came out of Paradise into this
world. De doctrin. Moham. pag. 196.



IERVSALEM, see Hierusalem, and Beita'lmikdas.



IETHRAB, see Iesrab.



K


KABIS, or Alkabis, is a mountaine in Arabia Felix, not
farre from Mecha.



KADI, Cadi, Alkadi, Alkad, The Lord chiefe Iustice. A
title of honour and high esteeme amongst the Arabians
of Barbary. It is of greater honour then that of the Alhac­
cam; which is like as is with vs the Maior of a city. All the
noblemen, as I take it, are thus stiled. For all of them haue
this kind of authority giuen vnto them from the King. In
the history of the warres of Barbary, it is taken for the
kings lieutenant, and commander of his forces by land.



KANTAR, Kintar, Cantarus, an hundred weight. The
greatest weight amongst the Arabians of Barbary, contai­
ning an hundred pound weight; so called as I take it, of 
the latine word Centum. Vncia illis, saith mine Author, est
qualis est Italis: verùm libra octo & decem capti vncias, voca­



turque eorum lingua Rethl. Centum verò Rethl Cantarum v­
num efficiunt.



KAPH, is a mountaine I know not where situate; but
heare our fablers description of it. Procede, inquit, & ex­
pone, ( hoc est, perge mentiri ) cur cœlum dictum est cœlum? R.
Ideo quidem quia de fumo creatum: Fumus verò vaporis ma­
ris, &c. Quid ergo habet quod viride est? R. Ex monte Kaf.
Mons enim Kaf ex Smaragdis Paradisi, qui mons orbem terræ
cingens, cœlum sustinet, &c. De doct. Moham. pag. 192. &
Cydon. 128. is not this a strange kind of Philosophy?
Moreouer Æthicus, I am sure, hath not recorded this
mountaine amongst those famous hils of the world.



KARAWAN, Caraban, a company of merchants going
together for trading, with a great number of Horses, Ca­
mels, and Mules, loden with merchandise or other com­
modities. See Carawan.



KASAVA, Alcasaua, is the name of the kings house in
Marocco.



KORRAN, see Alkoran.



M


MAMALVCHI, were the souldiers of the Souldan of
Babylon. Sultani milites, saith Cardinall Cusa, Mamaluchi
vocabantur. The word signifieth seruants or slaues : that
is, the kings vassals.



MARSA, saith mine Author, signifieth an hauen, or
port. Herehence Mersa'lcabir, id est, latissimus portus, is the
name of a large and capacious hauen in Africa, quætamen
est male fida carinis, as Leo testifieth.



PORTVS Marsa, vel Burgi, that is, Turris portus, a port
in Alexandria.



MARSA essilsela,  Portus catenæ, The chaine port: Ano­
ther port there.



MECHA, a city of Arabia Felix ( Ayamen they call it )
to which from all places of Turky, they make their yearly
peregrinations, to visite the tombe of Mohammed. In
this city is the temple Haram, so often mentioned in the



Alkoran, and in the histories of the Turks and Saracens.
See Haram. Here also is the Alcaaba. It is one of the three
cities which, as our fabler doth affirme, came out of Pa­
radise into this world. Iethrab and Ierusalem were the o­
ther two. De doctr. Moham. pag. 196.



MEDINA Almeidæ, a citie in Spaine, so called, as Leo
affirmeth of a strange table which was kept there. Medina
Almeidæ, vrbs à mensa quadam, quæ ex vnica gemma viridi,
instar smaragdi, constabat, in ea reperta, Arabum lingua nomen
accepit. see Almedina, and Assora'lmaida.



MEDINATA'LNABY, or more truly Medinata'nnaby,
that is, the city of the Prophet, is a city of Arabia Felix.
But whether it be Iethrab, or Mecha, or a third city diffe­
rent from both, I dare not for certaine affirme.



MELICI, are a sect or faction of Mohammetans , or
Saracens professing Mohammeds religion. Melici, saith
Curio, Alafij, Alambeli, & Buanifi sunt quatuor sectæ Sara­
cenorum. Afri sunt, Melici: Arabes & Damasceni, Asafij:
In Cairo verò maxima Ægypti vrbe omnes sectæ, nemine re­
pugnante, vigent. In this Cair is like vnto Amsterdam.



MESGIED, Mesged, Mescita, Meskita, Mesquita, Mos­
quita, signifieth a Church, Temple, or Synagogue of the
Mohammetanes , where they meete & performe all their
superstitious seruice vnto their idoll. Turcarum phanum si­
ue templum Mesquita dicitur. In Arabia Felix there is a 
temple neare vnto Cufa, where Aly, one of the successors
of Mohammed was buried; Which therefore is called 
Masged-Aly, that is, templum Aly. The historians do falsly
write it Massadale.



MESQVITA, Mosquita, see Mesgied.



MOHAMMED, ( Mem being doubled by Teshdid) Mo­
hammed, Muhammedes, Muamedes, MOhammetus, Macho­
med, Moammetus , was the name of that famous impo­
stour and seducer of the Arabians or Saracens, the first au­
thor I meane and inuentor of the Alkoran and lawes of



that superstitious faction. He was borne in Arabia, as the
Historiographers do report, on the 22 day of Aprill ( x.
Kal. Maij ) in the yeare after the birth of Christ 596 : He
died on the 13 of March ( 3. Id. Martij ) in the yeare of
our Lord 637 , being of the age of 41 yeares, and hauing
reigned 10. He was buried in Mecha, a city of Arabia
Felix.



MOHARRAM, Muharam, and with the article, Almu­
haram, the name of the first moneth of the Arabian Kalen­
dar, containing 30 daies. Amir autem filius lezid illud per­
cipiens, obuius illum deuicit, & in Alcuphæ confinio peremit,
die decimo Almuharan.



MOSQVITA, see Mesgied.



MVLEY, Muleius, a title of honour signifying as much
as Lord, or Commander. I do not find it giuen or attri­
buted to any but those of the kings stocke.



MVSLIM, or Mussliman, [GREEK] Mussulmannus, is
one that is instructed in the beleefe of the Mohamme­
tanes. Terrore perculisi multi mandato paruerunt, saith Can­
tacuzenus, & salui facti à sanguinis effusione, & rapina, &
nominabantur Saluati, seu Musselmani; p. 64. Item alibi, Om­
nes hanc fidem tenentes, Mussilmannos, scilicet sanæ fidei homi­
nes nominantur. Yet I confesse that the learned Bellonius,
who had conuersed long with this sect, telleth vs that this
name is giuen to euery one that is circumcised, and that
at the time of the performance of this ceremony: But
so, as none is to be admitted before he shall be able to an­
swer vnto certaine questions, which then are demanded
of him: His words, to this purpose, are these: Circumci­
duntur Turcæ, non octauo die, quemadmodum Indæi: Sed octa­
uo anno, duodecimo, vel decimoquinto ætatis anno, vel maturi­
ùs, vel seriùs, pro rei opportunitate. Pueri enim non circumci­
duntur donec tam grandes sint, vt circumcisori respondere que­
ant. Eos in templo circumcidere non licet: sed in parentum ædi­
bus. Quoniam incircumcisi templum ingredi non possunt, &c. Cæ­
terum a circumcisione nomen pueri non immutatur: sed id reti­



net quod illi in natiuitate inditum fuerat, addita solùm voce
Mussulma, hoc est, Verus Turca circumcisiss. Musslim, there­
fore, or Musliman, is vsed amongst them in the same sence,
as we vse the word Christianus, vel Catholicus, whereby we
do signifie a member of the Church, one ingrafted or in­
corporated into the mysticall body of Christ.



MVSSLIMAN, Musslimannus, see Muslim.



MVSHWART, or Mushward, is the king of Maroccos
hall, or Great chamber. where the Lords, Gentlemen, &
Gard do attend the seruice and command of their Soue­
raigne.



N


NADIR, Nathir, is that point in the heauen, which is
opposite vnto the Zenith, or that point which is directly 
ouer our head. Zenith, saith Christmannus, quem Arabes
scribunt Semith, vertex capitis est, seu polus horizontis: Punctum 
vertici oppositum appellant Nathir, quasi dicas, punctum simile:
Est enim illud quasi alter polus horizontis, nobis depressus.
That is, Zenith, which the Arabians do write Semith, is
the point ouer our heads, or pole of the Horizont. The
point that is opposite to this, they call Nathir ( or Nadir)
as one would say, The like point. For that is as it were the 
other pole of the Horizont vnder vs.



O


OSMENVS, a proper name of a man amongst the Ara­
bians; which is diuersly conceiued of the historians, some
writing Vsmen; others Othman, or Othoman. It was the
name of the first Emperour of the Turks , which first
wrung the scepter out of the hands of the Saracens.



P


PHATIMI, one of the titles of the kings of Barbary.
The word signifieth Ablactatus, wained, one newly taken
from the mothers or nources breast. But in this place I
suppose it to bee deriued from Phatima, the name of a 
woman of the posterity of Mohammed, from whom these



kings do fetch their pedigree. I determine nothing , let
those which are more conuersant in these stories bee
iudge.



PHRANGI, see Alphrangi.



PHVRKAN, see Alfurkan.



R


RAMADHAN , the ninth moneth of the Arabian Ka­
lendar, containing 30 daies. This moneth they fast, as we
do in Lent.



RABIEewel, Rabie the first ; The name of the third
moneth of the Kalendar of the Arabians, containing 30
daies.



RABIEachar, Rabie the latter. The name of the fourth
moneth of the Arabian yeare, containing 29 daies.



REGIAB , the seuenth moneth of the Arabians, con­
taining 30 daies.



RETHL, is a kind of weight which answereth to our
pound; it containeth 18 ounces. Libra, saith Curio, capit
18 uncias, Tethlam ( male, pro Rethlam ) illi vocant. Vncia il­
lis est, saith Bellonius, qualis est Italis : Verùm libra octo &
decem capit Vncias, vocaturque eorum lingua Rethl. Centum ve­
rò Rethl Cantarum vnum efficiunt. A pound weight which
they call Rethel, containeth 18 ounces. Their ounce, saith
Bellonius, is the same with the Italian ounce. But their
pound containeth 18 ounces. This they call in their lan­
guage Rethel. Now an hundred Rethels do make a Can­
tar, or Kintar as some do pronounce it, that is, an hundred
weight.



S


SAHARA, The stonie countrey, the sands: the same al­
most that Sarra is: that is, a wildernesse or desart, vntilled
and vnhabited, by reason that it is nothing but rocks, and
ouerspread with sand.



SALIBA,  [GREEK], claua militaris, quia dentes vel cultri 
[GREEK], scapo adharentes in omnes partes vulnerant. Saliba is



a kind of souldiers weapons, or holy water sprinkle, as we
call it, a kinde of club , which hauing diuerse spikes put
crosse wise into the staffe , woundeth and hurteth which
way soeuer you strike. We might call the crosse staffe by
this name: For Salib in this language signifieth a crosse.



SALIE, The Orisons. The Turks in 24 houres, do go
sixe times to prayers: The first time is, as they write, about
two houres before day, and is called Sallie : When as the
Moudon from the top of the steeple cryeth with a loud
voice Allah cabir, la allah, illa ilellah, that is, God is almigh­
ty , there is no God, but the Lord. The second they call
Sabaha'lhhair: The third, Dahour: The fourth, Lashour: The
fift, Mogrubey: The sixth, Lashahara.



SARRA, Serra , or as the Spaniards do pronounce it,
Sierra, a desart place, a wildernesse. Diuerse places in A­
frica , and elsewhere, are called by this name: but espe­
cially that which was formerly called Lybia, is now na­
med Sarra , as the Cosmographers with one consent do
teach vs. Tertia pars Africæ, saith our Author, quæ Lybia La­
tinis. Arabica lingua non aliter quam Sarra appellatur, quæ
vox idem quod desertum significat. The third part of Africa,
which the Latines called Libya, in the Arabicke tongue
is called no otherwise then Sarra, which word in that lan­
guage signifieth a desert or wildernesse.



SARRACENI , Sarazins, Sarrasins, are those people
which otherwise of the Ancients were called Arabes, A­
rabians. Neither were they so named of Sara, Abrahams
wife, as some men do thinke, but of Saraka, which signi­
fieth Furari, to rob or steale. And indeed the Arabians
haue bene and are to this day accounted great sharkers
and robbers.



SCECVS, see Sheich.



SHARIF, see Scherif.



SEEDI, a name or title of honour, yet attributed vnto
meane persons. It signifieth, My lord. The word is vsed in
all respects as Monsieur, the French word, or Sir, the En­
glish.





SEEDA, a Lady, Madame. The same that Seedi is, one­
ly differing in gender.



SEMITH, see Zenith.



SEPHAR , the second moneth of the Arabian yeare,
containing 29 daies.



SHAABEN , the eight moneth of the Arabian Kalen­
dar, containing 29 daies.



SHEICH, Scechus, Scechus, or after the Spanish man­
ner of writing and pronuntiation , Xechus , and Xaichus:
a title of honour attributed to none but men of desert.
Sceci, saith Honiger, sunt Reguli, qui regiones & vrbes insig­
niores, circa oram præsertim, possident. Schech's are the kings
lieutenants, which haue the gouernment of countries and
chiefe cities, especially those which are vpon the sea coast.
Another saith, that it is a title giuen alwaies to the eldest
of the kings sonnes. This I dare not for truth affirme: sit
fides penes authores. This is certaine, that the first of this fa­
mily that now reigneth in Barbary was stiled, Muley Mo­
hammed Sheich. The word signifieth as much as Senex,
[GREEK], old, ancient.



SHERIF, Sharif, Sharifius, or as the Spaniards do
write it, Xerif, Xerifius, Xarifius. It was the name of the
great-grandfather, as I take it, of Muley Seedan that now
reigneth in Fesse and Marocco, who by his wealth and
wisedome did aduance his family vnto the height and
dignity of kings. Hereupon, if I be not deceiued, it hath
bene euer since taken for an honourable title, and, as farre
as I remember, attributed to none but such as are descen­
ded from the kings stocke. The word signifieth Noble, ho­
nourable, illustrissimus. Seriphus, or Seriphes, saith the histo­
rian, hoc est, Nobilis. A noble man, or a Lord. Item, Leo A­
fricanus doth often stile a great man, whose company he
did much frequent, Seriphus Princeps. Item, Summæ digni­
tatis vir Seriphes appellatur. Quæ dignitas ea apud illos est, vt
Califa mortua, Seriphes succedat. A man of great honour is
called Seriphes: which honour amongst them is that, that



when the Calif is dead, the Seriph must succeed: so that it
should seeme to be as much to them, as the Heire appa­
rant: the Dolphin, they call him in France: the Infanta, in
Spaine. Yet whether this be true or not, I dare not a­
uouch.



SHEWAL, the tenth moneth of the Arabian Kalendar,
containing but 29 daies.



SVLTAN, Soultan, Souldan, Sultanus, and with the arti­
cle Assultan, the name of supreme honor amongst the A­
rabians, and seemeth to bee as much as Imperator was a­
mongst the Romans, or [GREEK], omnium augustissi­
mus, was to the Greeks. For thus they now call the Great
Turke, Sultan de Stamboli, The Souldan of Stamboli. It is
more then Melic, that is King. The first, as I thinke, that did
assume this title, was the Generall and leader of the Sara­
cens or Arabians which conquered Egypt, and the coun­
tries neare adioyning, whose successours afterward were
called Soultans of Babylon. Salinus ( fortè Saladinus) Æ­
gypti imperium adeptus, edixit vt Calyfæ Ægypti vocarentur
Sultani, quæ vox summum Principem & regum regem signifi­
cat. Item infrà, Ægypti pontifex Sultanus appellatur , hoc est,
summus imperator, siue regum rex. Saladinus hauing obtai­
ned the Empire of Egypt, commanded by Proclamation,
That the Chalifs of Egypt should euer after that be called
Souldans: which word doth signifie, The cheefe Prince, or
King of kings. Item, The Byshop of Egypt is called the
Souldan, that is, the great Emperor, or King of kings. The
word is the same in nature and signification, that the He­
brew Shilton is, which in Daniel signifieth [GREEK], po­
testatem, a soueraigne power or command.



A SVLTANEE is a peece of gold of the value of 7s.6.d.
It hath the denomination of the former word Sultan, and
signifieth as much as Regalis, a royall, the kings coine.



T


A TALBY, is amongst the Arabians of Barbary as much



as a Scriuener or publike notary is with vs; For these one­
ly are authorized to draw writings betweene man and
man, as bils of debt, contract, couenant, bargaine and sale,
and such like, which they call bils of Shuhùds, that is, of
witnesses. Of these kinde of writings I haue seene very
many, and yet haue neuer seene any containing aboue fiue
or sixe very short lines. This breuity fauoureth of the an­
cient simplicity of former ages, yea euen of the Lawyers
of this our nation, as may appeare in all the deeds & con­
ueiances by them then drawne, and continued, remai­
ning to be seene at this day. Amongst those which I haue
seene, I haue especially obserued two; The one was for a 
great house in Cheapside, abutting on the one side vpon
Iremonger lane, purchased by the Earle of Lancaster of a 
Iew, in the time, as I remember, of Richard the first, with
diuerse prouisos and reseruations of rent, &c. signed with
the hands of the Maior, & diuerse of the Nobility & Al­
dermen: Besides the licence & approbation of the Prince
of the Synagogue of the Iewes, written in Ebrew in a 
strange exoticke character; All contriued into a peece of
parchment, not any whit bigger then an ordinary single 
obligation. The other was all in Ebrew, betweene two
Iewes, for an house in Colnchester, in the tinme of K. Iohn,
containing but sixe very short lines. This I translated for
the office of the Records in the Towre well neare thirtie
yeares since: There as I am informed it is still to be seene.



TARICH , Terich , is the same that Epocha is to the
Greeks: or Æra, to the Latines: The Astronomers, fol­
lowing the interpretors of the Arabian writers, do call it
Radix, whereby they vnderstand some set and certaine
time beginning at some memorable action, ( as the Crea­
tion, the Flood, the Birth of Christ ) from which they ac­
count and reckon backward or forward all other times
and actions whatsoeuer.



TARIFA, signifieth the end, outside, or outmost bound
of any thing. Hereupon many places in Arabia, and in



places where the Arabian colonies haue bene seated, do
take their name. In Spaine the city which was anciently 
called Carteia, in the outmost skirts of Andalusia, is now
called Tarifa. Carteia in Hispania ad Calpe promontorium
sita, post dicta est Tarifa. Carteia, a city in Spaine, situate vp­
on the foreland called Calpe, was afterward named Tarifa.



GIBEL Tarif. Calpes promontorium, saith mine Author,
à Tarife duce dicta est Gibel Tarif, hoc est, mons Tarifius est ap­
pellatus, & nunc Gibel terra nuncupatur. There is also a foun­
taine or spring neare vnto this place which is called of the
Geographers Fons Tarifius. The historian was deceiued.
For these places were not so named of Tarif, a Captaine:
but of their position and situation, as I haue said. For so
that foreland or promontory in Cornwall, which we call
The Lands end, the Arabian Geographer calleth Tarfi'l­
garbi mina' lgezira, the West bound of the Island.



TVRGMAN, Trudgman, [GREEK], in the
latter Greeke writers, signifieth, an interpretor ; deriued
from the Ebrew Thirgem, which signifieth to interpret or
expound out of one language into another. From whence
also Thargum, or Targum, a translation, an interpretation,
hath the denomination.



V


VASTAT, a city of Egypt, one of the foure, which as
Mohammed doth feigne, did come out of hell into this
world. De Doctrin. Moham. pag. 196. See Elmeden.



VELEZ, see Beled.



VELEZMalaga, is a prouince in Spaine, which I take
to be the city and territories of Malaca: see Monardus.



W


WADI, see Guadi.



X


XAICHVS, see Scheich,





XARIFIVS, see Sherif.



XECHVS, see Sheich.



XERIFIVS, Xerif, see Sherif.



Z


ZIBELTAR, see Gibel.



ZENITH, saith Christmannus, &c.




