



An Explication of the Terms of Gard'ning, in
an Alphabetical Order.

A.

TO Ablaqueates, or lay bare the Roots
of Trees. See Bare, and Trees and
Roots.

Acclivity is the sloping of the side of a
Hill, or Bank, or Ridge, or any other
Ground not level, considered as Rising or
Ascending, which when considered as de­
scending, is called Declivity. See Declivi­
ty.

Ados, is a French Term signifying some­
times a sloping Bank raised against some
well exposed Wall, to sow hasting or early
Pease or Beans in, or plant Artichokes, or any
thing else we would have more forward
than ordinary, and sometimes Ridges or
Double Slopes, with Furrows or Drains be­
tween them, to lay the Plants dry, in wet or
marshy, or over moist Grounds. See Banks,
Hillocke and Slopes.

Agriots, in French, Griots, are a sort of
choice Cherries, of the sharp sort, such as are
Four right Kentish Cherries.

Alberdge, is a name given to Peaches,
that are but of a small, or scarce midling
Size."alberdge" not found in OED.

To Aline, is to range, level, or lay even
in, and to a strait and direct Line. Said of
Walls, Rows of Trees, and sides of Banks,
Allies, or Beds, which is performed with
Lines fastned to Spikes fixed in the Ground
or Wall, as is amply described in its proper
place. See to Range, to Level.

Aliners, are such Rangers, or Men im­
ployed in the abovesaid work of Ranging,
or Levelling Rows of Trees, Walls, &c. It
were well our English Gard'ners would
naturalize those two Words, not being
otherwise able to express their signification
without a Circumlocution, and having
with less necessity naturalized many other
forreign terms, without so much as alter­
ing their Termination, which in these I
have made perfectly English.

Allies, are such as we call Walks in any
Garden. See Walks, and their Use and
Proportion, see in the Body of the Book.

Allies, are said to be Bien Tirrées, Bien Re­
passées, or Bien Retirrées, that is, well plain'd,
when they are laid smooth and firm and
tight again, with the beater or rouling
Stone after they have been scraped or tur­
ned up with an Instrument to destroy the
Weeds.

Diagonal Allies. See Diagonal.

Parallel Allies. See Parallel.

To Amend, is to Meliorate, recruit, or
improve any Ground that is either exhau­
sted by continual bearing, or that is natu­
rally Barren, with Dung, Marl, Compost,
Fresh Mold, or any other usual way of im­
provement.

Amendment, is Mucking, Dunging, or any o­
ther way recruiting or improving of Ground
as abovesaid.

Amputation, is the sloping or cutting off,
of any considerable Branch or Limbs of a
Tree.

Annual Plants or Flowers, are such as con­
tinue but a Year.

Ants, Pismires, or Emets, are known
Insects.

Approach, to Graff by Approach. See Graffing
and Inoculation, in the first part of this
Work.

To Apple or Pome. See to Pome.


Argots or Spurs, are the pointed ends
and extremities of dead Branches in any
Trees, which no neat Gard'ner will neg­
lect to cut off. But it is particularly ne­
cessary to do it in Nurseries for Trees graf­
sed Scutcheon-wise. See Spurs.

Arms are the main Branches or Limbs of
a Tree.

Aromatick Plants, are such as are Spicy,
and hot in Scent and Tast, whether sweet
or no.

Artichoke-Eyes or Eyelets, are the off-sets
growing about the main Stool or Heart
of Artichoke Roots, from which Spring the
Suckers or Slips by which they are propa­
gated.

Artichokes Suckers are of two sorts, viz. Hea­
ded Suckers, that bear small Heads, and
shoot out of their stems round about their
main Heads, but grow not so big, or Suckers
which as is abovesaid, spring from the Off-­
setts of their Main Roots, called by the French,
Orilletons, or Eyelets, which are therefore
their Slips or Slip-suckers.

App See Exposure and Exposition.

Avenves, are certain Allies or Walks in
Gardens larger than ordinary, but more
properly leading to the front of the Houses,
which are commonly accompanied with
two Bye-Walks, commonly call'd Coun­
ter-Walks, which are both Bordered with
great Trees, either Elms, Linden Trees, or
Oaks, and sometimes Standard Fruit-Trees.



Aviary, is a convenient place in a Garden,
or House where Birds are kept, to Sing,
Breed, &c. 

Augusted, is a Term used to signifie any
thing that is Sun burnt, and has endu­
red the heat of the Summer, and is turned
ripe and yellow like Corn in August, and
hard and firm withall. It is spoken of se­
veral things, as of Branches of Trees that
are of a full Summers growth, of Melons,
Pumpions, &c. when they are grown yel­
low, and hard, and will endure the Nail.

To Arrest Melons or Cucumbers, is to
break off the top of their Vines, to check
and stop their Growth. See Melons.

Azerolls, are Garden-Haws, being twice
as big as the Wild ones, and much more Pulpy
and Pleasant, but not so fruitful;
and consequently, Azeroll-Trees, or Garden-­
Haw-Trees, which are usually planted against
Walls.


B.

BAcward Fruits or Legumes, are such as
ripen late in the year. See Latter.Headword phrases not found in OED.

Bands of Long Rie Straw, steeped in wa­
ter to make it lithe and pliant, and then
twisted, are made use of to tie up Lang Let­
tuce, or other plants to cabbage, or whiten.
Such Straw in French is called Pleion. See
Straw.

Plat-Bands. See Borders; See likewise
under P.

Sloped Banks, raised against Walls well
exposed, for the sowing or planting of Ha­
sting or Early Peas, Beans, Artichokes, &c.
See Ados and Slopes.

To Bank, is to tight up the sides of a
Bed or Border, and make it firm with
the back of a Spade or other Instru­
ment.

To Bare the Roots of Trees, or to Abla­
queate, is to dig away the Earth about
them, and expose them sometime to the Air,
to refresh them, and make room for put­
ting fresh Mold to them, or in order to
come at their Roots, to prune them, when
either defective, or too Rank or Luxuriant.
See Trees and Roots.

Bark, is the outward rind of a Tree.

To Bark a Tree, is to peal and strip it
of its Bark.

Baskets made of Ozier wrought so loose,
that one may see through them, are used for
Circumposition, that is to plant young Trees
in, to keep in reserve, to be ready to take
up again with Basket and all, to replant in
the places of such Trees as shall happen to
die, or otherwise miscarry, in the Ranks
where we had planted them, that so there
may be no Gaps, nor other Deformity in
any Rank of Trees. The French term them
Mannequine.

To Bear easily or quickly, or easily or
quickly to take to, or to be brought to
bearing, is spoken of Trees that bear in
few years, or little time after they are plan­
ted.

To Bear hardly, or to be hard to take,
or to be brought to bearing, is spoken of
Trees that are many years or a long time
after planting, before they bear.

Beaten, spoken of tilled Ground when
it is so beaten with great and violent Rains,
that 'tis grown as firm as if it had been ne­
ver tilled at all.

A Beater is an Instrument wherewith
Gravel Walks, Pall-malls, &c. are smoothed
and made firm.

Beds are plots of dressed Ground, which
in digging, are wrought into such a form
by the Gard'ner, as is most conveni­
ent to the temper and situation of the Earth
in that place, and to the nature of the
Plants to be sown or planted in it. They
are of two sorts, Cold and Hot.

Cold Beds are made either of Natural
Earth, or mixed and improved Mold, and
are in moist Grounds raised higher than the
Paths, to keep them moderately dry, and
in rising and dry Grounds, laid lower than
the Paths, that they may on the contrary
retain moisture so much the better, and pro­
fit so much the more by the Rain that
falls.

Hot Beds, are Beds composed of Long
New Dung, well packt together, to such a
height and breadth as is prescribed in the
Body of the Book, and then covered over
to a certain thickness, with a well tempered
Mold, in order to the planting or sowing
such plants in them, as are capable of be­
ing by Art, forced to grow, and arrive to
maturity even in the midst of Winter, or at
least a considerable while before their na­
tural Season.

How these Beds are differently made
for Mushrooms and how for other Plants.
See in the work it self.

Deaf Beds are such Hot Beds as are made
hollow in the Ground, by taking away
the natural Earth to such a certain depth,
and filling the place with Dung, and then
covering it with Mold, till it rise just even
with the Surface of the Ground. They are
used for Mushrooms."deaf bed" not found in OED.

Kernel Beds are Nursery Beds, wherein the
Seed or Kernels of Kernel Fruit are sown in
order to raise Stocks to Graff upon.

Bells, are large Glasses made in the form
of Bells, to clap over tender Plants or such
as are to be forced, to keep them from the
Cold, and to communicate the Sun's heat to



them sometimes with the more advantage,
when it is not strong enough without them. 

Belles de Nuit, or fair ones of the night,
are a sort of Flowers.

Bigarros, are a sort of French Heart Cher­
ries, so called because they be partly Red,
and partly White.

Bigarrades, are a sort of Sour Oranges
deep coloured, and in a manner crumpled,
and with a very uneven Rind, used chiefly
in Sauces, and to medicinal purposes. So
called from their odd and uncouth shape.

Bigarrades, are a sort of mothey colour­
ed Pears, called also the vilonous Pears of
Anjou.Sense of "bigarade" as 'pear' not found in OED.

Biting is a taste in Fruits and Plants,
well known to any taster.

Le Blanc, i. e. the Whites, is a sort of
disease in Melons and Cucumbers, termed only
in English Unhealthiness: See Unhealthi­
ness.

To Blanch: See to Whiten.

Blast and Blasting, are said of any
young Buds or Flowers, or Leaves of Plants,
that being nipt by the East or North East
Winds sometimes reigning in the Spring,
wither and shrivel, and fall off, to give
place to new ones. The Authour's counsel
is to ease the Plants, by taking them spee­
dily off.

To Bleed, or Weep is said of Vines whose
sap runs out to waste by indiscreet cutting
or any other accident: See weep.

Blighing is said of Flowers or Blossoms,
that shed or fall without knitting for Fruit,
by the effect of the same Winds.Headword not found in OED: "blighting"?

To Bloom is said of any Plant that begins
to Flower.

Blossomes are well known to be the Flowers
of Fruit-Trees.

Blossoms that shed without knitting for
Fruit, are said in French Couler, i. e. to slip,
or slink like an Abortive Birth.

To Blow, is said of Flower Buds when
they open and spread.

Borders are Flat Banks raised against Walls
commonly garnish'd with Sweet Scented
Herbs, as Time, Sage, Lavender, &c.

Bordures or Borders, is a term likewise used
for Herbs commonly planted in Borders.

Counter-borders, or Plat Bands, are such
Borders as are made on the sides of Walks or
Squares that front the Borders by Walls.

To Border an Alley, is to Line or Edge it
with Borders that may separate it from the
Squares, and Beds, and other works contain­
ed in them, between which they Traverse.

A Botannist, is one that is a profinement
in the general knowledge of Plants.

A Bottle or Truss of Hay, is a known Term.

Bough: See Branches.

Boxes: See Cases.

A Branch or Bough is a part of a Tree,
that shooting from the Trunk, helps to form
the Head. Branches are of several sorts.

An Augusted Branch is a Branch of a
Summers growth, that is just hard'ned, and
has done growing.

A Bearing, or Fruit-Branch is a young
shoot that is grown of a midling length and
thickness from the pruning of the foregoing
year.

Collateral Branches, are such Branches as
grow and spread on the same side of a Wall-­
Tree.

A Mother Branch, is a Branch that after
its last Pruning, has shot forth other new
Branches; And thus we say, that in Pruning
no young Branches are to be left upon the
Mother Branches, but such as contribute to
the Beauty of the figure of the Tree.

Main, or whole Branches are called
Arms, and Limbs.

Branches Chifonnes. Skrubbed or Shrubbie
Branches are such as are very small and
very short or Skrubbed, whether they be of
but of one or more years growth, and be­
cause they do but stuff a Tree with a confu­
sed quantity of useless Leaves, must there­
fore be taken clean away.

Water Branches, or Water shoots, or Water
Boughs, are such Boughs that on Standards,
being shaded and dript upon, remain smooth
and naked without Buds which are as I sup­
pose those which our Authour calls Jarrets or
Hams: See Hams.

A Wood Branch, is a Branch that spring­
ing out of the last years Pruning in a regular
and natural order, is reasonably thick.

A half Wood Branch, or Branch of half
Wood, is a Branch that being too small for
a Wood Branch, and two thick for a Fruit
Branch, must be shortned to the length of
two or three Inches, to make it produce
other new ones that may be better either
for Wood, or Fruit, and at the same time
contribute to the Beauty of the figure, and
to spend off and divert some of the over
Luxuriant vigour of the Tree.

Branches of False Wood, are such as
shoot from any other part of the Tree than
that which was Pruned, last year; or else
such as though they spring from the last
Pruning, are thick and gouty in those places
where they should be slender.

The main Running Branches of Melons or
Cucumbers are called Vines.

To break off. See pinch, and Brout,
and Brouse.

To break up, Is said properly of plow­
ing or digging up Ground that never was
tilled before, or at least not a long time.

To Brouse or Brout, in French, Brouter, is
to break off the extreamities of small Bran­



ches, when they are too long in proportion
to their vigour. 

Brugnons: See Nectarins."brunion" antedates earliest OED citation (1706).

Bruised Fruit, that is, bruised in falling
without piercing the skin, is called in French
Cottii, or Squatted.

A Bud is the Head of a Young shoot that
begins to peep out.

A Young Bud or Eye, is a Bud as 'twere
in its first Seed and principles, when it just
only appears in the Bark of the Tree, before
it swells to peep or shoot forth.

To Bud, is to Graff by Inoculation, or
set a young Bud of one Tree into another;
an operation to be performed about Mid-­
summer. See Innoculate and Inoculation, and
Graffing in the fifth part of this Work.

Well Budded or well set Trees; is said of
those Fruit-Trees, that have abundance of
Fruit Buds, and the contrary of those that
are not so.

A Bucket or Tub used by Gard'ners some­
times, to sow some choice particular Seeds
in; they are made sometimes square or ob­
long, but most commonly round, and about
the bigness of a Barrel. The French call
them Baquets. See Tubs.

Bulls or Bulbous Roots, are all such Roots as are
Roundish and Coat upon Coat like Onions, as
those of Garlick, Tulips, &c. and are most­
ly propagated by Off-sets. And accordingly
in French they are called by the general
name of Onions.

Mother Bubs, are those which produce Off-­
sets."bub" not found in OED in this sense.

A Bunch is a common Term, as a Bunch
of Radishes, Turneps, &c.

Bunch is also said of Grapes or any Fruit
that produces several Fruit upon one stalk;
as also of knots of Wood, &c.

Burly-Trees are said to be or grow Burly,
when a Graff grows bigger than the stock
it is Graffed upon, which is asign the stock
or wilding is not vigorous enough. The
French term is Burlet.

Bubo, is said of some Fruit Shrubs, as a
Curran-Bush, a Goose-berry-Bush, &c. Also
the tops of Dwarf-Trees are said to be Bushie,
when the Branches grow into a Tuft."bubo" not found in OED in this sense.

Bushel. A French-Bushel is a measure con­
taining near a peck and half English, or 20
pound weight.


To Butt: See Hillock.

A Button is a round and turgid swelling
Bud containing the Blossoms that produce the
Fruit in any Tree; in Kernal Fruit every
Bud contains several Blossoms, and in stone
Fruit but one.


C.

CAbbage a known Plant.

To Cabbage or Pome, is to curl or fold
up into a round firm head like a Cabbage,
or an Apple.

Thus not only Cabbage but Lettuce is said
to Cabbage or Pome, and Artichokes are said to
Pome: See Pome.

Calebas is a term used for Plums that in
the Month of May instead of Plumping or
preserving their Green grow broad, lank,
and Whitish, and at last fall off without
Plumping at all."calebas" is unidentified. This sense of "plumping" does not appear to be in the OED.

A Canker is a sort of Scurf, Scabbiness, or
dry Rot in Trees, which breeds both in the
Bark and in the Wood, and most infests, the
little Muscat and Robine, and Bergamot Pear-­
Trees, as well in their Stems or Bodies, as in
their Branches.

Capers and Capucin Capers, see them des­
cribed in the sixth part treating peculiarly of
Kitchen-Gardens.

Caprons are Straw-berry Plants that have
large Velvet Leaves, and bear large Whitish
Straw-berries which have but a faint taste, and
are not very Fruitful, and therefore not
much valued.

A Carpet Walk is a Green Walk of Grass,
Camomil, or the like, kept neat and even
with mowing and rolling: See Walk.

Cases or Boxes are conveniences made of
Wood to plant some certain rare and ten­
der Plants, as Orange-Trees, in &c. See
Boxes.

To Castrate or Geld, is said of Cutting or
Pinching of the superfluous shoots of Melons,
Cucumbers, &c.

Castings of Ponds or Ditches. Is the slime
or mud cast out of Ponds or Ditches, which
after it has been a while exposed to the Sun,
is profitably used to recruit, improve or
amend, exhausted or lean Ground.

To Chap, is said of the Ground, or of
any Wood or Fruit that cleaves and gapes
by any cause whatsoever.

Chalk, and Chalkie Earth: See Earth.

Chassis: See Class Frames.

Cherry-Gardens, or Cherry-Orchards, or
Cherry-Plantations are known terms. There
are in France, some Cherry-plantations in the
open fields, confining upon the Vine-Yards,
of some miles extent; and the like there are
of Plums, Olives, &c.

Stock Cherry-Trees, are Cherry-Trees sprung
from the Roots of others which yet bears
good Cherries without being Graffed.

Chevreuses, are Hairy or Goat Peaches, so
called because they are Hairy like Goats.
Chevre signifying a Goat.Not found in OED but noted later, as in Philip Miller's The Gardener's Dictionary (1735).



Chevreuses, are Peaches Hairy like Goats:
See Goat Peaches. 

Chovons, Colly-flower plant in Flowers.Headword unidentified.

Cions, or Scions are young slips, or suc­
kers of any Tree fit to Graff: See Scions.

Circumposition: See Baskets.

A Glass, is a rank or order by which
things are sorted and in which they are
placed.

Claws or Fangs, called in French Patts:
See Fangs.

Clay or Clayie Ground are terms well
known see: Earth.

Cleanse, as to Cleanse a Tree of Moss, Scab,
or Canker, Gum, Rust, Vermin and their Eggs,
&c.

Clear, as to Clear a Tree of some of its super­
fluous Branches when they grow too thick,
or of its useless suckers and Cions.

Cleft, to Graff in the Cleft. See it in the
fifth part of the Book."cleft" postdates last OED citation (1657).

Clod, as a Clod of Earth, is called in
French Motte.

To Close, a Tree that is Graffed is said
to Close when the Bark grows over the cut
where it was Graffed so that it appears smooth
without a Scar; or when the Bark grows
over and covers any other cut or wound
in Pruning.

A Close cut: See cut.

Cloves, is a term used to signify the Off-­
sets of Garlick, and some other like Roots.
See Off-sets.

Clusters, or Bunch.

To Coffin themselves, is said of Flowers
that shrivel up and dry away in their Buds
without flowing or spreading.

Compartiments: See knots.

Compost. Is rich made Mold, compoun­
ded with choice Mold, rotten Dung, and
other enriching ingredients.

A Conservatory is a close place where O­
range-Trees, and other tender Plants are pla­
ced till warm weather come in. See Green
house.

A Coronary Garden, is a Garden planted with
Flowers and other materials that compose
Nosegays and Garlands.

To Couch, is to bend a Wall-Tree for pali­
sading, or to lay down layers to take Root.

Counter Espaliers, are Pole Hedges, or Trees
growing in Pole Hedges, fronting the Wall-­
Trees, and spread, palisadoed, and Trellissed
like them. They are now almost out of use
in France, but only for some sorts of Garden
Vines.

Cotty or squatted is said of bruised in
falling, without cutting their skin.Antedates earlier citation for "cotty" in OED (1789).

Courtilliere, is a sort of insect, or Palmer
Worm bred in Horse Dung, and conse­
quently in Hot Beds, about two Inches long
at full growth, pretty thick, and yellow­
ish, with many legs. It crawls very nimbly,
and gnaws the Roots of Melons, Succory, &c.
growing on Hot Beds. See Insects, and Pal­
mer.

Crop, is a known word to signifie the
whole increase we gather from any thing, as
a crop of Corn, &c.

To Crop also is to plant sow or furnish a
Ground that is empty, &c.

To Crop, is to break or pinch of useless
Branches without cutting.

To Cross, is said of Branches in Wall-Trees,
that grow cross one another.

Crown, is used for the head or upper
hollow extreamity of Kernel Fruit. to Graff
in the Crown: See Graff in the fifth part of
the Book.

Crumpling, or Guerkins are small Cucum­
bers to pickle, called in French Cornichons.
They are also small crumpled Apples.

A Cubical Toise or Fathom: See Toise, and
Fathom.

Cuckows, are Straw-berry Plants that blow
without bearing.

Cucurbit Glasses filled with honied Beer or
water are hung upon Wall-Trees, to catch
and destroy wasps and flies.

Culture, is the Tillage of Ground, or the
whole care and labour that is taken for the
Tillage of Ground, dressing of Gardens, or
rearing, raising and improving of any parti­
cular Plant or Fruit.

A Curtain. 

To Cut, and the several ways of it see
in the Treatise of Pruning.

A close Cut, is a Branch of a Vine short­
ned to the length of 3 or 4 Eyes, or young
Buds.

Cuttings, are ends of Branches cut off
from some certain Trees, shrubs and Plants,
which being set or planted, will take Root
and grow.

Cutworks, are Flower Plots, or Grass plot con­
sisting of several pieces cut into various plea­
sing figures answering one another, like cut
work, made by Women.


D.

DEclivity is the sloping of the side of a
Hill, Bank, Ridge, or any Ground
not Level, considered as Falling, or Descen­
ding, and is contrary to Acclivity, which
see.

Deaf Beds: See Beds."deaf bed" not found in OED.

Dented, is spoken of any Leaves of Trees
or Plants, that are dented.

Devils Gold Ring, in French, Lisette, a sort
of a Worm or Cater-pillar infesting the young
shoots of Vines.

Diagonal Allies, or Lines, are Allies or
Lines drawn cross one another through



the Center of each, and cross any square in
a Garden from corner to corner, thereby to
give them that walk in them the fuller
view of the square. 

Diet. See Milk Diet. Feed, Refresh.

To DIG or delve, are terms known to
all.

Doughie. Is said of the Pulp of fruit, as a
Doughie Pear, a Doughie Peach, &c. See Pulp.

Drains, are Dykes or Gutters made in
Grounds, to carry off the water: See Dykes,
Gutters, Water-courses.

To Dress, Is said of the Tillage or
Tighting up of a Garden, or any part of
it. It is likewise said of the pruning and
trimming of Trees. Thence we say, a
Vine dresser, or to dress a Vine, &c.

Dung, is a known Term, and is long
and new, or short and old. Long and new
fresh Dung is Litter that has served Horses
or Mules but one or two Nights at most,
and has all its straw entire in it, and has
not yet fermented, and much less rotted,
old and short Dung, is Dung that has fer­
mented and lost its heat, and whose Straw
is rotted, and formed into a kind of Mold
with the Dung.

Dwarf Trees are Low Standards, or
Trees so dressed and pruned in Planting,
as to have but low Trunks, and moderate­
ly spreading Branches and Tops."low standard" not found in OED (but see "standard," n., 20).

Musty, Mouldy, or Hoary Dung is used
for a Mushroom Bed: See Beds Mouldy, and
Mushrooms.

Dikes: See Drains, Gutters, Water-courses.


E.

EMbroidery, is a term used in Flower Gar­
dens, signifying, Flower Plots that are
wrought in fine shapes, like patterns of
Embroidery.

Ear-Wigs are an Insect well known.

Earth, in Gard'ning, is taken for the
Soil or Ground in which Trees Legumes, or
Edible and useful Plants or their Seeds are
to be sown or planted, and is of several sorts,
as for example:

It is call'd Sower, Bitter, and Stinking,
when in smelling to it, or taking the water
in which it has soaked, we perceive it Sowr
bitter or stinking.

It is called White Clay, when it is of a
White stiff, and slimy substance, and is
fat, heavy, gross and Cold, and cuts like
Butter, and is very apt to chop with the
Summers heat; and some call it dead Earth
because of its unfruitfulness.

It is stiled good when we can make any
thing grow in we have a mind to; And
bad when neither Trees, Plants nor Seeds
thrive in it.

It is called hot and burning, when it is
so light and dry that upon the least heat,
all the Plants in it dry away and wither.

It is called Gravelled when 'tis mixed
with much sand and many little stones tem­
pered with a little light Red Clay.

It is called Tough, heavy, and by some
stubborn, and because of its unfruitfulness
Chast, and in England Red, Loamy stiff
Clay, when it cuts smooth and stiff, and is
very hard to Till or dress, because the great
rains beat it all into a marsh like mortar,
and the heat on the other side chops it,
and makes it hard as a stone.

It is called strong, free, or rank Earth,
when without being stiff and Clayie, it is
like the bottom or mould under the turf,
of good medow Ground, and in handling,
sticks to the fingers like a paste, and receives
any shape or impression from them, whe­
ther long, round, &c.

It is termed Cold, moist, and backward
when upon the advance of the Spring it is
long before it conceives heat enough to put
forth its productions, and brings forth eve­
ry thing later than other places.

It is called forward, or hasty, when
Fruits ripen in it betimes; as at St. Ger­
mains Paris, St. Maur, &c. and back­
ward when it has a contrary effect.

It is called loose, light and mellow, when
either by art or nature it is brought to a
midling consistence, that is, loose and light
like sand, and yet partaking of the heart
and substance of good mould, easily obeying
the spade, rake and other instruments, and
penetrable to Seeds and the shoots and Fi­
brous Roots of Plants and Trees.

It is called new or fresh when it never
served yet to the production of any Plant,
such as is found two or three foot or more
in depth beyond the surface or upper crust
of the Ground.

It is called made or transported Earth
when 'tis brought into the Garden from
some other place.

It is called Fallow Ground when 'tis laid
to rest a year or two or more, without being
planted or sown with any thing. See hol­
low.

It is called over wrought or exhausted
Ground, when it has been a long time con­
tinually tilled, sown and Planted without
intermission, and without any recruit or
amendment.

Lastly it is called light and sandy when
without having any body of true Earth, its
parts do not stick together, no not with
the Rain it self, but are so loose, that no
plants can take hold enough to fix any
Root there.



Mould is transported Earth, and is either
Natural or Artificial. 

Natural Mould, is pure choice well tem­
pered Earth, taken from the bottom or un­
der pasture of a Meadow, or other place
where the Earth is naturally rank and mel­
low, or made out of the castings of Ditches
or Ponds, well dryed, sunned, and dres­
sed, &c.

Artificial Mould, is Earth composed of
rotten Dung, natural Mold, rotted Leaves
of Trees, and other proper fanting and en­
riching Materials. See Compost.Possibly "fanting" should be emended to "planting."

To Earth up, is to bank or hillock up the
Earth about Cellery, Endive, Long Lettuce,
Chards, &c. almost to their Tops, to whiten
them.

Edgings, are the edges of Borders or Beds
which are garnished with Sweet Flowers or
Herbs.

Espaliers, are Wall-trees, or any Trellissed,
or pallisado'd Tree.

Estiloers. Unidentified.

Ever Greens are such Plants, whose Leaves
are always Green, as Bays, Lawrel, Holly,
&c.

Exhausted. See Earth.

Exoticks, are Foreign Plants brought
from beyond the Seas, and that do not na­
turally grow in our Climates.

Exposition, Exposure and Aspect, signifie
the same thing, and denotes the posture or
situation any Wall, or plant is in, in order
to receive the Benefit of the Rays, and
influence of the Sun. And is fourfold, viz.
Northern, Southern, Eastern, Western.

The Good Expositions, are those of the
East and South, whereof the South is the best.

The Bad Exposition is that of the North.

The Midling or Indifferent Exposition, is
that of the West. See them all described in
the Body of the Work.

Eye, a young Bud just appearing in the
Bark of a Tree. Is called an Eye. See
Bud.

The Crown, or higher extremity of any
Kirnel Fruit, is likewise termed an Eye.


F.

FAggots, is the brushy or small part in
the middle of a Faggot, laid at the
bottom of Cases for Orange-Trees, to keep
the Earth lose, and let the moisture pass.

Fall, the falling or sloping of any
piece of Ground downward, is called De­
clivity. Which See.

Fallow Earth or Ground, is Ground laid to
rest, and only tilled, mucked, and amended,
without sowing or planting any thing in
for a certain time till it be recruited. See
Earth.

False Flowers or Blossoms, are those Flow­
ers or Blossoms of Cucumbers, Melons, &c.
that do not knit, or set for Fruit, but fall off
without producing any thing.

False Wood. See Branches.

Fangs, is a term signifying the Claws
of Ranunculus, and such like Roots, with
which they take hold in the Ground. See
Claws.

To Fan or Skreen Corn or Seeds, is a
well known Term.

Fane, is a French Term, the top or leafy
part, properly of such Plants whose Leafs
are only or mostly in use, as of Radishes,
Turneps, &c. being that part of them, as
the word imports, that is, subject to fade
and wither. It is called in English, some­
times Foliage. See Foliage, Tops, Leaves.

A Fathom is a measure of six Foot, called
in French, a Toise, and is a Term much
used by this Author. See Toise.

Feed as to feed Vines with Blood, and
other nourishing and refreshing mixtures.

Fibres are small long Roots like Hairs,
that spring out of the larger Roots of
Trees

To Fill or Knit, is said of Fruit when it
begins to Plump. See Knit and Plump.

Fine, as Roses, or Arroses fine, are gentle
waterings.OED documents the verbs rather than the nouns.

Fleas are a sort of black Vermine, that
hang upon and spoil Plants, called Pucerons
in French, from their likeness to other Fleas.

Flavour, is a grateful tast, mixed with a
fragrant smell, as in some Wine and Fruit,
when we say they have a fine Flavour.

To Fill, or Knit, is said of Fruit when
it begins to Plump. See Knit and Plump.

A Florist, is a Gard'ner that cultivates
Flowers, or any other Person that under­
stands and delights in the same.

Foliage is the leafy part of a Tree or
other Plant, or a great quantity of Leaves.

Forest-Trees are such Trees as bear no
Fruit, but are planted only for Yards, A­
venues, &c.

Fork and to Fork the Earth, &c. are
Terms that need no Explanation.

Forward Fruits, Plants or Legumes, are
such as ripen or grow fit to be eaten, be­
times in the Year. See Hastings.

To Force, is to advance things to Matu­
rity upon Hot-beds before their natural Sea­
son.

Fotherd Grounds, is ground upon which
Cattel are fed upon in Winter, with Hay,
&c. to better it.

A Free-stock, as Free-stock upon Free-stock,
is a Graff upon a Wilding, or a Graff of
a Wilding upon a Wilding. See Stock.

Frost-bitten, is said of Blossoms, Buds,
Shoots, Fruits, or any Edible plants, that



are killed, or otherwise spoild with the Frost. 

A Fruit-loft, Garner, Room, Store-house,
or Magazine, is a place where Fruit is laid
up.

Kernel-Fruit, is Fruit that comes of Ker­
nels or Seeds, as Apples, Pears, Quinces.

Stone Fruit, is Fruit that comes of, and
contains Stones, or hard Shells inclosing their
Seed, growing within the pulp of the Fruit,
as Peaches, Plums, &c.

Furnitures, are all hot and spicy Herbs,
mixed with Lettuce, Purslain, and other cold
Herbs in Sallets to temper and relish them,
as Rocket, Tarragon, Basil, &c.

To fold in, is said of Leaves of decayed
or blasted Plants that shrink, wither, and
curl up together on a heap.

The Foot of a Tree is that swelling part
of a Tree between the Body or Trunk, and
the Roots of the Trees that are covered in
the Earth. It is sometimes called in French,
the Neck of a Tree.


G.

A Gage is a Hole or Trench dug to plant a
Tree in, of a certain depth, which serves
a measure for all the rest in the same row.

Gardens are choice inclosed pieces of
Ground planted with Edible Plants, Fruit-­
Trees, and Flowers, and differ from Or­
chards, which are commonly planted with
Standard Fruit-Trees, and are seldom wal­
led, or so curiously inclosed as Gardens.

Kitchen-Gardens are chiefly for Kitchen
and Edible Plants.

Fruit Gardens for Fruits.Antedates earliest OED citation for "fruit-garden" (1712).

And Flower-Gardens or Parterres, for Flow­
ers.

Marsh, or Market Gardners, are such as
frequent the Markets. See Botanists and
Florists.The entry antedates the earliest OED citation for "market gardener" (1727). The phrase "marsh gardener" is not found in OED.

Nursery-Gardens. See Nurseries.

To Garnish well, is said of Wall, or any
pallisaded Trees, when they spread well,
and cover the Wall or Trelliss on all sides,
without leaving any place bald or bare.

Glass-Frames or Glassis.

Goat-Peaches are Peaches that are very hai­
ry. See Cheureuses.

A Graff, a young Cion, shoot, bud, or
sucker set into another Tree or stock.

To Graff, see the several ways of do­
ing it in the fifth part of the Book.

A Graffing Knife, is a known instrument
to cut withal in order to Graffing.Antedates earliest OED citation for "grafting knife" (1727).

Gravel, is a thing well known, see Earth.

A Green-house, is a Room or House
framed with Conveniencies for the housing
and sheltering of Orange-Trees and other
tender foreign plants, from the cold in Win­
ter time, and cool Weather.

Gritty, sticky, or stony, is said of Pears,
whose Pulp is hard, or harsh near the Core,
or all over.

To Grub, as to grub up Weeds by the
Roots, is a word known of Signification.

Gutter, Gutters are little Channels or
Dykes that serve for Drains or Water-­
Courses, to carry off the water in moist
marshy Grounds, and keep it dry. Some­
times they are paved and made up with
Stone.


H.

HAlf Standards, are Trees whose Trunks
are shortned in planting to a midling
length, between High Standards and Dwarfs
or Low Standards."half-standard" not found in OED.

Ham, is said of a Branch of a Tree
very long, and bare of any other Branches,
either by Nature, or by the Gard'ners igno­
rance in cutting them off, which Hams
must be cut pretty close off, to make them
shoot out new Sprouts."Ham" in this sense is not found in the OED.

Hastings or Hasting, is spoken of Fruits,
Sallets, Legumes, that ripen or come to per­
fection betimes in the Year, as Hastings, Peas,
Beans, Artichokes, Cherries, &c. See For­
ward.

The head or top of a Tree, is known
to all what it is.

To Head a Tree, is to cut off the Head
or Top, leaving only the bare Stem with­
out any Top Branches.

To Heat, as to heat Beds or Paths with
new Long Dung, in order to force on and
advance Sallets and Fruits before the natu­
ral time.

Haugh: See Hough.

Hedges, Besides common Hedges, there
are Hedges made of Straw or Reeds to
shelter tender Plants against the cold Win­
ters, call'd in French, Brise-Rents.

Pole Hedges, are Hedges composed of pa­
lisaded Trees spread and fastned to Lattice
frames and Trellisses: See Counter Espaliers
or Counter Wall-Trees.

The Heel of a Branch is the grosser and
thicker bending part of a Branch that is cut
off, which is Graffed into a stock when
the other end is too small and weak."heel" in this sense (of a branch) is not found in the OED.

The Heel or stool of an Artichoke slip,
is that end that joins to the main Root.

Herbalist or Herborist, is one that under­
stands or sells Herbs and Plants.

Hillocks are little Hills or round Banks
raised about the feet of Trees or other Plants,
as Vines, Hops, Artichokes, &c. as also about
such plants as are earthed up to be white­
ned.

To Hillock is to raise such rounds Banks
or Hillocks about any plant as are above de­



scribed Hoary Dung: See Mouldy Dung, and
Mushrooms. 

Hortolage: See Potagery.

Hot Beds: See Beds.

Hough or Haugh, is an instrument well
known to Gard'ners, and most Country peo­
ple, as likewise the action of using it.See OED, "haugh," a: "A piece of flat alluvial land by the side of a river, forming part of the floor of the river valley." The glossarian may be lost here.


I.

TO Inarch, to Graff by approach: See
in the Treatise of Graffing. part 5.

To Incase, is to put curious tender, or
Exotick Plants into Boxes or Cases, for
their more advantagious Culture and pre­
servation.

To Innoculate or Bud: See in the Trea­
tise of Graffing. part 5.

Increase, a Tree or plant is said to be of
great Increase, when they yield plenty of
Fruit, or a good crop of any thing else, as
grain, pulse, &c.

Insects, are all little animals whose bodies
are divided by several cuts as 'twere and
sectures.

Mother Insects. 

Insuccation, or Mangonism.

To Interr or Replant, is to set Onions,
Tulips, or any Boulbous Roots into the
Earth again, after they have been taken
up all the dead of the Winter.


K.

A Kitchen or Olitory-Garden, is a Gar­
den chiefly made for Kitchen or Oli­
tory Plants."olitory garden" antedates earliest citation from OED (1706).

Kitchen or Olitory Plants are all Plants
that are usually Eaten, and used in the Kit­
chen: See Olitory.

Kernells are the Seeds of Apples, Pears,
and Quinces, which from them are called
Kernel-Fruit in Contradistinction to such as
come of stones, as Plums, Peaches, &c. call'd
Stone Fruit.

Kernel Beds: See Beds.

To Knit, or set for Fruit, said of Trees
and Plants, or their Blossoms, when they
begin to form their Fruit.

The Knop of a Flower, is the head case or
cup wherein a Flower is contained whilst in
Bud.

Knotty said of Trees that are rugged and
full of knobs.

Garden knots, are Flower-Plots, or Plats,
and Beds of Flowers formed into curious
intricate, fanciful, and delightful figures,
to please the Eye, but seen from some
Eminent terret or room.


L.

LAtter Fruits or Legumes, are such as ri­
pen late in the year.Headword phrases are not found in OED.

To lay, or Couch, is to lay down and
cover some part of the lower part of the
suckers of some certain plants and Trees or
shrubs in the Earth to make them take
Root in order to be slipped off, and Re-­
planted.

Layers are such suckers, as are so laid and
couched.

Lattices, are the square works in wooden
frames or Trellisses that support Wall or
palisaded Trees.

Seed Leaves, are the first Leaves that
Spring up like ears on each side, at the
first cleaving or sprouting of any Seed.

Legumes, are properly such as we call
Pulse, as Peas, Beans, &c. But this Author
often uses the word for all esculent or edible
Kitchen plants.

A Level, is an even piece of Ground,
without any slope either rising or fall­
ing.

A Level slope, is a slope that rises or falls
so gently and evenly, that it is hardly dis­
cernible from a plain, or true level. It is
called in French Micote, and when made so
in digging, a Talus.

Light Earth: See Earth.For "light earth", see OED, "scour," 11d (1619).

Limbs, the main Branches of a Tree are call­
ed its Limbs.

Losan, and Loamy Earth: See Earth."losan" not found in OED, but possibly "loosen" (cf. "Loose Earth").

Litter is such Straw as is used to little
Horses with which has not yet been used, or
converted into Dung.

Loose Earth: See Earth.

Litter Counter Walls.


M.

MAlacotoons, are Peaches which are clo­
thed with a Cotton like Down.

Mangonism, is an Art used by some by
the infusion of certain injuries or tinctures of
several Colours, or tastes, infused into the
Roots or stems of Plants, and chiefly
Flowers or Fruits, the same taste or Colour.
Which knowing Authour's condemn as
vain.

Mare, is that which remains of the Grape
after they are pressed, it is also used to sig­
nifie, the Gritte, stony or Earthy part of
a Pear or any Fruit that resists and disob­
liges both the Teeth and taste in Eating."mare" unidentified.

Market or March Gard'ners: See Gard­
ners.Antedates earliest OED citation for "market gardener" (1727). The phrase "march gardener" not found in OED.

Marl is a sort of Chalkie and faultty sub­
stance used to warm and amend land, that
are cold and moist.



Matts, and Mattrasses are used to cover
Plants with from the Cold. 

Melons, and Muskmelons, are
known Fruits.

Their main Branches are called Vines, to
break of the tops of which Vines, is called
checking or stoping them, and by the French,
to arrest Melons, &c.

Micote, a gently rising and falling
Ground hardly to be discerned from a le­
vel."Micote" not found in OED.

Mellow Earth: See Earth.

Mildew, is a sort of Honey dew, that
falling upon Plants, blasts, rots and spoils
them.

Milk Diet, is Milk diluted or mix'd with
water and discreetly let down to the Roots
of Orange-Trees, or other like tender Exo­
ticks, and for curious Plants, to refresh
and recover them when sick, by letting it
gently drop out of the Vessel by a rag laid
partly in the Milk and part of it out.

Mother Insects: See Insects.

Mother Branches: See Branches.Earliest OED citation for "mother-branch" is 1822 ("leader," 9).

Move, as to Move, stir, turn up, and new
dress or turn up the Earth in any Place.

Musk. 

Mural-Trees, are Wall-Trees.

Musked, those Fruits are said to be Mus­
ked that have a rich spicy or winy taste, and
leave a smack of perfume in the Mouth, and
smell well.

Mushrooms, are certain fungous or spun­
gy excrescentes of the Earth, which are now
highly prized in Sauces.

Musty, or Mouldy Dung that is so Mouldy
that it begins to grow all Hairy with Hoa­
riness, is then fit to use to make Hot Beds
for Mushrooms: See Beds, Dung, Musty, and
Hoary.


N.

TO Nail up a Wall-Tree, is to fasten
well its Branches and palisade and
Trellise it as it should be to keep it tight,
and in due shape and figure.

The neck of a Tree. See foot.

Nectarins called also Brugnons are smooth
skin'd Peaches that cleave to their stones."brunion" antedates earliest OED citation (1706).

To nip: See to pinch.

Novelties of the Spring, are such things
as are forced to a maturity upon Hot Beds,
a considerable while before their natural time
of ripening.

Nursery Gardens or Seminaries, are Gar­
dens planted only with seedling or other
stocks to Graff on, or young Trees ready
Graffed, in order to have them ready to
transplant in other Gardens as occasion shall
require.

Nursery Beds or Seminary Beds, are Beds
where young plants, or Herbs are sown or
planted, in order to be transplanted after­
wards elsewhere.


O.

OFf-Sets are young kernell Excrescences
breeding from the sides of the lower
part of Boulbous Roots, which are round
without and concave within, which in time
grow to be Bulbs themselves, and serve for
their propagation. In Garlick they are called
Cloves.

Onions is a common term in French for all
Boulbous Roots.

Odoriferous is said of all sweet scented
plants, Flowers, or Fruits. In Fruits this
quality is termed by the French Musked, or
Perfumed.

Orangist, is a Gard'ner that cultivates O­
ranges, or any person that understands and
delights in the Culture of them.

Orangery is a place stocked with Orange
Trees, whether within doors or without.

Orchards, or Hort-yards Ort-yards, are in­
closed pieces of Ground planted chiefly with
Standards Fruit-Trees, and more often fenced
with Hedges, or Ditches, and other fences
than with Walls.


P.

PAnach't, is said of a Tulip, Carnation or
such like Flower when they are curiously
striped, and diversified with several Colours
like a gaudy Plume of Feathers, which the
word properly signifies.

To Palisade, is to bend, spread, and
couch Trees upon Trails or Trellisses, or a­
gainst Walls, whence Trees are named Pa­
lisaded Trees.

Paradise Apples, are a sort of sweet Apple,
growing on small Trees very sit for some
purposes of Graffing.

To Graff upon Paradise, is to Graff upon
the stocks of such Trees.

Parallel Allies, are Allies of an equal
breadth through their whole length, and
running along in lines equally distant all
along from the lines that compose the sides
of the Allies which answer them.

Parterres, are Flower Gardens, or Flower
plots in such Gardens.

Under Pasture, is Earth or mold taken up
from under the Turf of good Meadow or
Pasture Ground, to carry into Gardens, to
mend or recruit the Soil.

Pavies, are Peaches that stick fast to their
Stones.

Peaches, In a strict Sence in this Author,
are such only as loosen from their Stones.

Stone Peaches are Peaches growing on a
Tree, sprung from a Stone without graffing.Cf. OED, "cling," n.1 (1633).



To Peg down, is to fix down the Lay­
ers of any Plants, to make them firm that
they may take Root the better. 

Perfumed or Musked, is that which has a
spicy tast, mixed with a smack both of the
tast and smell of Musk, or some such like
perfume.

To Perch, is to inclose Trees or Plants
with fences made with poles or perches laid
cross one another, to keep off Beasts and
Boys.

Perennial: See Ever-green.

Pickets: See Spikes.

To Pinch. See in the Treatise of Pru­
ning.

The Pith, is the sappy part of the
Wood of a Tree.

Plain or pure, is said of a Flower that
is but of one colour, without being pan­
nach't or striped: See Pure.

To Plant or Set, is a Term used in Contra­
distinction to sowing.

A Plant Merchant or Herborist, is a
Term sufficiently known.

A Plantation, is a piece of Ground stock­
ed with plants of any sort, or of many
kinds.

A Plot, as a Garden Plot, is a piece of
Ground modelled out ready for planting,
according to the design of the Plantation.

To Plump or fill, is said of Fruits when
they begin to grow bulky, and towards ri­
pening.

To Pome or Apple, is said of the Heads
of Artichokes when they grow round, and
full shaped as an Apple. It is said also of
Lettuce, &c.

Pomace, is the mash which remains of
pressed Apples, after the Sider is made, used
for producing of Seedling Stocks in Nursery-­
Gardens.

To vPot, is to put or sow any Seed or
Plant that is tender or curious into a Pot,
for its better and safer Cultivation.

Potagery, is a Term signifying all sorts of
Herbs or Kitchen-plants, and all that con­
cerns them, considered in general.

Pot-Herbs, are always used in the Pot or
Kitchen.

Powdret, is the dryed Powder of Occi­
dental Civet, otherwise called human Dung,
used by some to the Roots of Orange-Trees,
but condemned by the Author."powdret" not found in OED but cf. DOST, "pulderit."

To Prick, is to pull up young Seedlings,
where they grow too close and thick in the
Nursery Beds, and prick them into other Beds
at more distance.

To Prop, is to prop up any Plants with
Perches, forked Sticks, or Poles, such as
Hops, Vines, Peas, French-Beans, &c.

To Prime, and its several ways. See in
the Treatise of Pruning.

Pulp, is the inward Substance or fleshy
part of any Fruit, of which there are seve­
ral sorts, as Buttred and melting Pulp, is
that which is melting and sweet in the
Mouth, like Butter, such as is that of the
Butter-pear, Bergamots, &c.

Short Pulp, is that which breaks short
in eating, such as is that of Pears, that are
firm without being hard, and that crackle
between the Teeth in eating.

It is called tough harsh and hard in cer­
tain Pear, that have nothing of fine or de­
licate, as in Catillac's, Double-flowers, &c.

It is called Mealy, when it eats dry and
mealy, as in over ripe Dean-pears, Cadet-pears,
&c.

It is called Doughy, when it is fattish
and disagreeably soft like Dough, as in white
Butter-pears, Lansacs that grow in the shade.

It is called Tender, in certain Pears, that
though they be neither melting nor short,
yet are tender and excellent, without being
soft, fatty, or otherwise distastful, as in un­
known Chaineaus Vine Pears.

Lastly, some Pears have sower taste, as
the St. Germain Pears, and some sharp and
biting as the Crasauns.

A Punaise or Bug is a sort of a Tyke that
preys upon Plants, as the stinking Bugs of
the same Name do Human Bodies.

Pure. See Plain.


Q.

QUince Stocks, that are smooth, strait,
vigorous, and fit to graff upon, the
Author calls Coignassiers, and those that are
rough, knotty and skrubbed and unfit, he
calls Coigniers. But he believes them not
Male and Female, according to the vulgar
Fancy. Of these the Portugal are best.


R.

RAke, a Gard'ners Rake whether of
Wood or Iron, is well enough known,
and the action of using it.

Rame and Ramberge, are terms used of
Melons, when instead of a pleasant, they
have a stinking and filthy taste contracted
from the neighbourhood of some stinking
Weeds, or being too near the Dung, the same
happens to hasty Asparagus from the Hot Bed.

To Range, is to place in good order, or
plant even in a Line.

Rank Earth: See Earth.

Random Plants, are such as having been
smothered, and deprived too much of Light
and Air, or oppressed with any weight,
grow white small Curl'd and crooked, and
slim, like such we find under great Stones or
Logs when we take them up. See Estioler.



To Recreate, is to turn up Ground, and
recruit it with some heartning and fatning
Mold or Mixtures, and convenient water­
ings, &c. 

Red Winds, are the dry and blasting
North East Winds, that Reign in March and
April.

To Refresh, is said in two Senses, viz
First, Trees are refreshed by Ablaqueation
i. e. by laying their Roots bare, and re­
trenching their decayed and superfluous
Roots, and recruiting them with good fresh
Earth, or well tempered Mould, or by tur­
ning up side down, and well dressing and
stirring the old Earth.

Secondly, To Refresh, is likewise to wa­
ter Trees or Plants, as also to feed them,
and diet them with Water diluted with
Milk, or well tinged with Dung, or other
rich ingredients, or with Bloud, or other
fatning and nourishing things, when they
are Sick.

To Release: See Unbind.

Retrench. 

Rye-Straw, being long firm, and steept
in Water to make it pliable, is used to make
Bands to tie up Lettuce or Cellery, &c. to
whiten, or wads to wrap about them, or
covers to cover them or other Plants, and
some tender Trees in Winter. See Straw:

A Ridge, is a double Slope between two
Furrows, in any digged or plowed Land:
See Slope.

Roses, or Arroses fine, are gentle water­
ings.

Rossane, is a Name for all Yellow Peach­
es.Headword unidentified.

Roots, such Plants whose Roots are most
in use, are called often simply by that
Name, as Carrots, Turneps, &c.

Rub, as to rub of superfluous Buds. See
it in the Treatise of Pruning.

Rust, is the effect of Blasting or Mil­
dew.


S.

THE Salt of the Earth so called in Gar­
d'ning Terms, is a certain Spirit which
renders its Fertile, supposed to be commu­
nicated by the rays of the Sun tempered
with the nitrous parts off the Air and
Dew.

Sand, and Sandy Earth. See Earth.

Sap, is the radical moisture or Juice that
nourishes a Plant.

Saped, see Sobbed, is any thing that is too
much soaked in Water.

Scar, is a gash which remains after the
cutting or pruning of a Tree.

To Scrape, as to scrape off Moss, Spawn
or Eggs of Vermines &c. needs no Ex­
plication.

Scions: See Cions.

A Scoop, to scoop out Water, and the use
of it are things well known.

Screens or Skreens, are inventions made of
Straw or other Matter, to shelter Plants.

Scutcheon, or Escutcheon, a Term of
Graffing. See it explained in the Treatise
of Graffing part.

Season, a thing is said to be in Season
while it continues fit to eat.

Seedlings, are little young Plants, sprung
from Seeds or Kirnels, in order to form
Stocks fit to graff on. Thus we say, an
Apple Seedling, a Seedling Orange-Tree.

Seed-Leaves: See Leaves.

Seminaries are Nursery Beds, or Gardens
See Nursery.

To Set, is to plant with the Hand as
distinguisht from sowing.

Well Set, or Budded. See Budded.

To Settle, is the sinking of the Earth,
in order to grow firm, after digging or
plowing, or otherwise tilling, or of a Hot
Bed after its great and first heat is past.

To Sever, is to sever that end of any
young Graff that is graffed by Inarching, or
approach from the Stock on which it grew,
when the other end of it has taken good
hold and footing in the Stock, into which
it was graffed. 'Tis said also of rooted
Layers when slipt off, from their old
Stock.

To Shed, Fruit Trees are said to shed
their Flowers or Blossoms, when blasted
or nipt by Winds or Frosts, they fall off
without producing Fruit.

To Shoot, is the same as to spring or
sprout out.

Shoots, are such young Branches as shoot
out every year.

To Shrivel or Fold, is said of Leaves
Blasted, or dying Trees or Plants.

Shrubs, are small kind of Trees, of a
midling sort between Trees and Herbs.

Slips, are Suckers slipt off from any
Trees or Plants, to set again, to propagate
them.

To Smooth, is to pare or cut even a large
Bough with a pruning Knife, after it is
sawed off.

Smut, is the Blacking or Smutting of
Corn or other Plants, that happens to them
in some Years.

Snivel called Morve, is a sort of rotting
moisture, hanging about some Plants.

Spicy, is said of all hot scented and tasted
Plants.

Spikes are separated Sticks, fixed on the
sides of Beds, or in Rows where Trees are
to be planted, to guide the Eye to keep
them in a direct Line.

Spindles are those stalks in stocks or Tufts



of Carnations or Clove-gilliflowers, that bear
the Flowers. 

Spit, is the depth a Spade pierces into
the Ground, as one Spit deep, two Spit
deep, &c.

Sprigs, are small young Shoots.

Sprouts, are young green Shoots.

A Stalk is said of that part that bears a­
ny Fruit immediately, and tacks it to the
Branch on which it grows. It is also the
stem of any Plant or Herb that is not a
Tree or Shrub.

Standards are tall Bodied Trees, growing
in open Ground.

Stake. 

Squatted. See Cotty.

Stem, is the Body of a Tree, between
the Foot and the Head.

Stick, is said properly of a strait Stem, that
runs up high and upright all the way with­
out any Branches, till just at the top.

Sticky or Stringy, is said of Roots, when
not kindly or running to Seed.

Stiff, is said of some Earth. See Earth.

To stir, or stir up, is gently to move
the Earth without diging or plowing it;
though sometimes it be used for any sort of
Tillage.

A stock, is the stem or Body of a Tree
upon which after due trimming and prepa­
ration the Graff, or Cion of another Tree
is Graffed.

To top, is by pinching, breaking, cut­
ting, or treading the Branches or main
stalks of Trees or other plants, the sap is
checked or stopped from mounting upwards,
or at least strait forwards.

Stool, the crooked bottom part of an Ar­
tichoke slip by which it is fastned to the main
Root, is called its stool.

To strike Root, Any new planted Tree,
layer, slip, or cutting is said to strike Root,
when it begins first to take Root, or at
least take new Root, after its planting.

To strip, is to despoil a Tree of its Leaves
Fruit, bark, or Branches that form not the
Head.

Striped is said of Flowers diversified with
streakes of several Colours, as Tulips, Carna­
tions, &c.

To string, as to string Straw-berry plants
is to clear them of their superfluous strings
and runners.

Strings: See sticky.

A stone, is the Seed of any Fruit, which
is enclosed in a woody shell hard like a stone,
which from thence is called stone Fruit, as
Plums, Peaches, &c.

A stone Peach, is a Peach growing upon
a Tree sprung from a stone without Graf­
fing.Headword "stone Peach" not found in OED.

Stub. 

Stump, is the Trunk or stock of a Tree
cut down very low, or a Branch cut very
close.

To cut or Prune stump wise: See it in
the Treatise of Graffing Pruning.

Surface and superficies, is the outward or
upper crust of the Earth.

Surface Earth, is that Earth or mold
that is uppermost, and exposed to the
Air.

Suckers, are young Cions or slips com­
monly growing from the sides of the Roots,
or else of the main joints of any plant or
Tree, sit to be slipt off, and planted or
Graffed.

Sweet Herbs, are such as the French call
fine Herbs, as Rosemary, Marjerome, &c.


T.

A Tendrel, is a young tender shoot of
a Vine or other Fruit-Tree that is not
yet hardned or grown Woody.

A Terrass, is an artificial bank or mount
of Earth, commonly supported with a
fronting or facing of stone, and raised like
a kind of Bulwark for the ornament of a
Garden.

To thin, is to pick off Fruit, pull up
Herbs and Roots, or cut away Branches
when they grow too thick, that the rest
may thrive the better.

To Ticket, is to fasten Tickets or notes
about Fruit-Trees containing their names and
order to distinguish them.

To Till, is to dig, delve, plow, and o­
therwise dress or prepare the Ground for
planting or sowing.

Toise or Fathom is a measure of six foot
see Fathom.

A Cubical Toise is the 216 foot every
way of any thing measur'd by the Toise or
Fathom.

Ton is a sort of Worm or Maggot that
gnaws Straw-berry Roots.

A Trail is a Trelliss, or Lattice frame
made for the support of Wall and palisa­
ded Trees.

To Transplant, is to take up any thing
out of the Bed or place where it was sown,
when it is grown to a fit bigness, and to
plant or set in another place where 'tis to
remain, or to be improved to a greater per­
fection.

To Tread, is used in more sences than one,
as to tread down Earth about Trees, &c.
To make it settle firmly, &c. or to tread,
as the tops of Carrots, Parsnips, &c. are
troden down to keep the sap from moun­
ting, that it may nourish the Roots the bet­
ter, &c.

To Trench, is to dig the Ground up, and



to make Trenches, furrows and holes to
plant Trees, Artichokes, &c. in. 

Trenches, are Furrows with Holes fitted
for Trees, &c.

To Trelliss, is to pallisade, nail up and
fasten Trees upon Walls, or Pole-Hedges,
and on wooden Trails or Trelisses.

A Truss of Hay, is a Term well known

To Truss up, is to raise up a Branch of a
Wall-Tree that hangs down, and tack it up
fast, that the Fruit may not break it, or
disfigure the Tree by Swagging it down
with its weight.

To Turn up or loosen the Earth: See stir,
and Till.

A Turf, is either a Turf of Grass with
its Earth, or so much Earth that hangs firm
about the Root of a Tree, or Plant or Tuft
of any Plant that grows in Tufts, when
they are pulled up.

Tuft, is a knot of Roots or Boughs, as
'twere united together in one round Body
or Cluster; so we say, a Tufted or Bushy
Tree, a Tuft of Strawberries, &c.

Tyger-Babbs, are a sort of pestilent insects,
infesting Wall-Pears, and Pear-Trees."tyger-babbs" not found in OED.


V.

VEin, as a Vein of Earth is said Com­
paratively of some parts of a Gar­
den that produce better or worse than other
parts of it, whence we say, here is a good,
and there is a Bad Vein of Earth.

Vegetables, are all sorts of living Plants,
Trees, or Herbs that grow.

Vegetation, is the springing or growing
of any Plants.

Verdures, is a Term denoting all Plants
whose green Leaves chiefly are in use.

Vermine are all mischievous Creatures that
hurt plants.

Vigorous. 

To Vindemiate, is to gather Grapes and
make them into Wine.

Vine-yard, is a piece of Tilled Ground
planted with Vines, in order to make Wine.

Vine Dressers, are those Husbandmen
that order and dress the Vines.

Vines of Melons, are their main running
Branches, so called, because they run along
like Vine Branches.

Vinous, is said of a Winy tast and smell
or flavour in Fruit.

To Unbind, is to take off the Bands of
a Graff, when it is well fixed: See Release.

To Uncase, is to take any Plant out of
its Case.

Under Pasture, is Mold taken from under
the Turf of choice pasture Ground, to im­
prove the Soil of Gardens with.

Unhealthy, is said of Melons or Cucum­
bers, when they are troubled with a kind
of Whiteness that decays them.

To Unpot, is to take Plants out of Pots.


W.

WAds of Straw. See Wrap and Straw.

Walks. See Allies.

Carpet Walks. See Carpet.

Wall-Trees, are Trees nailed, couched,
and spread or displayed in a Decent and
profitable Form against Walls.

Wasps, are known insects: See Cucurbits.

Water Courses, are drains to carry off Wa­
ter. See Drains Dykes, Gutters.

To Wean or Sever: See Sever.

Weeds, are all noisom Herbs that annoy
the useful Plants in a Garden.

To Weep or Bleed said of Vines. See Bleed.

Windfalls, are Fruit which the Wind
blows from the Trees.

Red Winds. See Red.

Winter-greens are such Plants as are green
all Winter. See Ever-greens.

Wicks. See Wrap.

Wood, is the substantial part of a Tree,
that is solid and not tender.

Wood Branches. See Branches.

To Whiten, is to use art by Dunging,
Earthing, tying up, &c. to whiten Plants,
and sweeten them to the tast.

To Wound, is so to cut Trees in Pruning
or otherwise as to hurt them, and such hurts
are called Wounds.

To Wrap, as to wrap up Plants, or ten­
der Trees with Wads or Wisps of Straw, to
keep them from the Frost.


Y.

YEllow Peaches are call'd Rossanes.






CHAP. I.

What things should be planted in any Kitchen-Garden of a reasonable extent,
to render it compleatly furnished.

ALL the World is agreed, that there are few days in the whole Year in which
we can be well without the assistance of the Kitchen-Gardens, whether it be in
the fair and fruitful Season, whilst they are still growing on the Earth that first pro­
duced them, when we have no more to do but to go and gather them there; or in
Winter when we must fetch them out of the Store-rooms, where we had timely laid them
up for Security, before the arrival of the bitter cold, which not only makes the Earth
unfruitful for a time, but destroys too a great part of those Vegetables which are so un­
happy as to be within its reach; and therefore it follows, that every day of the Year,
we must be furnisht with what we need of this Nature, out of our own Gardens or
Stores, or elsewhere, either by the liberality of our Friends, or what is most common
from the Markets.

That you may therefore have at one view, the knowledge of what composes this a­
greeable assistance, that may be drawn out of the Kitchen-Garden. I shall here present
you with a kind of Alphabetical Inventory of all the things that such a Garden should,
and may furnish us with, throughout the whole course of the year.

A.

ALenois Cresses. Vid. Cresses.

Alfange, a sort of Roman Lettuce.

Alleluia, Wood-sorrel, alias French-Sorrel, or
Sharp Trefoil."Sharp trefoil" not found in OED.

Anis. 

Artichokes, both Green, Violet and Red.

Artichokes, Costons, or Slip-suckers."coston" and "slip-sucker" not found in OED.

Asparagus. 

Aromaticks; see Fine Herbs.


B.

BAlm, called in French, Melisse.

Basil or Basilick, both the Greater and
the Lesser."Basilick" appears to be an anglicized French form but is not found in the OED as a spelling in English.

Bays, the common sorts.

Hot Beds, of several sorts, as for Sallets,
and Spring-Radishes, and the first Early
Strawberries, as for Musk-melons, Cucum­
bers, and Mushroons, and for raising some
sorts of Flowers in the Winter, and other
Plants to set again in the naked Earth, and
for the forcing of Sorrel and Cabbage Let­
tuce, &c. to advance.

Beet-Raves, or Red Beets, to produce Roots
for Sallets.Antedates earliest citation of "beet-rave" in OED (1719).

White Beets called Poirée, for Chards.

Beans both of the common sort, and those
called Harico's, or French Kidney Beans;
as also Venetian Beans called Feve­
rolles.

Bonne Dame, or Good Lady."good lady" unidentified.

Borage. 

Bourdelais, or Verjuice Grape, both Red and
White.

Bucks horn Sallet. 

Bugloss. 

Burnet, called in French, Pimpernel.


C.

CAbbages of all sorts.

Capers of the Ordinary sort.

Capucin Capers, called otherwise Nusturces.

Caprons, a sort of Strawberries.

Spanish Cardons. 




Carlots. Unidentified.

Cellery. 

Chalots, vid Shalots, and Eschalots.

Chards of Artichokes.

Chards of Beets.

Chassela's Grapes. 

Cheril, Musked and Ordinary.

Chervi, or Skirrets.

Chicons, the same with Alfange.

Ciboules. 

Citrulls or Pompions, or Pumpkins.

Cives. 

Colyflowers, and Coleworts, both comprehen­
ded under Cabbage in French.

Cresses, as Alénois or Garden Cresses.

Cucumbers. 

Currans, which with Gooseberries, are both
called Groseilles in French, and distin­
guish'd into the Prickly, the Red, and the
Pearled.


D.

Dragons or Estragon, a Sallet.


E.

ENdive, White or Tame, as well the Cur­
led as the Plain, called in French
Chicorée or Succory, as also the Wild
sort.

Eschalots, vid. Shalots.

Estragon or Dragons, a Sallet.


F.

FEnnel. 

French-Sorrel; see Alleluja.

Furnitures for Sallets, which with the French,
are Spare-mint, called by them Balm, as
also Estragon, or Dragons, English Cives,
Fennil, Chervil, as well the common as the
Musked sort, and Basil, &c.

Fine Herbs, called in English, Sweet-Herbs,
but meant by the French of all hot scen­
ted Herbs, as Time, Morjarom, Lavender,
Rhue, Worm-wood, Hysop, &c. which are
planted in Borders.


G.

GArlick. 

Gooseberries, together with Currans,
both confounded, under the name of Gro­
seilles in French, and distinguish'd into the
Prickly, the Red, and the Pearled.

Good Lady, vid. Bonne Dame."good lady" unidentified.


H.

HYsop. 


L.

LAvender in Borders. 

Leeks. 

Lettice of all sorts, according to the Sea­
sons, as well to sow in rows, or
small Furrows, to cut when little, as to
Cabbage, and to bind up, viz. the Coquille
or Shell-Lettuce, alias the Winter, and the
Passion Lettuce, the Curl'd bright Lettuce,
and the Green Curl'd Lettuce, the Little Red
Lettuce, the Short Lettuce, the Royal Let­
tuce, the Bellegarde, the Lettuce of Genua,
of Perpignan, and of Auberviliers, the Impe­
rial, and the Roman Lettuce, which compre­
hends all the Chicons, both the Green and
Red, otherwise called the Alphange Let­
tuce, and they are to tie up."passion-lettuce" antedates the earliest OED citation (1704), as do "shell-lettuce" (1707), "curled bright lettuce" (1719), "red lettuce" (2001), "green lettuce" (2001), and "winter lettuce" (1961).
"coquille lettuce", "short lettuce", "royal lettuce", "bellegarde", "lettuce of Genua", "lettuce of pergignan", "lettuce of Auberviliers", "imperial lettuce", "little red lettuce", and "red lettuce" are not found in the OED.


M.

MAcedonian Parsly. Vid. Parsly.

Mâches. 

Mallows and Marsh-mallows. 

Marjoram in Borders. 

Melons or Musk-melons. 

Mint, called in French, Balm.

Muskat, or Musk-grapes, both the White, the
Black, and the Red.

The Long Muscat, alias, the Passe-Musquée.

Mushrooms. 


N.

NAsturces, or Capucin Capers. See Ca­
pers.


O.

ONions, both the Red and the White.


P.

PArsly, as well the Common as the Cur­
led.

Macedonian Parsly. 

Parsnips. 

Patience, a sort of Sorrel. Vid. Sorrel.

Pease, from the Month of May, which are
the Hastings, till Allhallow-tide.

Passe Musquée. See Muscats.

Piercepier, a sort of Stone Parsly.

Pompions or Pumpkins, called in French, Ci­
truls.

Potirons, a sort of flat Pumpion or Pumpkin.

Purslain, both of the Green, and Golden or Red sort.




R.

RAdishes, both in Spring, Summer, and
Autumn.

Raspberries, both Red and White.

Responces, or Field-Radishes."responces" was not found in OED.

Rue. 

Rocamboles, or Spanish Garlick."rocamboles" antedates earliest OED citation (1698); and "Spanish garlic" does so also (1707).

Rocket, a kind of Sallet. Furniture.

Rose-mary. 

Rubarb. 


S.

SAge. 

Salsifie, or Goat's-Beard.

Saracens or Turky Wheat. "Saracens" (for "Saracens wheat" or the French "blé-sarrasin") not found in OED.

Savory. 

Scorzonera, or Spanish Salsifie. 

Sellery. See Cellery.

Shalots. See Eschalots.

Smallage. 

Sorrel, both the Great, the Little, and the
Round. 

Spinage. 

Spare-Mint. See Mint.

Straw-berries, both Red and White. 

Succory. Vide. Endive.

Suckers of Artichokes. 

Sweet Herbs. See Fine Herbs or Aromaticks.

Sharp Trefoil. See Alleluia."sharp trefoil" not found in OED.


T.

TIme for Borders. 

Tripe-Madam. 

Sharp Trefoil, vid. Alleluia.

Turkey or Saracens Wheat.

Turneps. 


V.

VErjuice Grapes, vid. Bourdelais.

Vines. 

Violets in Borders. 


W.

WHeat. See Turkey and Saracens
Wheat.

Worm-wood for Borders. 

Wood-sorrel. See Alleluia.




CHAP. II.

Containing a Description of the Seeds, and other things which contribute to
the production and Multiplication of every sort of Plant, or Legume.

A

Alenois Cresses: See Cresses.

Alfange: See Lettuce.

ALLELUIA, or Wood, or French Sorrel, is a sort of Trefoil, that is multiplied
only by Runners or slips, which sprout from the foot of it, as do Violets and Dai­
ses, &c. It bears a White Flower, but no seed.

Anis, Is propagated only by seed, which is pretty small, and of a yellowish Green,
and is of a longish Oval Figure, Striped: Which Oval is Bunched on one side. In a
word, it is altogether like Fennel-seed.

Artichoaks, are commonly multiplied only by their Oeillitons or little Eyes, or Off-Sets
which are a sort of Kernals, which grow about the heart of the foot of their plants,
that is, in that part that separates the Root from the Eye or bud, out of which the
stemm grows that produces the Artichockes: These little Eyes or off-sets begin commonly
to breed at the very end of Autumn, or in Winter, when it is mild, and shoot forth their
Leaves in the Spring, that is at the end of March, and in the month of April, at which
time, we grope about the foot of the Artichoke, and separate or slip off these Suckers or
off-sets, in French called little Eyes, and that is called Slipping, or dis-Eyeing.

These off-sets or suckers to be good, should be White about the heel, and have some
little roots; those that are black about the heel, are old, and produce but very little Ar­
tichokes in the spring, whereas the others stay till August, September, or October, before
they bring theirs to perfection, according to the intention of the Gard'ner.

Sometimes Artichokes are multiplied by the seed, which grows in the Artichoke bottoms,
when they are suffered to grow old, to flower, and to open, and lastly to dry, about
Midsummer.



When we tie them up in Autumn, we wrap and cover them up to their whole length,
with straw or old dung, and so Whiten the Cottony sides of their leaves, to make Arti­
choke Chards of."dis-Eyeing" antedates earliest OED citation (1719).

Asparagus, or Sparagras are propagated only by seeds which is black, a little oval,
round on one side, and very flat on the other, about the bigness of a great pin's head,
and grows in a shell, or round Cod, which is Red, and about the bigness of an ordi­
nary Pea; there are four or six seeds in each shell, and those shells grow in Autumn,
upon the head of those Asparagus plants that are a little fairer and stronger than the
rest. Sometimes those shells are sown whole, but the best way is to break them, and
beat the seeds out of them. The time of sowing them is about the end of March.


B

BAlm, in French, Melisse, is multiplied only by Runners and Cuttings.

Basil, or Basilick, as well the Great, as the Small sort is multiplied by seed, which is
of a blackish cinnamon colour, and very Small and a little oval, and is propagated no
other way but that."Basilick" appears to be an anglicized French form but is not found in the OED as a spelling in English.

The common Bay, or Bays, is propagated by seeds which are Black, or else by Lay­
ers.

Beans, as the Marsh or Common Beans, which are pretty thick and long, of an oval
figure, round at one end, and flat at the other, with a black list or Crease pretty thick
and broad, of a sullied White colour, having a smoother skin than the Haricauts, or Kid­
ney Beans, which are likewise long and oval, but narrower, lesser, and thinner than the
other, having a black list in the middle of one of the sides of the oval, which is round
on one side, and a little bending Inward on the other. The Feverolles, or Venetian
Beans, differ only from these last, in that they are a little less, and are some of them
White, some Red, and some mottled with several Colours; there is one sort of them
that is very small. Every body knows, they all grow in Cods."marsh bean" and "Venetian bean" not found in OED.

Beet-Raves, or Beet-Radishes, that is, Red-Beets to produce Roots for Sallets, are mul­
tiplied only by Seeds, which are about the bigness of middling Peas, and round, but all
gravelly in their roundness; they are yellowish, and so like those of the White Beet, that
they are hardly to be distinguish'd one from the other, so that People are often mista­
ken, thinking they have sown Red Ones for Roots, and see nothing come up but White
Beets; they are planted apart when designed to run to Seed.Antedates earliest citation of "beet-rave" in OED (1719); "beet radish" not found in OED.

White Beets, called Porrêe or Poirée, for Chards are also propogated only by Seed,
which is like that of the Red Beets, only 'tis of a little duller colour: They are replanted
to produce Chards.

Bonne-Dame, or Good Lady, is multiplied only by Seed, which is extreamly flat, and
thin, and is round and reddish."good lady" unidentified.

Borage is propagated only by Seed, which is black, and of a long bunchy Oval Fi­
gure, and having commonly a little white end towards the base or bottom, which is
quite separated from the rest, the length is all Engraven as 'twere with black streaks from
one end to the other.

Bugloss is likewise only multiplied by Seed, which is so like that of Borage, that they
cannot be known asunder.

Buckshorn Sallet is multiplied only by Seed, which is one of the least we have; it is
besides that, longish, and of a very dark Cinnamon colour, and grows in a Husk like
a Rats Tail.

Burnet is propagated only by Seed, which is pretty big, and a little Oval, with four
sides, and is all over engraven as 'twere in the spaces between those four sides.


C.

CAbbages, called in French, Choux, and comprehending both Cabbage, Coleworts, and
Colyflowers of all kinds, of what Nature soever they be, are multiplied only by Seed,
which is about the bigness of an ordinary Pin, or of Birding Powder, and is reddish, in­
clining to a brown Cinnamon colour.

Capucin Capers. See Nasturces.

Caprons. See Strawberries.

Spanish Cardons are propagated only by Seed, which is longish, oval, and about the
bigness of a fair Wheat Corn; it is of a greenish, or Olive colour, mark'd with black
streaks from one end to the other, and is Sown from the middle of April to the end.



Carrots are multiplied only by Seeds, which are small and oval, the sides of which are
wrought with little streaks, or longish points very small; and one side of the flat part of
the Seed is a little fuller, and more raised than the other, and both of them are marked
long-ways with streaks; they are of the colour of a dead Leaf. 

Cellery is multiplied only by Seed, which is very small, yellowish, and of a longish
oval Figure, and a little bunched.

Chalots: See Eschalots.

Chards of Artichokes: See Artichokes.

Chards of Beets: See Beets.

Chervil is multiplied only by Seed, which is black, very small, and pretty longish;
striped long-ways; it grows upon the Plants that were Sown in the Autumn before, and
Knits and Ripens in the Month of June.

Musked Chervil is multiplied likewise only by Seed, which is longish, black, and pretty
big.

Chervi or Skirrets is multiplied only by Seed, which is oval, longish, and pretty small
and narrow, streaked from one end to the other, and of the colour of a grayish white
dead Leaf, and flat at one end.

Ciboules, or small Onions, are propagated only by Seed, of the bigness of a corn of or­
dinary Gun-powder, a little flat on one side, and half round on the other, and yet a little
long and oval, and white on the inside; so like to which are the Seeds of both the
Red and White Onion, and of Leeks, that it is very hard to distinguish them one from
the other: Ciboules are Sown in all Seasons.

Citrulls, Pumpions, or Pumkins, are propagated only by Seeds, which are of a flat oval
Figure, and pretty large and whitish, and are as 'twere neatly edged about the sides,
excepting only at the bottom, where they stuck to the Citrull or Pumpion, in whose Belly
they were formed.

Cives, called English Cives, are multiplied only by little Off-sets that grow round about
their Tufts, which grow very big in time, from which a part of those Off-sets are taken
to Replant.

Colyflowers: See Cabbages.

Coleworts: See Cabbages.

Cresses, called Alénois Cresses, are multiplied only by Seed, which is of a longish oval
figure, small, and of an Orange yellow colour.

Cucumbers, or Cowcumbers, are propagated only by Seed, which is oval, a little pointed
at both ends, but a little less at the lower end or bottom than at the other, out of which
springs its Bud or Sprout; it is of a midling thickness, of a whitish colour, and is gathered
out of the Bellies of those Cucumbers that are grown yellow with ripeness.

The Curran-Bushes, whose Fruit grows in Bunches, both the Red, and the White,
called Dutch Currans; as also Goosberry-Bushes, called in French, Groseilles, as well as Cur­
rans, and named Picquans, or Prickly Groseilles, are multiplied as well by slips that are a
little Rooted, that Sprout out of the foot of their Stocks every year in the Spring, as by
simple Cuttings; we also Replant their Stocks of two or three years old."Dutch currant" not found in OED.


D.

THe Dock, called Patience, being a sort of Sorrel, is multiplied only by Seed, which
is like Sorrel Seed, only a little bigger.

Dragons, or Estragon, a Sallet: See Estragon.


E.

WHite Endive, called in French, Chicorée, i. e. Succory, is multiplied only by Seed,
which is longish, and of a whitish grey colour, flat at one end, and roundish
at the other, and grows upon the Stocks or Stems of the preceeding years growth; one
would take it almost for nothing else but little bits of Herb cut pretty small.

Wild Endive, or Succory, is also propagated only by Seed, which is longish and black­
ish, and grows as the other doth.

Eshalottes, or Shalotts: See Shalots.

Estragon, or Dragons, being a Sallet, is multiplied only by Runners, or Cuttings.




F.

FEnnel is propagated only by Seed, which is pretty small, longish and oval, bunched,
and streaked with greenish grey streaks.

French Sorrel: See Alleluia.


G.

GArlick is produced by a kind of Kernels, or Off-sets, which grow in great numbers
about its Foot, and make all together a kind of Bulb like an Onion, which Kernels
are called the Cloves of the Garlick; every Clove being concave or hollow on the inside,
and convex, or bending outwards on the out-side, having at its lower end, a flat base or
bottom, by which it is fastned to the body of the Foot or Stalk, out of which the
Roots spring; and having on the top a pointed end, out of which springs its Bud, or
Shoot, when it is planted in the Earth in the Months of March or April, in order to its
bringing forth.

Good Lady: See Bonne Dame.

Goosberry-Bushes: See Curran-Bushes.


H.

HYssop, or Hysope, is propagated only by slips.


L.

LAvender is multiplied by Seed, and by the old Stocks or Plants replanted.

Lawrel, or Laurel: See Bays.

Leeks are multiplied only by Seed, which is altogether like that of Ciboules; they are
Replanted in the Month of May, very deep in the Earth, to make their Stalks and
Plants thick and white; and they are Sown in March as soon as the Frost will permit;
their Seed grows in a kind of thick white Purse, which is round, and grows upon the
top of a good long Stalk, and it keeps a pretty long time in that Purse or Hood before
it falls.

Lettuces, of what sort so ever they be, are multiplied only by Seed, which is of a
longish oval figure, streaked long-ways, sharp pointed at the ends, and very small; some
are black, as those of Aubervilliers, but the most of them are white: when they are Sown
in the Spring they run to Seed in the Month of July after; but the Winter Lettuces, called
otherwise Shell Lettuces, after having past the Winter in the place where they were Re-­
planted in October run up to Seed in the Month of July following.


M.

MAcedonian Parsly: See Parsly.

Mâches, or Masches, are multiplied only by Seed, which is very small, and of
an Orange colour.

Mallows, or Marsh-Mallows, are propagated only by Seeds, which are like one another
in shape, but yet are different as well in colour as in bigness; for the Seed of the Mallows
is much bigger than that of the Marsh-Mallows, and that of this latter is of a deeper brown
than that of the plain Mallows; they are both Triangular, and streaked all over.

Marjoram is propagated only by Seed, which is very little, and shaped almost like a
Limon, more pointed on one side than on the other; it is speckled in some places with
little white specks, and is as 'twere streaked with white all over; it is of a pretty light
Cinnamon colour.

Melons, or Musk-Melons, are multiplied by a Seed, which is like that of a Cucumber,
excepting in colour, which in Melons is of a pale red, and is not so broad as that of
the others; they are taken out of the Bellies of ripe Musk-Melons.

Mint, or Spare-Mint, called in French, Balm, is multiplied only by Runners that are
like so many Arms that spring out of its Tuft, and take Root; it likewise is propagated
by Cuttings, but bears no Seed.

Muscat: See Vines.




N.

NAsturces, commonly called Capucin Capers, are multiplied only by Seed, which is a
kind of Pea or Haricot, or French-Bean, which climbs and gets up upon Branches or
Poles which are near it; the Leaf of it is pretty large, and the flower, of an Orange colour;
the figure of the Seed is a little Pyramidal, divided by Ribs, having all its superficies engra­
ven, and wrought all over, being of a grey colour, inclining to a light Cinnamon:
They are Sown in hot Beds about the end of March, or the beginning of April, and af­
terwards they are Replanted by some Wall well exposed. The Seed easily falls as soon
as ever 'tis Ripe, as doth that of Borage, and the Belles de Nuit, or Night Fair Ones; and
therefore they must be carefully gathered.


O.

ONions, as well the White, as the Red, are multiplied only by Seed, which as I have
already said, is like that of Ciboules.


P.

PArsly, as well the Common, as the Curled sort, is multiplied only by Seed, which is
little and very small, and of a greenish grey colour, and a little bending inward
on one side, and all over streaked with little rising streaks from one end to the other.

Macedonian Parsly or Alisanders is also propagated only by Seed, which is pretty big and
oval, and a little more full and swelling on one side than on the other, which bends a lit­
tle inward, streaked throughout its whole length; and is also streaked a cross on the edges
between the sides.

Passe-pierre: See Pierce-Pierre.

Parsnips are multiplied only by Seed, which is flat, and of a round figure, a little oval,
and as if it were hemmed or edged, streaked throughout its length, and is of the colour
of a brownish Straw.

Patience: See Dock.

Passe-Musquee: See Muscats, and Vines.

Peas, or Pease, are multiplied only by Seed; there are great Ones, little Ones, white Ones
or yellow Ones, and green Ones. All the world knows they grow in Cods, and are almost
round, and sometimes half flat.

Perce-Pierre vulgarly called Passe-Pierre, i. e. Pass, or Pierce Stone, being a kind of
Stone-Parsly, is multiplied only by Seed, which is more long than round, pretty big, of
a greenish grey colour, striped on the Back and Belly, and resembling a Lute in shape.

Pimpernell: See Burnet.

Pompions, or Pumpions, or Pumkins: See Citrulls.

Potirons, a sort of Flat Citrulls, or Pumpions, are multiplied only by Seed, which is
altogether like that of the Common Citrull, or Pumpion, and grows in the same manner.

Purslain, as well of the Green, as Red, or Golden sort, is multiplied only by Seed, which
is black, and extraordinary small, and of a half flat roundish figure. To have a good
Crop of this Seed, the Purslain Plants must be Replanted at the end of May, at a full
Foot distance one from the other: The Seed grows in little Husks or Shells, each of
which contain a great many, and when we are to gather it, we cut off all the heads of
the Stalks, and lay them to dry a little in the Sun, and then we beat the Seed out, and
Fan, or Screen it.


R.

RAdishes are multiplied by Seed, which is round, pretty thick, and of a reddish Cin­
namon colour; it grows in a kind of little Cods, which they call Coque-Sigrues in 
Provence.

Raspberries, both Red and White, are propagated only by slips that sprout out of their
stocks every year in the Spring time, and are sit to Replant the next Spring after.

Reponces, or Field Radishes, are multiplied only by Seed, and are a sort of little Radishes
that are eaten in Sallats, and grow without any pains in the Fields."responces" was not found in OED.

Rocamboles, are a sort of mild Garlick, otherwise called Spanish Garlick, which is mul­
tiplied both by Cloves, and by Seed, which latter is about the bigness of ordinary Peas."rocamboles" antedates earliest OED citation (1698); and "Spanish garlic" does so also (1707).



Rocket, being one of the Sallat Furnitures, is multiplied by Seed, which is extreme little,
and of a Cinnamon, or dark Tan colour.


Rosemary is a little very odoriferous Shrub, that is propagated by Seed or Branches that
have some portion of Root.

Rubarb is propagated only by Seed, which is pretty big, and triangular, the three An­
gles being as thin as very thin Paper, and there being a thickness in the middle where
the Bud or Shoot is.

Rue is multiplied by Seed, whose shape resembles that of a Cocks Stone; it is of a black
colour and rugged; but yet we usually propagate it rather by its Layers and Cuttings,
than by its Seed.


S.

SAge is multiplied only by a kind of hooked slips that have a little Root.

Salsifie, or Goats-Beard, the common sort is multiplied only by Seed, which is al­
most like in all things to that of Scorzonera, except in its colour, which is a little greyer;
it is of a very long oval figure, as if it were so many little Cods all over streaked, and
as 'twere engraven in the spaces between the streaks, which are pretty sharp pointed to­
wards the ends.

Samphire or Sampire: See Pierce-pierre.

Saracens Wheat, or Turky Wheat, is a dark red Seed or Grain, about the bigness of an
ordinary Pea, very smooth, round on one side, and a little flat on the other, where it is
fastned to its Spike or Ear."Saracens" (for "Saracens wheat" or the French "blé-sarrasin") not found in OED.

Savory is multiplied only by Seed, which is extraordinary small and round, slick,
and grey.

Scorzonera, or Spanish Salsifie, is propagated only by Seed, which is small, longish and
round withal, and of a white colour, and grows in a kind of Ball, mounted on the top
of the Stalk of the Plant, having its point garnished with a kind of Beard like that of
Pissabeds, or Dandelions.

Sellery: See Cellery.

Shalots or Eschalots, are multiplyed by Off-Sets or Kernels, which grow about the
foot of its Plant, and are about the bigness of a Filberd Nut.

Smallage is multiplyed only by Seed which is reddish, and pretty big, of a roundish
oval Figure, a little more full and rising on one side, than on the other, and is streaked
from one end to the other.

Sorrel, as well the Lesser one which is the common sort, as the Greater one, are both
multiplyed only by Seed, which is very small, slick, and of a Triangular Oval Figure,
the ends of it being sharp and pointed, and being of an excellent dark Cinnamon Co­
lour.

Round Sorrel, is propagated only by Slips or Runners, so that out of one Tuft, we
may easily make several plants of it.

French or Wood-Sorrel: See Alleluia.

Spare-Mint: See Mint.

Spinage is multiplyed only by Seed, which is pretty big, and horned, or Triangu­
lar on two Sides, having its corners very sharp pointed and prickly, and the other part
which is opposite to those pointed Horns, is like a Purse, of a Grayish colour.

Straw-berry Plants, as well the white as the red, and those called Caprons, are propaga­
ted only by Runners, which are produced by a kind of Threads or Strings, which
springing out of the body of the Plant, and creeping along upon the Earth, easily e­
nough take Root, at certain Joynts or Knots about a foot distance one from the other,
which knots coming to take Root, make new Plants, that in two or three Months time,
are fit to be transplanted, and they are placed three or four of them together, to make
what we call a Tuft.

Succory: See Endive.

Suckers of Artichokes: See Artichokes.

Sharp Trefoil: See Alleluia.


T.

TIme is multiplyed by Seed, which is very small, and sometimes we separate those
Plants or Stems of it that produce several rooted Slips or Suckers, to replant them
in Borders, for Time is seldom planted otherwise.



Tripe Madam is propagated both by Seed, and Cuttings or Slips, every Stem or Stock
of it producing several Arms, which being separated and replanted, easily take Root again.
The Seed of it is Gray, and Longish, and almost of the shape of Parsly Seed; there
grows a great deal of it upon every Seed Stalk, which runs up one above another, like
those of Seed-Carrots, Parsnips, &c. there are seven or eight of them in a sort of little o­
pen Cup, where they grow ripe after the falling of a yellow Flower, inclining to an
Olive colour.

Turkey Wheat: See Saracens Wheat.

Sharp Trefoil: See Alleluia.

Turneps are multiplyed only by Seed, which is almost like that of Cabbage.


V.

VInes of what sort soever they be, whether White, Red, or Black Muskat Chassela's,
Bourdelais, Corinthian, or Long Muscat, called otherwise Passe-Musquée, &c. are mul­
tiplyed by Layers, by hooked or bent Slips, and especially Couched; and lastly, by Graft­
ing Cleft-wise.Antedates earliest OED citation for "chasselas" (1699) and "black muscat" (1989); "bordelais", "Corinthian [muscat]", "long muscat", and "passe-musque" not found as separate entries in OED.

Violet Plants, as well of the Double as Single sort, and of what colour soever they be, though
they produce Seed in little reddish Shells or Husks, yet are multiplyed only by the Slips
they produce, each Plant or Stock of them growing insensibly into a great Tuft, which
is divided into several little ones, which being replanted, grow in time big enough to be
likewise divided into others.


W.

Wheat: See Saracens and Turkey Wheat.

Worm wood, is multiplyed by Seed, which is of a pretty odd Figure, being a little
bent inward in its smallest part, and a little open on the other end, which is bigger and
rounder, and upon which there is a little black spot. Its colour is yellowish at the bigger
end, and its sharper end inclines a little to black. Its Seed is seldom used, because it is
very difficult to fan or sift, being very light, and therefore when we have need of
propagating Worm-wood, we make use rather of its Cuttings and Layers, that are a lit­
tle rooted.

Wood-Sorrel: See Alleluia.






Now to give you a particular account of the Culture that belongs to every several
sort of Plant, I must tell you, that this Culture consists, first, in observing the distances
they are to be placed at one from the other; second, in the Triming of such as need it;



third, in planting them in that situation, and disposition, which they require;
fourth, in giving them those assistances which some of them have need of to bring them
to perfection, or which are convenient for them, whether it be by tying up, or wrapping
about, or Earthing up, or otherwise covering them, &c.

I begin in the ALPHABETICAL Order.

A.

ALISANDERS: See Macedonian Parsley.

Alleluia, or Wood-Sorrel, when it grows old, grows into Tufts, and being
a Plant that grows in the Woods, and consequently that loves the shade, we
therefore plant it along by the sides of our Northern Walls, at the distance of about one
foot between one plant and another; the more we strip it of its Leaves, which is one good
quality it has, the more fresh ones it shoots forth: It is enough to set it two Inches
into the Ground; it lasts three or four years without being renewed, and to renew it,
we need do no more than to separate or slip out the great Tufts of it into several little
ones, and replant them again immediately, which is to be done in the Months of
March and April; a little watering in very Hot weather, and especially in sandy
Grounds, is a very great and welcome help to them.

Anis and Fennel are commonly sown pretty thin, either in furrows, or borders; their
Leaves are used in Sallets among other Furnitures. They run to Seed towards the Month
of August, and when their stalks are cut down, they shoot out new Leaves the next year
that are as good as the first, but however it is best to renew them every two years.

Arrach, Orrach, or Orage, is propagated only by Seed, and is both one of the quickest
both in coming up, and in running to Seed, which latter it does at the very beginning of
June. It is sown pretty thin, and to have good Seed of it, we must transplant some
plants of it in some separate place. The Leaf of this plant is very good both in pottage,
and in stuffings or farces; we use it almost as soon as it peeps out of the Earth, for it
passes away very quickly; and to have some the more early, we sow a little quantity of it
upon a Hot Bed: It thrives well enough in all sorts of Grounds, but yet it grows always
fairer in good Grounds than in but indifferent ones.

Aromatick or sweet, or spicy Herbs such as are planted in Edgings of Borders, as Mar­
joram, Time, Sage, Rosemary, &c. See their Culture under the several Titles of each of
those particular Herbs.

Artichokes, as we have already elsewhere told you, are multiplied by their Eyes, Suck­
ers, Slips, or Off-Sets, which every plant of them usually shoots out every year in the
Spring, round about its old Root, and which must be taken off as soon as they are grown
big enough, leaving only at each place three of the best and furthest distant one from the
other. For the planting them, we commonly make little Trenches, or Pits about half a
foot deep, and three foot distant one from another, and filled with Mold, and we place
two rows of them regulated by a line, in each Bed, which is to be full four foot broad,
and parted from the next Bed by a path-way of one full foot; these Trenches of
Pits are to be made at about half a foots distance from the edge of the Bed, and
Checquerwise one towards the other; we place two Slips in a right Line in each
space containing between Nine and Ten Inches in Length. We must renew them
once every three years at least, cut off their Leaves at the beginning of Win­
ter, and cover them with long dry dung during all the very cold weather till the
end of March, when we must uncover them, and slip them, if their Slips be yet big e­
nough, or else stay three Weeks or a Month longer till they be, then we must labour
and move the Earth well about them, and dung them with the rottenest part of that
Dung that served them for a covering; we water them moderately once or twice a Week,
till about the end of May, their Fruit begins to appear, and from that time we must wa­
ter them plentifully, that is two or three times a Week, during the whole Summer, al­
lowing half a Pitcher full of Water to each plant, and especially in Grounds naturally
dry; those planted in the Spring, should bring their Fruit to perfection in Autumn fol­
lowing, if well watered, and they which do not, ought to yield their first Fruit in the
next Spring after, in case they be strong enough to resist the sharpness of the Winter.
Artichokes have not only the hard weather, and excess of wet to fear, but they have the
Field Mice likewise for their Enemies, those mischievous little Animals gnawing their
Roots in the Winter-time, when they find nothing better in the Gardens, and for that



reason, it's good to plant one Rank of Beet-Chards between two Ranks of Artichokes,
that the Field-Mice finding the Roots of these last the tendrer of the two, may fall up­
on them instead of the others, as they never fail to do. There are three sorts of Arti­
chokes, viz. the green, or otherwise white ones, which are the most early, the violet
ones, whose Fruit is almost of a pyramidal Figure, and the red ones which are round,
and flat like the white ones. The two last sorts are the most delicious. 

Artichoke Chards. See Chards.

Asparagus are sown at the beginning of the Spring like other Seeds, that is, they are
sown in some Bed well prepared; they must be sown indifferent thin, and raked with an
Iron Rake, to cover them with Earth. About a year after, if they be big enough, as
they will be, if the Ground be good, and well prepared; or if not, at least at two years
end, we must transplant them, which is to be done about the end of March, and all the
Month of April; and for that effect we must have Beds between three and four foot
broad, and separated one from the other; if it be in ordinary Ground, we dig these Beds
hollow with a good Spade, throwing up the Earth we take out of them upon the
Path-ways; and as to strong, heavy and moist Grounds, I would have them ordered
as I have done the Kitchen-Garden at Versailles, that is to say, I would not have the Beds in
them at all laid hollow, but on the contrary, raised and kept higher than the Path-ways,
too much wet being mortal to these Plants. Asparagus thus sown shoot out Tufts of Roots
round about their Eye, or Mother Root; that is to say, round the place from whence all
their shoots are to Spring, which Roots spread between two Earths, and in order to
transplant them either into a hollow Bed, or a high raised Bed, we bestow a good tho­
rough Tillage on the bottom of the Trench, and if the Ground be not very good, we
dung it a little, and afterward we plant two or three stocks of these young Plants, or­
derly in ranks upon the Superficies of the Bed prepared for them, without needing to
trim the extremity of their Roots, or at least, but a very little, and if our intention be,
to force these Asparagus by an artificial heat, when they are grown big enough, we place
them at a foot distance one from the other, and if they be to remain to grow after the
usual manner, we allow them at a foot and a half's distance, but in both Cases, we
place them Checquerwise, and when they are so placed, we cover them up again with
two or three Inches depth of Earth: if any of them fail to Spring up, we may reimplace
them with new ones two or three Months after, which is to be done in the same man­
ner as we planted the others, only taking care to water the new planted ones sometimes
during the great heat, and to keep them always well weeded, and well dug about, or
else we mark out with little sticks the empty places, and stay till the Spring before
we fill them up again. Every year we cover the Bed with a little Earth taken off from
the Path-way, because instead of sinking, they always are rising by little and little: we
dung them moderately every two years, and let them shoot up the first three or four
years without gathering any, till we see them begin to grow pretty thick, and then we
may force as many as we please of them, or if not, we continue to gather of them every
year a crop for fifteen years, before we need to renew them. Every year about Martle­
mas, we cut down all their stems, every stock producing several stems, and take the seed
of the fairest of them for Seed, if we would have them come to bear at the time above-­
mentioned. To draw them out of their Nursery-Beds, we use an Iron Fork, the Spade be­
ing too dangerous for that work, because it would cut, and hurt those little
Plants.

We must not fail every Year at the latter end of March, or beginning of April,
that is, before the Asparagus begin to sprout naturally, to bestow a small dressing or
stirring of the Ground about three or four Inches deep, on every Bed, taking care not
to let the Spade go so deep, as to hurt the Plants; which small dressing serves, both to
kill the Weeds and to render the Superficies of the Earth loose, and thereby not only the
better to dispose it to drink up the Rain, and the May-dew that nourishes the Stocks, but
likewise to facilitate the passage of the Asparagus in sprouting. The particular and most
dreadful Enemies of Asparagus are a sort of little Fleas, that fasten upon their shoots,
make them miscarry, and hinder them from thriving; they are most troublesome in ve­
ry hot and dry years, not appearing at all in other years; there has been no Remedy
found yet against this mischief.


B.

BAlm, called in French Melisse, is an Odoriferous Herb, whose Leaf when tender, makes
a part of Sallet-Furnitures. It is multiplyed both by Seed, and by rooted Branches,
like Lavender, Time, Hyssop, &c.



Basil is an annual Plant, that is very delicate. We seldom sow it but upon Hot Beds,
and not in open Ground, as we do Purslain, Lettuce, &c. We begin to sow some in
that manner at the very beginning of February, and we may continue so to do the whole
year. Its tender Leaves are mixed in a small quantity, with the Furnitures of Sallets,
among which, they make an agreeable perfume; It is likewise used in Ragou's, especially
dry ones, for which reason, we take care to keep some for Winter. We gather its Seed
in the Month of August; and usually to make it run to Seed, we transplant it in the
Month of May, either in Pots, or Beds. There are several sorts of it, but that which
bears the biggest Leaves, and especially if they incline to a Violet Colour, and that which
bears the least Leaves, are the two most curious; that which produces midling ones,
being the ordinary or Common sort. 

The Common Bays, or Bay-Tree, is a shurb of no very great use in our Gardens, and
therefore it is enough to have some few Plants of it in some well sheltered place, to gather
some Leaves of them when occasion requires.

Beans, as well those of the Common, and Garden sort, as those called Kidney-Beans,
and French-Beans, and in French, Aricôs, are sown in open Ground, and grow not other­
wise; The Aricô French, or Kidney-Beans, are sown about the latter end of April, and all
the Month of May, and are very sensible of the Frost; The Common Garden Beans
are sown at the same time with Hasting-Peas, both in November, and in Febru­
ary.

Hot Beds. See the Works in November.

Bete-raves, or Red Beet-Roots, are annual Plants propagated only by Seed, and are
seldom transplanted. They are sown in the Month of March, either in Beds or Borders.
They must be sown very thin, or at least if they come up too thick they must be very
much thinned, or else they will not grow so fair and large as they should be. They
require a very good, and well prepared Ground: They are the best that have the Reddest
substance and the Reddest Tops: They are not good to spend till towards the end of
Autumn, and all the Winter Season. To have Seed of them, we transplant in March some
of the last years Roots that we have preserved from the Frost, their Seed is gathered in the
Months of August and September."beet-rave" antedates the earliest OED citation (1736).

White, or Chard-Beets: See Chards.

Borage and Bugloss, grow and are to be ordered in the same manner as Arrach, only
they come not up so vigorously. We sow of them several times in the same Summer, because
their Leaves, in which consists all their excellence, are good only whilst they are tender,
that is, while they are young. Their little Violet Colour'd Flowers serve to adorn Sallets.
Their Seed falls assoon as 'tis ripe, and therefore must be carefully watch'd: The surest
way is to cut down the stalks, and lay them a drying in the Sun, assoon as ever the Seeds
begin to ripen, and by that means we shall lose but very few.

Bourdelai's, otherwise called Verjuice, as well the White, as Red sort, is a kind of Vine
which is pruned, and slipt, or layed, and graffed and planted as other Vines are in the
Months of January, February, and March. Care must be taken to tie up its Branches,
either to props, or some sort of trail, about the middle of June at latest, or else the
wind destroys it quite: We must also pick and pluck off the weak and unprofitable
Branches of these Vines; and when we prune them, 'tis enough to leave two, three,
or four fair Branches at most upon each stock, and to keep them not above three or four
buds long, every one of which usually shoots forth one bearing Branch, with three or four
fair Bunches of Grapes upon each Branch. My practice is in all sorts of Vines, but par­
ticularly in the Muscat or Musked sorts, to keep the lower Branches shorter by two buds,
than the highest, to keep the Plant always low, when I would not have them mount up
upon a Trail.

Buckshorn-Sallet: See Hartshorn-Sallet.

Burnet, called in French Pimprenelle, or Pimpernelle, is a very Common and ordinary
Sallet furniture, which is seldom sown but in the Spring, and is sown thick either in Beds or
Borders.

It often Springs afresh after cutting, of which the youngest shoots must be chosen for
Sallets, the Leaves that are any thing old being too tough. It does it a great deal of
good to water it in Summer. There is but one sort of it whose Seed is gathered at the end
of Summer.




C.

CAbbages of all sorts of Kitchen-Plants take Root again the easiliest when transplanted,
as they are likewise the most known, and most used of any in our whole Gardens.
They are multiplied by Seed, and are of several sorts and Seasons. There are some called
White, or headed Cabbages, which are for the service of the latter end of Summer, and for
Autumn. There are some Curled, called Pancaliers, and Milan Cabbages, which produce
small headed Cabbages, for Winter; there are some of a Red or Violet Colour; and some
called long sided Cabbages, whereof some are Bright or White, and very delicate, ripe in
Vintage time, and others Green, and are not very good till they be Frost-bitten. Lastly,
there are some called Choux Fleurs, i. e. Cabbage Flowers, and by the English Collyflowers,
which are the most noble and valuable of them all, and are not used in pottage, but in
choice intermesses; they cannot endure the Frost, and therefore assoon as they begin to
form their heads, they must be covered with their Leaves tied up for that end over
them, with Straw bands, to guard them from the insults of the Cold that spoil and rot
them. They are for our Winter spending, and must be sheltred in the Green house or
Conservatory, whither they must be carried and there planted with a turf of their old Earth,
about them, where they commonly are used to perfect the full growth of their heads.
All other Cabbage-Plants yield Seed in France, but only these, whose Seed we are fain to
have brought up from the Eastern Countries, which makes them ordinarily very dear. To
make Cabbages run to Seed, we use every year either in Autumn or Spring to transplant
some of the best and fairest of them, which run to Seed in the Months of May and June,
that is gathered in July and August.

You are by the way to remark two things; The first is, that all thick Plants that run
to Seed, and grow pretty high, as Cabbage, Leeks, Ciboules, Onions, Red Beet-Roots, Car­
rots, Parsnips, Cellery, &c. must be supported either with upright props, or cross
sticks, to hinder the wind from breaking down their stems before the Seed be
Ripe.

The second is, that we seldom stay to let any Seeds dry upon their Plants as they
stand, it being enough to let them only Ripen, when we cut down their stems, and lay
them to dry upon some Cloth, after which, we beat them out, and fan and cleanse them
and lay them up when they are fully dry: And thus we do with the Seeds of Cresses,
Chervil, Parsley, Radishes, Borage, Bugloss, &c."Milan cabbage" not found in OED.

Ordinary Capers grow upon a sort of small Shrub that is raised in niches made purposely
in well exposed Walls, for that end, which are filled with Earth to nourish the Plants;
and every year in the Spring we prune their Branches, which afterwards shoot out buttons
or swelling buds, which are pickled up in Vinegar to be used in Winter, either in Sallets,
or in pottage.

Capucine-Capers, or Nasturces, are annual Plants which are usually sown in Hot Beds,
in the Month of March, and transplanted again in the naked Earth along by some Walls, or
at the foot of some Trees, where their mounting stalks which are but weak, and grow pretty
high may take some hold, to support themselves. They are also planted in Pots, and
Boxes, in which some sticks are set up to support their stalks. Their Buttons or round
Buds before they open, are good to pickle in Vinegar. Their Flower is pretty large of
an Orange Colour, and very agreeable. They must be carefully watered in the Summer, to
make them shoot vigorously, and so long time as they should. Their Seed falls to the
Earth assoon as ever 'tis ripe, as well as that of Borage and Bugloss, and therefore must be
carefully gathered up.

Caprons, are a sort of large Straw-berries, not over delicate, which ripen at the
same time as those of the better kind. Their Leaves are extraordinary large, velveted
and of a darkish Green Colour. They are little to be prized, and are found in the Woods
as other Straw-berries are.

Spanish Cardons or Cardoons, grow only from Seed. They are sown at two several
times.

The first is commonly about the middle, or latter end of April, and the second, at
the beginning of May.

They must be sown in good and well prepared Ground, and in little Trenches or
pits a full foot wide, and about six Inches deep, filled with Mold. We make Beds of four
or five foot wide, in order to place in them two ranks of those little Trenches or pits
checker-wise. We put five or six Seeds in every hole, with intention to let but two or
three of them grow, if they all come up, taking away those that are over and above that



number, either to throw away, or to new stock those places where there perhaps are
none come up, or where we may have sown some few upon a Hot Bed for that intention.
And if in fifteen or twenty days we do not see the Seed come up, we should uncover
them, to see whether they be rotten, or begin to sprout, that so we may fill up their
places with new ones in case of need. The Seeds of the first sowing are generally
three weeks coming up, and those of the second fifteen days. Cardons must not be sown
before the middle of April, for fear they should grow too big, and run to Seed in August
and September, and then they are not good. Great care must be taken to water them
well; and when towards the end of October, we have a mind to whiten them, we take
the advantage of some dry day, first to tie up all their Leaves with two or three bands,
and some days after, we cover them quite up with Straw or dry Litter well twisted
about them, so that the Air may not penetrate to come at them, except it be at the very
top, which we leave open.

These Cardoon Plants thus wrapt up, whiten in about fifteen days or three weeks, and
grow fit to Eat. We make an end of tying up, and wrapping, or covering all that
we have in our Gardens, when we perceive the Winter approach, and then we take
them up with the Earth about them, to transplant them in our Green House, or Con­
servatory: Some of those Plants are good to transplant in the naked Earth in the
following Spring, to run to Seed in June, or July, or else some Plants of them
tied up in their first places, will serve for that three or four times together.

Carrots are a sort of Root, whereof some are White, and others Yellow, that grow only
from Seed, and require the same care and ordering which we have already described
under the head of Red Beet-Roots.

Cellery, is a sort of Sallet produced by Seed, and is not good but at the end of Autumn,
and during the Winter Season. We sow of it two several times, to be supplied with
it so much the longer, because that which has been long sown, easily runs to Seed, and
grows hard. We sow it then the first time upon Hot Beds in the beginning of April,
and because its Seed is so extream small, we cannot help sowing it too thick, so that if
we be not careful to thin it, and crop it in time, to make it grow to some strength and
bigness before we transplant it, it warps and flags its head too much, and grows weak,
and shoots its Leaves straglingly outward, instead of producing store of them from the
middle of its stock. The surest way is to transplant it in a Nursery Bed, placing the
Plants two or three Inches one from another, for which we make holes with our fingers
only; we transplant that which comes of the first sowing at the beginning of June,
and sow our second sowing, at the latter end of May, or beginning of June, but 'tis in
open Beds, and we take the same care to thin, crop, and transplant this, as we did that
of the first sowing, but we must plant more of it the second time, than at the first.
There are two ways of transplanting it; the one is in a Pit or Trench one full spit deep,
and between three and four foot broad, in order to place in it three or four ranks of these
Plants at the distance of one foot from one another: This way of making hollow Beds
Earth up our Cellery in, is good only in dry Grounds, wet ones being too apt to rot,
it. The second way of transplanting it, is in plain Beds that are not made hollow, and at
the same distances as in the other, taking care in both sorts of Beds to water them ex­
treamly in Summer time, its chief goodness consisting in being tender, as well as in being
very White. Watering contributes to the first kind of goodness, and for the second, you
are to observe, that to Whiten Cellery, we begin at first to tie it with two bands when it
is big enough, chusing dry weather for that effect, and afterward we Earth our Cellery
Plants quite up, with Earth taken off the high raised path-ways, or else cover it all
over with a good quantity of long dry Dung, or dry Leaves, as we do Cardoons. Cellery
so Earthed up with dry Earth, or Clothed with long dry Dung, or dry Leaves, to the
very top of its Leaves, Whitens in three weeks or a Month, and because when 'tis Whi­
ted, it rots as it stands, if it be not presently eaten, by consequence, we are not to
Earth it up, or cover it with Dung, but in such proportion as we are able to spend out
of hand; there needs no other precaution to be used to it so long as it does not freeze;
but as soon as ever it begins to set to freeze, we must then cover up our Cellery quite over
head and ears, for a hard Frost spoils it presently. And that we may the more easily
cover it, after we have first tied it up with two or three bands, we take it up with the
Earth about it, at the beginning of Winter, and plant it in another Bed, setting the Plants
as close as we can one to another, and then there needs much less stuff to cover them,
than when they are left standing in their old places at such great distances asunder. The
way to raise Seed from them, is, to transplant some Plants of them in some by-place, after
Winter is past, which will not fail to run to Seed in the Month of August, we know but
one sort of it.



Chards of Artichokes, otherwise called Costons, are the Leaves of fair Artichoke Plants
tied, and wrapt up with Straw in Autumn and Winter, which being covered up all o­
ver but at their very top, with Straw, grow white, and by that means, lose a little of
their bitterness, so that when they are boiled, they are served up like true Spanish Cardons,
but after all, are not so good, and besides the Plants often rot and perish whilst we are
whiting them.

Chard-Beets are Plants of white Beets transplanted in a well prepared Bed, at the di­
stance of a full foot one from the other, which produce great Tops, that in the middle
have a large white, and thick downy Cotton-like Main shoot, and that downy Cotton-­
like shoot is the true Chard used in Pottages and Intermesses. After we have sown white
Beets upon Hot Beds, or in the naked Earth, in the Month of March, we transplant that
which is yellowest in Beds purposely prepared, and by taking care to water them well during
the Summer, they grow big and strong enough to resist the hard winter cold, provided
care be taken to cover them with long dry Dung, just as we do Artichokes. They are
likewise well placed, when two Ranks of them are transplanted between two Ranks of
Artichokes. We uncover them in April, and dress the Earth about them, and give them
careful attendance, and by the means of this diligent Culture, they produce those fine
Chards we have in the Rogation Season, and in the Months of May and June; in fine,
they run to Seed, which we gather in the Months of July and August, to sow in the
following Spring.

The Chassela's is a very good and sweet sort of Grape, of which there are two kinds,
white and Red, and this latter is very scarce and rare, but the other very common. It
requires the good Expositions of the South, East and West, to be so much the yellower,
the more firm and crackling, the better; It is of all Grapes that which keeps lon­
gest, if it be not suffered to grow too ripe upon the Vine before it be gathered. Its
Culture which consists in pruning it, is the same with that of the Bourdelais or Verjuice
Grape.

Musked Chervil is one of our Sallet-Furnitures, and at the beginning of the Spring,
whilst its Leaves are young and tender, it is agreeable, and proper to contribute towards
the giving a perfuming Relish, but they are to be used no longer when they are old and
tough. It remains several Years in its place without being spoiled by the Frost, so that
its Stock grows pretty big and high: it runs to Seed towards the Month of June, and by
that is multiplyed."musked chervil" not found in OED.

Ordinary Chervil is an annual Plant, or rather a plant of few Months, which serves
for many Uses, and especially in Sallets, when it is young and tender, and therefore we
ought to see a little of it every Month proportionably to the occasions we have for it,
and to the quantity of Ground we have. It runs very easily to Seed, and if we have
some of it betimes, we must sow it about the end of Autumn, and doubtless we shall have
the Seed quite ripe towards the middle of June following; we cut down the stalks as
soon as it begins to grow yellow, and beat it out as we do that of other Plants.

Chicons are a sort of Lettuces to tie up; see their Culture under Lettuces. Cibouls or
Chibouls, properly speaking, are but Onions that are degenerated, and of which Nature has
as 'twere miscarried, that is to say, Onions that instead of producing a thick Root in the
Earth, and one single stem, produces but a small Root, and several Stems, or upright
Shoots, and those which produce most of them, are most esteemed, which are the sort of
which we should be most careful to preserve Seed, and which if planted in March will
yield us Seed fit to gather in August. We sow Cibouls almost every Month in the Year,
except in very hard Weather, when the Earth cannot be cultivated; their Seed is so per­
fectly like that of Onions, that they cannot be distinguisht one from the other, but the
former never recover so as to produce Onions, and particularly those we pluck up out of
the Onion Beds, which are sown too thick, and must be thin'd, that those which are left,
may grow the bigger. We thin our Cibouls also for the same, and we transplant some
which prosper very well, and grow big when they are so transplanted. It is conveni­
ent sometimes to water our Ciboul Beds in Summers that prove extraordinary dry, and un­
less in such cases, they will not need watering, but however they must be always planted
in good Earth.

English Cives, otherwise called Appetites, are multiplied by producing thick Tufts, which
are slipt out and separated into many little ones, and are transplanted nine or ten Inches
asunder, either in Borders or Beds; they require pretty good Ground, with which if they
be accommodated, they will last three or four years without removing, without needing
any great culture; it being enough to keep them well weeded, and to water them some­



times during the great heat. It is their Leaves only, that are used for one of the Sallet
Furnitures.

Citrulls or ordinary Pompions, Pumpions, or Pumkins, and Potirons, or flat Pumpions,
as every body knows, are the biggest productions the Earth brings forth in our Climates,
for whose culture there is little to be done; usually we sow them in Hot Beds towards the
middle of March, that being the only way to preserve and multiply them, and at the end
of April, we take them up with the Earth about them, to transplant them in holes
made for that purpose, of about two foot diameter, and one foot deep, and two Toises or
Fathoms asunder one from the other, which are filled with mold; when their Vines begin
to grow five or six foot long, which happens about the beginning of June, we throw
upon them in the middle of that length some shovels full of Earth, both to prevent their
being broken by the winds driving them to and fro, and to make them take root at
the place so covered, by which means the Fruit that grows beyond that part, will be
the better nourished and consequently grow the bigger: There are two sorts of Citruls
or Pumpions, the Green, and the Whitish ones, but neither of them are fit to be gathered
till they be Augusted, that is till they be grown Yellow, and their skin grown tough
enough to resist ones nail. We keep of them in our store-houses, till about the middle of
Lent, when they have been seasonably gather'd, and well defended from the Cold:
All sorts of situation in the open Air agree with them well enough, but yet they which
are well exposed ripen sooner than the others; we trim nothing off from them, but
only content our selves with watering them sometimes when the Summers are excessive
dry. Their Seed is found in their Bellies.

Coleworts and Collyflowers are included under Cabbage.

Costons of Artichokes: See Chards.

Garden Cresses, is one of the little Sallet Furnitures, and is a Plant that lasts but a little
while. We sow of it every Month as we do Chervil, that we may have always some
of it that is tender; and we sow it very thick. It is propagated only by Seed, which it
is very apt to run to, and which we begin to gather at the end of June, cutting down
the stalks in order to dry them, and beat out the Seeds and winnow them as we do
those of other Plants, assoon as we perceive any of them to ripen.

Cucumber: See their culture under the head of Melons, and Musk-Melons. It is to be
observed, that a Cucumber Plant yields a great quantity of Fruit, and for a long time,
when 'tis well cultivated, and especially when 'tis well watered.

Currans and Goose berries, both being comprehended under the French name Groseilles,
both the Red and White, or Pearled sort, termed in English, Currans, and the prickly sort,
called in English, Dutch Goose-berries, are kinds of little Fruit shrubs, which yield a great
deal of Fruit. They produce round about their old stock, a great number of rooted
suckers or slips, which serve to propagate them, besides which their Branches and espe­
cially the young ones that are cut off from them, take root easily. They are planted in
the Month of March, at the distance of at least six good foot one from the other, either
in whole Beds, or squares, or in the void spaces between the Dwarf-Trees which are usually
planted about the squares of Kitchen or Fruit-Gardens. Both of them delight in a Ground
that is a little moist, the better to enable them to produce thick shoots, and consequently
good Fruit.

The Red and Pearled, or White sort, called in English Currans produce Bunches, which
are Ripe in July, but the prickly ones, named in English, Goose berries, produce none, but
bear their Fruit upon single stalks all along the young Branches of the preceeding years
growth, and that at the place of every one of the Eyes or Buds of that Branch. The
Fruit of this latter is used particularly in March and April, in Compôtes or wet sweet-meats,
and sauces, for which uses it must be very Green, for when it is Ripe, it grows too
soft and flat. The culture that is most proper to be used to both Currans and Goose-berries,
and especially to the Currans, consists in cutting away all their old wood, and preserving
only that of one and two years growth: for a confused mixture of one with the other,
is not only very indisagreeable and pernicious, but the old Branches will bear nothing
but very small Fruit, till at last they quite degenerate, so that they will bear none but small,
common, and very crabbed sowre Currans or Goose-berries, and assoon as the old stocks
have done bearing any longer either fair Branches or good Fruit, we should take a Re­
solution utterly to grub them up, after we have first raised a plantation of new ones in
some other choice fresh piece of Ground, to supply their places; for a Garden ought by
no means to be without fair Currans and Goose-berries, and assoon as ever the new ones begin
to bear, we are to destroy the old ones, which make but a very unsightly figure in a
Garden."Dutch gooseberry" not found in OED.




D.

SHarp Dock, or Dock-Sorrel, or Patience, properly speaking, is but a sort of very great
or large Sorrel, which is very sower. We content our selves only with some borders,
or perhaps, some one single Bed of it, to have some of its Leaves to mix now and
then among our Sorrel. The manner of raising it is the same we practise with Sor­
rel."dock-sorrel" antedates earliest citation in OED (1886).


E.

ENdive is a sort of very good annual Plant used in Sallets, and in our pottage in the
Autumn and Winter Seasons, provided it be well whitened, and consequently tender
and delicate; it is multiplied only by Seed. There is the Common or Garden Endive,
and wild Endive, called also Succory, the common name in French to them both. The
Common Endive is of several kinds, viz. The White, which is the most delicate, and
the Green sort which is the most rustical, and best able to resist the Cold, as likewise the
Curled sort, and that which is not Curled.

All sorts of them agree tolerably well with all kinds of Ground. We seldom begin to
sow any of them till towards the middle of May, and then they must be sown very thin,
or be very much thinned, afterwards in order to be whitened in the places where they
first grow, without transplanting, and we also sow but a little quantity of them at once,
because they are too apt to run to Seed: The season for sowing a greater quantity of
them is at the latter end of June, and during the whole Month of July, in order to have
some good for spending in September, and we afterwards sow a great deal of it again in
August, that we may have a sufficient provision of it to supply us all the rest of Autumn,
and the first part of the Winter. When our Endive comes up too thick, we cut it, or else
pull up some of it, to thin it, that the rest may grow big enough to be transplanted;
and when we transplant any of it in Summer time, it must be placed at the distance of a
large foot between Plant and Plant; we usually make great Beds of five or six foot
broad, in order to transplant them afterwards in rows markt out strait with a cord. This
Plant requires great and frequent waterings; and when 'tis big enough we must go to
work to whiten it, for which effect, we tie it up with two or three bands according as
its height requires; and being so tied, it whitens in fifteen, or twenty days: But because
it is very apprehensive of the Frost, therefore assoon as ever the Cold begins to come on,
we cover it with long dry Dung, whether it be tied up or no: At the end of September,
we plant the stocks of it pretty near together because then it grows neither so high,
nor spreads so much as in Summer: And if we can save any Plants of it in Winter, we
must transplant them again in the Spring in order to produce Seed that may have sufficient
time to ripen. Those persons that have a good Conservatory or Green house, will do
well to house it up there, but they which have none must be content to cover it up
well with a good quantity of long dry Dung, so that the Frost may not come at
it.

Wild Endive, or Succory is sown at the very beginning of the Month of March, and
that pretty thick, and in Ground well prepared. We endeavour to fortifie it, and make
it grow big all Summer, by watering, and cropping it that it may be fit to whiten in
Winter.

There are some People that will eat it Green in Sallets though it be never so bitter, but
commonly they rather desire it whitened: And to whiten it, we cover it up with a
great deal of long Dung, after we have first cut it close to the Earth, by which means,
it been forced to spring up in obscurity, and shaded from all light, its young shoots
grow White and tender. The neatest way is by the interposition of some props crossing
from side to side, to keep the Dung from touching it, since it shoots up in the same
manner under such a hollow covering as under a close one, so that care be taken, so well
to stop up passages on all sides, that no light or Air at all get in. Being thus ordered,
its shoots are much cleanlier, and relish not so much of the Dung. They which have
Conservatories may transplant some of it thither in Winter, it sprouting well enough there,
when it is but a little obscurely placed. When it is Green it endures the Frost well enough,
and at the very latter end of May, it runs to Seed. Many People eat its young shoots in
Sallets when they are young and tender.




F.

FEnnel is one of our Sallets Furnitures which grows only from Seeds, and is seldom
transplanted. It resists the Cold of Winter. We sow it either in Beds or Borders.
It springs again, when cut. Its youngest and tendrest shoots are the best. Its Seed is
gathered in August; and in fine it agrees well enough with all sorts of Grounds. See
more of it under Anis.

Furnitures, which are Mint, Tarragon, Samphire, &c. See their culture under the several
titles of those Plants that compose them.


G.

GArlick is propagated by heads, or kernels called Cloves, about the end of February
which are set three or four Inches deep in the Ground, and at three or four Inches
distance one from the other. They are taken out of the Earth at the end of July, and
laid to dry in a place free from moisture, in order to preserve them from one year to
another.

Goose-berries: See Currans.


H.

HArtshorn or Buckshorn Sallet, is a little annual Plant whose Leaves when tender, are
used in Sallet Furnitures they are sown in March very thick, it being impossible to
sow them thin, because their Seeds are so very small which are gathered in the Month
of August. The little Birds are very greedy of them, as they are of all other small Kitchen
Plant Seeds. When the Leaves of this Plant are cut, there spring up fresh ones, as do al­
so from Sorrel, Cives, Parsley, &c.

Fine, or Sweet Herbs: See Aromaticks.


L.

LAvender serves to garnish borders in Kitchen-Gardens, and yields a Flower which with­
out being separated from its stalks, is used to put among clean Linen to perfume
it. It is multiplied both by Seed, and by its Branches or Slips which have taken Root at
their joints.

Leeks are sown at the end of Winter, and that pretty thick, and in Beds well prepared,
after which during the whole Month of June, we take them up neatly and transplant
them into other Beds which are no less carefully prepared; in order to which, we make
with a planting stick, holes about four Inches deep, and half a foot asunder, and after
we have a little trimmed both their Roots and Leaves, we only slide down a single
Plant into every hole, without minding to press down the Earth about it, as we do to
all other Plants; however we take care to grub up the Weeds about them from time
to time, and to water them a little in very dry weather, that their stems may grow to a
due thickness, and may whiten before Winter; when the Frost is very brisk, it is best to
cover them, or else, to set them into Earth in the Conservatory; it is likewise very conve­
nient, to take them up out of their Bed where they are planted a little at large, and to
place them nearer together afterwards in another Nursery Bed, and cover them up with
long Litter, because otherwise when it freezes hard, we should not be able to get them
out of the Ground without breaking them. We may leave some of them standing after
Winter, to run to Seed, or else we may Plant some in a separate place for that purpose.
Their Seed is gathered in August, and there is one sort that is bigger than the ordinary one,
which is the best.

Lettuces are Plants that are the most ordinarily and commonly seen in our Kitchen-­
Gardens, and are indeed the most useful Manna of them, and especially for Sallets, of
which almost all the World is most constantly amorous. We have many things; for in
the first place, there are Lettuces of different Seasons, those which are good in certain Months
in the year being not good in others; and those which grow well in the Spring, thriving
not well in Summer; and they which prosper in Autumn and Winter, coming to nothing, nei­
ther in Spring nor Summer, as will be seen afterwards: In the second place, there are some
that with the ordinary help of the general culture attain their due perfection, and contri­
bute both to the nourishment and pleasure of Man-kind, and they are the Cabbage Lettuces.



Thirdly, there are some that necessarily require the Art of Industry and the Gard'ner to
advance them to that degree of perfection which they should have; and they are such
as must be tied up to make them grow white, without which they would be neither
tender, nor sweet, nor good; such as are the Roman Lettuces, &c. Nay, and I have
thought fit sometimes to tie up those that were to cabbage, when I saw they did not cab­
bage soon enough, by which means they may be forced to cabbage whether they will
or no. I use this Method particularly with some sorts of Winter Lettuces, that is, when
there are any of them which though furnished with leaves big enough to cabbage,
yet for want of sufficient heat, are hindred from turning, that is from growing hard;
and this expedient is a very soveraign Remedy against that Defect, in a surly Season; and
besides these general distinctions, the number of the particular Kinds of Lettuces is
greater than of any other sort of Kitchen-plants whatsoever, as will appear more especially
by the order they observe in respect of the Seasons; and the order of the Cabbage-Lettuces,
as near as I can describe it, is this.

The first that cabbage at the going out of Winter, are the Shell Lettuces so call'd,
because their Leaf is round almost like a Shell. They are otherwise called Winter-Lettu­
ces, because they pretty well indure ordinary Frosts, which none of all the other Lettu­
ces can do. These are sown in September, and afterward transplanted in some Wall-Border
towards the South and East, in the Months of October and November, or else they are
sown upon Hot Beds under Bells, in the Months of February and March, and are good to
eat in April and May. We have at the same time another sort of Reddish Lettuces called
Passion Lettuces, which prosper very well in light Grounds, but not over well in others
that being colder and stronger or heavier, easily infect them with slimy Snivel. Both
these kinds should when they thrive, produce very thick and good Heads. To these
succeed the Bright curled Lettuces, which usually cabbage in the Spring, that is before
the heat grows any thing excessive, but they must not be planted in strong and heavy Lands.
They likewise do well enough upon a Hot Bed, and especially under Glass Bells or Frames;
for when they are sown in January, and transplanted as soon as they are grown any thing
thick, or else left thin upon their Nursery-Beds, they cabbage as soon as the Winter-Let­
tuces, and are very excellent.

There is about the same Season, two other sorts of Curled Bright Lettuces; viz. one called
George Lettuces, which are thicker and less curled than the ordinary Curled Bright Lettuces;
and another called the Minion Lettuce, which is the least sort. Both these last require such
Ground as we term good black Sand, but yet their Heads seldom cabbage close enough,
that is to say, are not ordinarily so hard and firm as those of the right Curled Bright Let­
tuces.

The Curled Green Lettuces come in near about the same Season with the preceeding ones,
but are not so tender nor delicate.

There is also a sort of small red ones, and another named Short Lettuces, both which
have all the necessary qualifications of good Lettuces, excepting only that their
Heads are small, and that they likewise require Black Sandy Ground.

The first Lettuces supply us amply as I have said, during the Months of April and
May, and the beginning of June, but after that time they are too apt to be influenced
to run to Seed by the great heat that then comes on. They are followed during the
rest of June, and all the Month of July, by those called the Royal Bellegardes, or Fair
Looks, Bright Genua's, Capucins, Aubervilliers, and Perpignans; of which last, there are both
green and bright, both of which produce very fair and very good heads, and thrive well
enough in strong Grounds too, when the Summer proves not too Rainy; but cold, or
too frequent Rains infect them with Slime and Snivel, and consequently destroy them. The
Capucin Lettuces are reddish, cabbage easily, even without transplanting, and are pretty
delicate. The Aubervilliers bring forth Heads that are too hard, and sometimes bitter
withall, and are more used for boiling than for Sallets. The difference that appears
between the Royal and the Bellegardes or Fair look'd Lettuces, is only, that the former are a
little more Greenish, and these last a little Brighter.

However in the Summer time, the tied Lettuces are mixed among the cabbaged ones,
viz. the Roman Lettuces which are open, and are called Chicons, or Bright, and are termed Al­
phanges, which last are more delicate than the Chicons, both to raise, and when they are
eaten in Sallets. There are also a sort which are stiled Imperial Lettuces, which are of an ex­
traordinary great Size, and are likewise very delicate to the taste, but very apt to rot
as soon as ever they grow white; there are besides, a certain kind of large Reddish Chi­
cons, which whiten in a manner of themselves without tying, and are good in course
Grounds, and succeed usually pretty well in Summer, for as for the green Chicons, we



cannot well have them but in the Spring, because they run too hastily to Seed. The
Lettuces that defend themselves best from the great heat that predominates about the end
of July, and all the Month of August, are those we call Genua Lettuces, and especially
the green sort, for the Bright Genua, and Red Genua run more easily to Seed, and will
hardly come to good but in light Grounds. We should therefore prepare a great many
of these green Genua's against the Dog-days, and the first Frosts; we may also intermix
with them some few Bright, and some Red Genua's; but more especially we should
be sure to mix with them some Alfanges, and a great quantity of bright or white Endive,
as likewise, a great many Perpignan Lettuces, both of the bright and green kind. The
great Inconveniencies that happen to Cabbage Lettuces, are first, that they often degene­
rate so far as to cabbage no more, which is discovered by their Leaves growing out in
length like a Cat's Tongue, as Gard'ners term it, or by their changing their natural
colour into another more or less green; and therefore we must be very careful to gather
no Seed from any but such as cabbage very well, for which effect, we should be sure
to mark out at first, some of those that turn best, in order to reserve them to run to
Seed where they stand, or to remove them with a turf of the Earth about them into some
separate place assigned for that purpose.

The second is, that as soon as the most part of them are cabbaged, they must be
spent, unless we would have the displeasure to see them run to Seed without doing us a­
ny Service; in which Respect the Market Gard'ners have a great advantage beyond o­
ther Persons, because they can sell off in one day, whole Beds of these Cabbage Lettuces,
for commonly the Beds which were new planted at the same time, Cabbage likewise all
at once, whereas in other Gardens, we cannot spend them any faster than we need them,
for which Reason we are obliged to plant often of them, and that in greater quantity
than we are able to consume, that we may have a continual supply of them successively,
without any Discontinuation, it being much more commodious to have an over-plus
quantity of them, than to want. The surest way is to keep particularly to those sorts
that are the most Rustical, and that last a great while cabbaged before they run to
Seed, such as are the Shell Lettuces, the Perpignans, the Green Genua's, the Aubervilliers,
and the Austrichettes, or Austrian Lettuces, which I must confess too, are a long time cab­
baging.

The third inconvenience is, that the Morie, that is, the Rot which begins at
the ends of their Leaves, seizes them sometimes, and that when the Ground or the Sea­
son are not favourable to them, they remain thin and lean, and run up to Seed instead
of spreading and cabbaging. There is hardly any Remedy to prevent this Rot be­
cause there is hardly any to be found effectual against the cold and rainy Seasons that
cause it; but against the defects that may be in the Ground, there are infallible ones, that
is to say, it must be amended and improved with small Dung, if it be barren, whether it
be a sandy, or a Cold and gross Earth; and to this last, we should give a little slope,
if when the Ground is good, the waters spoil it by settling too much in it, and by that
means, make all the Plants growing there to rot. Good Dung throughly rotten, be­
ing the Soul and Primum Mobile of Kitchen-Gardens, without which, no more than
without frequent waterings, and dressing of the Ground no man can ever be rich in fine
and goodly Legumes.

There yet remains to be known for the perfect understanding the ordering of Let­
tuces, that they which grow biggest must be placed ten or twelve inches one from the
other, which is to be understood of the Shell Lettuces, Perpignans, Austrians, Bellegardes,
or Fair-looks, Aubervilliers, Alfanges, and Imperials; and for those that bear heads but of a
midling size, the distance of seven or eight inches is enough, which are the Bright Curled,
the short, the little Red, and the Green Chicon Lettuces, &c. Those that will be good
husbands may sow Radishes in their Lettuce Beds, because the Radishes will be all drawn
out and spent before the Lettuces cabbage; and for the same reason, because the Endives
are much longer before they come to perfection than the Lettuces, we may Plant some of
these last among the Endives; they agree well enough one with the other: and so we
may have a double crop to gather upon one and the same Bed and in the same Season;
for the Lettuces are gathered first, and afterwards the Endives arrive to their full good­
ness."Austrian lettuce" and "Autrichettes" not found in OED. "George lettuce" antedates earliest OED citation (1706).




M.

MAches, are a sort of little Sallet which we may call a wild and rustical
Sallet, because indeed it seldom is brought before any noble Company.
They are multiplied by Seed which is gathered in July, and are only used towards the end
of Winter. We make Beds for them which we sow about the end of August; they are
hardy enough to resist the rigours of the Frost, and because they produce a great many
little Seeds that easily fall, though we have but a little quantity of them, they will propa­
gate themselves sufficiently, without any other culture but weeding them.

Mallows and Marsh-mallows ought to be allowed a place in our Kitchen-Gardens, though
civility will not permit us to explain in this Treatise what uses they serve for, and though
they be rather Plants of the wild fields than of a Garden. They grow of their own accord,
and have no more need of cultivating than any of the Weeds that infest the good Herbs.
When we have a mind to have any of them in our Gardens, it will be best to sow them in
some by-place.

Marjoram, or Marjerom, is an Odoriferous Plant of which we compose agreeable
Borders and Edgings. There is the Winter Marjoram, which is the best, and the Summer
Marjoram which lasts not beyond that Season. Both of them are multiplied by Seed,
and likewise by Rooted slips or suckers. They are principally used in making Per­
fumes.

Mint, called in French, Balm, when once planted, needs no other particular culture
than being cut down close to the Ground every year, at the end of Autumn, to make it
shoot out store of tender Sprouts in the Spring, which are mingled with the Furnitures
of Sallets for them that love them a little spicy and perfumed. It must be renewed
every three years at least, and placed always in good Earth. The Branches when cut
off, take Root at the place where they are covered, and by that means, of one great
Tuft, we may easily make a great many, which are to be planted at the distance of a
foot one from the other. In the Winter likewise, we plant some thick Tufts of it upon
Hot Beds and by taking care to cover them with Bells, they spring very well for about fif­
teen days, and then perish.

Muscats are a kind of Grapes, which when they attain to their natural goodness, are
one of the most considerable commodities of a Kitchen-Garden. There are three sorts of
them, viz. White, Red, and Black, the White is commonly the best of the three, it re­
quires temperate Countries like that of the Isle of France, and the Expositions of the
South and East, and always a light Ground, we seldom see any good ones in pure Earth,
and if it be in hot Climates, or Gravelly, and Sandy Ground; they prosper very well upon
Counter-Espaliers, or Pole Hedge-Trees, and even in the open Air. Their Goodness
consists in having large, yellow, and crackling Berries, and growing thin in their Clu­
sters, and in a pretty rich musked taste, but yet not too strong like the Spanish ones.
The Province of Tourain produces admirable ones. Their Culture is exactly the same
with that of the Chassela's Grapes, both as to their Pruning, and manner of Propaga­
tion.

The Long Muscat, called otherwise the Passe-Musquee, is another sort of Grape whose
Berry is bigger and more longish than that of the ordinary Muscat, and its clusters are
also longer, but yet its taste is nothing near so rich as that of the others.


N.

NAsturces: See Capucin Capers.


O.

ONions are red or white, which last are sweeter and more prized than the red ones.
There's no Body but knows how many uses they serve for. They are propagated
only by Seed, which is commonly sown at the latter end of February and beginning of
March, in Beds of good Earth, and well prepared, and afterwards raked with an Iron
Rake, to cover them, as is done to other small Seeds. They must be sown thin, that they
may have room to grow to their full bigness, and therefore if they come up too thick, they
must be thinned by pulling some of them up as soon as they are big enough for that,
which is towards the Month of May, which we transplant in order to use instead of Ci­
bouls. Though the ordinary Season for sowing Onions, be at the end of Winter, yet we



may sow some in September, and transplant them afterwards in the Month of May, by which
means we may have some full grown at the very beginning of July, which we may ga­
ther, plucking them first out of the Ground as soon as that time comes, and then after
we have dried them two or three days in the hot Sun, lay them up in some dry place, to
keep all the year in case of need. We must not forget when our Onions begin to appear
with pretty thick Stems above the Superficies of the Earth, that is, when they begin to
advance towards their Maturity, to break them down, either by treading them under our
Feet, or with a board pretty hard pressed down upon them, because by that means the
nourishment that was before spent in their stems, being hindered from mounting upwards,
will remain and settle all in that which I think, is but improperly called their head, and
make it grow so much the bigger. I have already told you elsewhere, how their Seed
is to be raised.


P.

PArsley, as well of the Curled as ordinary sort, is of great use in Kitchens all the year
long, as well for its Leaves as Roots. It is comprehended under the Title of Ver­
dures or green Pot-herbs. We ought not to fail in the Spring, to sow a reasonable quanti­
ty of it in every Garden, and that pretty thick, and in good, and well prepared Ground.
When its Leaves are cut, it shoots out new ones like Sorrel. It well enough resists a mo­
derate, but not a violent cold, and therefore 'tis best to bestow some covering on it in
Winter, to defend it. When we would have any of it produce large Roots, we must thin
it in the Beds or Borders where 'tis sown. It requires pretty much watering in very hot
weather. There are some that pretend to have a kind of Parsly bigger than ordinary,
but for my part I know no such kind. The Curled Parsly appears more agreeable to the
Sight, than the Common sort, but is never a whit better than it for that. We gather
our Parsly Seeds in the Months of August and September.

Macedonian Parsley, or Alisanders, is one of the Furnitures of our Winter-Sallets, which
must be whitened like Wild Endive, or Succory; that is to say, at the end of Autumn, we
must cut down all its Leaves, and then cover the Bed where it grows, all over with
long dry Dung, or Straw Screens, so close, that the Frost may not come at it, by which
means, the new Leaves that spring from it, grow white, yellowish and tender. We
sow it in the Spring, pretty thin, because it produces a great many large Leaves, and
we gather its Seed at the latter end of Summer. It is a good hardy Plant, and that de­
fends its self very well from the Drought, without requiring much watering.

Parsnips are a sort of Roots well known in our Kitchens. We sow them towards the
end of Winter, either in open Ground, or Borders, and that always pretty thin, and in
good and well prepared Ground; and if they come up too thick, they must be thinned
as soon as May comes in, that they which are left, may be the better nourisht, and
grow the fairer. They are propagated only by Seed, for the raising which, the same
care is to be taken as we have directed for that of Red Beet-roots, Carrots, &c.

Passe Musquee: See Muscats.

Patience, or Sharp Dock: See Dock.

Peas, or Pease may be placed in rank of Kitchen-plants. It is a good rustical or hardy
Plant, which commonly is sown in the open Field, without needing any other Culture
than being weeded whilst 'tis young, that is, before it begins to codd. But when
they are propt, they yield more than when they are not. They require pretty
good Ground, and a little Rain to make them tender and delicate, and must be sown
pretty thin. There are several sorts of them, viz. Hastings, Green, White and Square
ones, otherwise called large codded Peas, &c. We may have of them in the Months of
May, June, July, August, September and October. For to have some all that while after
the first, we have no more to do, but to sow them in different Months, to have them
fit for eating three Months after. Those sorts we are most choice of in Kitchen-Gardens
are the Hastings both White and Green, which are of a midling Size. We sow them at
the end of October, under the shelter of some Eastern or Southern Walls, and we raise
Ridges or sloped Banks too, sometimes for that purpose; and to dispose them to come up
so much the sooner when they are Sown, we make them Sprout five or six days before,
by laying them to steep two days in Water, and afterwards laying them in a place
where the cold cannot reach them, till their first Root begins to appear. Hard wea­
ther spoils them quite, which is the reason why all we can do, will not procure us any
good ones till the latter end of May. We likewise sow some upon hot Beds, at the end
of February, in order to transplant them by the sides of some well exposed Walls, in



case those sown at the latter end of October preceeding, happen to have been spoiled by
the Frost. Our last time of Sowing them is at Midsummer, to have them fit to eat a­
bout All-hallow-tide.

Pompions and Potirons, or Flat Pompions: See Citrulls.

Purslain is one of the prettiest Plants in a Kitchen-gardens, which is principally used in
Sallets, and sometimes in Pottages. There are two sorts of it, viz. The Green, and the
Red, or Golden; this latter is the more agreeable of the two to the Eye, and more deli­
cate and difficult to rear, so that in hard weather we have much ado to make it grow
even upon hot Beds, and under Bells, for it seldom prospers in open Beds till about the
middle of May, and then too, the Earth must be very good, sweet, and very loose,
and the weather very fair. And therefore for our first Purslain which we are not to
begin to sow upon hot Beds till towards the Middle of March, we must use only the
Green sort, because the Yellow or Golden sort dwindles away as soon as 'tis come up, un­
less the Season be a little advanced, and the Sun a little hot, which is, towards the end
of April. It is commonly sown very thick, because its Seed is so very small, that it can­
not be sown thin. When we sow it upon hot Beds, either when 'tis cold, and that
by consequence Glass-bells or Frames are needfull, or in milder Weather, we only press
down the Mold about it with our hands, or with the back of a Spade; but when we
sow it in open Beds which must be well prepared for that purpose, we rake it over
five or six times with an Iron Rake, to make the Seed enter into the Ground.

The way to raise Seed from it, is to transplant some Plants of it that are big e­
nough, into Beds well prepared, at the distance of eight or ten inches ones from the o­
ther: The Months of June and July are proper for that effect. And then in a little
time after, they are run up, and have done flowring, assoon as ever we perceive any
of their Husks to open, and discover some black Seed, we must cut down all their
Stems and lay them some days in the Sun till all the Seed be quite ripened, and then we
beat them out and winnow them, &c. We must be carefull to transplant each sort a­
part by it self, that we may not be mistaken in the Seed when we are to sow it. The
Stick Stalks of Purslain that is run to Seed, are good to pickle in Salt and Vinegar, for
Winter Sallets.


R

RAdishes, when they are qualified with all the goodness they should have, that is,
when they are tender, and snap easily, and are sweet, are in my Opinion, one of
the Plants that give the most pleasure of any in our Kitchin-gardens, and that give it as
often, and for as long a time as any of them all; and I look upon them as a kind of
Manna in our Gardens. There seems to be no great pains required to make them grow,
it being indeed only necessary to sow them pretty thin, in well prepared loose and mel­
low Earth, and to water them soundly in drie Weather, and with this culture they
will attain to all the perfection they are capable of. But the main points here in Que­
stion, are first, to be always provided with Seed of a good kind; and secondly, to take
order to have Radishes without discontinuation, from the Month of February, till the
coming in of the Frosts in the middle of November. As for Seed of a good kind, know,
that is it that produces few Leaves, and a long red Root, for there are some that pro­
duce a great many leaves and little Root; and when we are once provided with Seed
of a good kind, we must be extreme carefull to propagate it, that we never be without
a stock of it; for which effect, in the Month of April, we must choose out among
those Radishes that are come of the last years Seed, such, as I have said, which have the
fewest Leaves and the most Root, and reddest Necks, and transplant them quite whole
in some well prepared spot of Ground, a foot and a half a sunder: Being so transplanted,
they will run up, flower and yield Seed ripe enough to gather towards the end of July;
and then we cut down their stems; and after they have been dried some days in the
Sun, we beat out the Seed, and winnow it, &c.

Those stocks of them that run up to Seed, shoot up their Branches to such a height,
and perpetuate their flowers so far as if they knew not where to stop; and therefore it is
good to pinch off these Branches to a reasonable length, that the first Podds may be the
better nourished.

But 'tis not enough to raise good Seed, we must likewise take order to be supplied
with good Radishes for eight or nine Months in the year. The first that are eaten grow
on Hot-beds, the manner of raising which, I have explained in the Works of November;
and by the means of those Hot Beds, we may have some during the Months of Februa­



ry March and April; otherwise we have none; and in order to have some all the other
Months, we must sow some among all manner of Seeds, they coming up so very quickly,
that we have time to gather off our Radishes before they can do any harm to the other
Plants. Radishes are extreamly apprehensive of the excessive heat in Summer, which makes
them grow strong as they term it, that is, too biting, stringy, and sometimes very hard;
and therefore in that Season we would affect to sow them in very loose Mellow Ground,
where the Sun shines but little; and the best way should be, to make up along by the
sides of some Northern Walls, a Bed or two for that purpose, filled with mold to the depth
of a large foot and an half, and to sow our Radishes there, and water them well. In
Spring and Autumn, when the Sun is not so Hot, Radishes take well enough in open Ground,
and in the wide unsheltered Air.

Rass-berries, or Rasp-berries, as well as the White as Red, begin to Ripen at the begin­
ning of July. They are planted in March, either in Beds or borders observing the
distance of two foot between Plant and Plant. They shoot out during the Summer
many well Rooted Suckers, some of which we take away to make new plantations with,
by which means the old ones are likewise renewed for they drie assoon as their
Fruit is gathered. The only culture used to them is, first, in the Month of March
to shorten all their new shoots which we preserve round about the old stock, and which
ought to be only the thickest and handsomest, and in the second place, to pluck away all
the small ones, as likewise the old ones that are dead.

Reponces are a sort of small sweet Radishes which grow wild in the Country, and
especially in the Corn, and are eaten in Sallets in the spring time. They are multiplied only
by Seed."responces" was not found in OED.

Rocamboles: See Shallots.

Rocket is one of our Sallet Furnitures, which is sown in the Spring as most of the others
are. Its Leaf is pretty like that of Radishes, and its Seed is very small, and almost like
Purslain Seed, but it is of a Reddish, or rather darkish Cinnamon Colour.

Rosemary is another sort of Odoriferous Plant which is principally used for the per­
fuming of Chambers, and in decoctions for washing the Feet. It is multiplied in
the same manner as Rue, and other border Plants, and lasts five or six years in its
place.

Rue is a Plant of very strong smell, of which we plant some borders in our Gardens;
it is propagated both by Seed, and Rooted slips, and is hardly of any use but against the
vapours of the Mother.


S.

SAge is a border Plant, whose culture has nothing of particular, but is like that of the
other border Herbs, as Rosemary, Lavender, Worm-wood, &c. There is a sort that is parti-­
Coloured, which to some people appears more agreeable than the common Sage, which is
of palish Green Colour.

Spanish Salsifie, or Sassifie, otherwise Scorzonere, is one of our chiefest Roots, which is
multiplied by Seed as well as the others, and is admirable good boiled both for the plea­
sure of the taste, and the health of the Body. It is propagated only by Seed which is
sown in March. We must be careful to sow it pretty thin, whether it be in Beds or
borders, or else at least to thin it afterward, that its Roots may grow the bigger.
Scorzonere runs up to Seed in the Months of June and July, and is gathered assoon as 'tis
Ripe.Antedates earliest OED citation for "Spanish salsify" (1707).

Common Salsifie is another sort of Root cultivated after the same manner as the preceed­
ing one, but is not altogether so very excellent. They easily pass the Winter in the
Ground. It is good to water both sorts of them in very dry weather, and to keep them
well weeded, and especially, to put them into good Earth well prepared, of at least two
full foot deep.

Samphire called in French, Pierce Pierre, or Passe-Pierre, is one of our Sallet Furnitures
that is multiplied only by Seed, and which being by nature very delicate requires to be
planted by the sides of Walls exposed to the South or East, the open Air, and great Cold
being pernicious to it. We usually sow it in some Pot or Tub filled with mold, or
else on some side-Bank towards the South or East, and that in the Months of March or
April, and afterwards transplant it in those places above-mentioned.

Savory is an annual Plant a little Odoriferous, which grows only from Seed, and whose
Leaves are used to some Ragou's, and particularly among Peas, Beans; it is sown in the
Spring either in Beds or borders.



Scorzonere, or Scorzonera: See Spanish Salsifie.

Shallots, otherwise Rocamboles, or Spanish Garlick, require no other culture than com­
mon Garlick, and are particularly remarkable for that their Seeds are as good to eat
as their Cloves taken out of the Earth. Their Seed is large and serves to propagate them
as well as the Cloves or Kernels that compose their Root.

Skirrets are a sort of Roots propagated by Seed, and cultivated like other Roots, as is
directed in the Month of March.

Spinage is one of those Kitchen Plants that requires the best Ground, or at least that
which is most amended and improved. They are multiplied only by Seed. We sow them
either in open Ground, or else in furrows or strait rows upon well prepared Beds and
this we do several times in the year, beginning about the sixteenth of August, and finish­
ing a Month after; the first are fit to cut towards the middle of October, the second in
Lent, and the last in Rogation time; Those which remain after Winter, run up to Seed
towards the end of May, which we gather about the middle of June. When they are
once cut they spring up no more, as Sorrel do's. All their culture consists in keeping
them very clear from Weeds; and if the Autumn prove extraordinary dry, it is not amiss
to water them sometimes. They are never transplanted no more than Chervil, Cresses,
&c.

Sorrel in Kitchen-Garden terms, is placed under the title of Verdures, or Green Pot Herbs,
and accordingly is much used in the Pot. There are some sorts of it that produce a lar­
ger Leaf than others, which are called Sorrel of the greater sort. All the sorts may be
sown in the Months of March, April, May, June, July and August, and in the beginning
of September too, provided they be allowed sufficient time to grow big enough to resist
the rigour of the Winter, we sow Sorrel either in open Ground, or else in strait rows, or
furrows, in Beds or borders, in all which cases, it must be sown very thick, because
many of its Plants perish. It requires a ground that is naturally good, or else well im­
proved with Muck. Its culture consists in being kept very clear of Weeds, in being well
watered, and being covered with a little mold once or twice a year, after 'tis first cut
down very close to the Ground. That mold serves to give it new vigour, and the Sea­
son most proper for applying it, is in the hot Months of the year. Sorrel is most com­
monly multiplied by Seed, though sometimes we transplant some of it that thrives very
well. We gather its Seed in the Months of July and August. There is a particular sort
of Sorrel, which is called Round Sorrel, its Leaves being indeed Round, whereas those of
the other sorts are very sharp and pointed. The tender Leaves of this sort are sometimes
mixed with Sallet Furnitures. But it is ordinarily used most in Bouillons, or thin Broths.
It is multiplied by running Branches, that take Root in the Earth, as they run over it,
which being taken off, and transplanted, produce thick Tufts which also produce other
runners, and so in infinitum.

Sharp Dock, or Dock-Sorrel: See Dock.

Wood Sorrel, or Alleluia: See Alleluia.

Straw-berries, as well the White as the Red, multiply and perpetuate themselves by
running Suckers that springing out of their old stocks, take Root. It is observed, that a
new plantation of them taken out of the Woods, turns to better account when transplan­
ted, than one slipt of from the Garden Straw-berries. We plant them either in Beds or
borders, both which must be well prepared, amended and laboured or stirred up in one
manner or other. If it be in dry and sandy Ground, both the Beds and borders must
be sunk a little lower than the Allies or path-ways, the better to retain both the rain that
falls, and the water we bestow on them; a quite contrary course must be taken, if we
plant them in strong, heavy, and fat Earth, and that is almost all pure Clay, because
excessive moisture rots the Plants. We place them usually nine or ten Inches asunder,
putting two or three little Plants into each hole which we make with a planting stick.
The best time to plant them in is during the whole Month of May, and in the beginning
of June, that is to say, before the great heat comes in. And we may plant them all
Summer long in rainy Seasons. It is particularly requisite to plant Nurseries of them in the
Month of May, and that in some place near the North Quarter, the better to shelter them
from the violent heat of the Summer Sun, and then we plant them but three or four Inches
one from the other, and when they are grown big enough there, we transplant them
afterwards in the Month of September in order to make Beds or squares of them, accor­
ding as we find occasion to have a greater or less abundance of them. Their culture
consists chiefly, first, in watering them well in dry Seasons; secondly in leaving, but a
moderate number of stems or upright shoots to every stock, three or four of the most
vigourous being enough; in the third place, in leaving but three or four Straw-berries of



them that appeared first, and nearest the stock, on every stem, and therefore we
must pinch of all their other Blossoms that almost endlessly grow out at the ends of those
that have already Blossomed, or are still in Blossom, because none but the first produce any
fair Straw-berries, hardly any of the last being ever known to knit or come to any per­
fection, but when we are careful to pinch them off judicially we may be assured always
to have good Straw-berries. I have already given directions in the works of the Month
of February, how to raise Hasting Straw-berries. Curious Persons have usually two
Straw-berries of two several Colours, viz. Red and White, but they place them in separate
Beds. The great Enemies of Straw-berry Plantations are the Ton's which are great
White Worms, that in the Months of May and June, gnaw the necks of their Roots
between two Earths, and so kill them; to prevent which, in those Months we should
carefully search every day, under the Roots of all our Straw-berries that begin to wither,
where we shall commonly find one of these great Worms which after they have done a
mischief to one, pass on to do the same to other Straw-berry Plants, and kill them in the
same manner. Straw-berry Plants bear very well the year after their planting, if plan­
ted in May; but yield very indifferently, if not planted till September, after they are taken
out of the Woods; yet in the second year they bear wonderfully, but that being past,
they produce but very pitifully, and therefore 'tis good to renew them every two years;
it is likewise convenient to cut off every year their old tops, when the Straw-berries are
gone, which is commonly at the latter end of July. The earliest Straw-berries that ri­
pen towards the end of May, are those that were planted by the sides of Southern or Ea­
stern Walls, and they that ripen last, are such as are planted in a Northern Exposition.

Succory: See Endive.

Sweet Herbs: See Aromaticks.


T.

TArragon is one of the perfuming or Spicy Furnitures of our Sallets, it is propagated
both by rooted slips and Seed. It springs again several times after 'tis cut; it endures
the Winter, and needs little watering in the driest weather in Summer, when we plant
it, we must allow eight or nine inches distance between Plant and Plant in the Beds we set
with it. The best time to plant in, is in March and April, which hinders not, but that
we may transplant it again in the Summer Season.

Time is another odoriferous Border-plant, which is multiplied as well by Seed as rooted
Branches or Slips. A Border of Time is a considerable and necessary Ornament in our
Kitchen-Gardens.

Tripe-Madam is one of our Sallet-Furnitures; it is used chiefly in the Spring when it is
tender, but a little of it ought to serve in the Summer, because then it is too tough. It
is multiplyed both by Seeds and Cuttings.

Turneps or Turnips are not properly Kitchen-Garden Plants, but yet where they are spa­
cious, they may be admitted into them. They are propagated only by Seed, and are
sown very thick in Beds, some in March, and others in August. We gather their Seed
in July and August, every Body so well knows their use, that I need speak no more of
them here.


V.

Verjuice Grapes: See Bourdelais.

Vines: See the several heads of Bourdelais, Muscats, &c.

Violets, and especially the double ones serve to make pretty Borders in our Kitchen-­
Gardens. Their flowers make a very agreeable Figure when they are artfully placed on
the Superficies of Spring-Sallets. Every Body knows, that they are propagated by
Tufts, that is, by dividing one great Tuft into several little ones, which likewise in
time grows thick, and fit to be divided into other little ones.


W.

WOrmwood. The plants of this and all other Plants placed in Borders or Edgings,
and therefore called Border-plants, as of Time, Lavender, Hyssop, &c. are plan­
ted by a Line, and at the distance of two or three Inches one from the other, and five
or six inches deep in the Ground. It is good to clip them every Spring, and to renew
them every two years, and to take away their oldest and decayed stocks. Their Seed
is gathered about the
Month of August.




