 


FEVDIGRAPHIA.
THE SYNOPSIS
OR EPITOME OF
SVRVEYING MED­
THODIZED
Anatomizing the whole Corps of the
Facultie; Viz.

The Materiall, Mathematicall, Mechanicall and
Legall Parts,

Intimating all the Incidents to Fees and Possessions, and
whatsoeuer may be comprized vnder their Matter, Forme,
Proprietie, and Valuation.

Very pertinent to be perused of all those, whom the Right, Reuenewe,
Estimation, Farming, Occupation, Manurance, Subduing,
Preparing and Imploying of Arable, Medow, Pasture, and all
other Plots doe concerne.

And no lesse remarkable for all Vnder-takers in the Plantati­
on of Ireland or Virginia, for all Trauailers for Discoueries of for­
raine Countries, and for Purchasers, Exchangers, or Sellers
of Land, and for euery other Interessee in the Profits
or Practise deriued from the compleate

SVRVEY

Of Manours, Lands, Tenements, Edifices, Woods, Waters, Ti­
tles, Tenures, Euidences, &c.

Composed in a compendious Digest by

W. FOLKINGHAM. G.


Quæ prosunt singula, multa iuvant.


LONDON

Printed for Richard Moore, and are to be solde at his shop in Saint
Dunstanes Church-yard in Fleete-streete,
1610.






SUruey in generall is an Art wher­
by the view and trutinate intima­
tion of a subiect, from Center to
Circumference is rectified. 



Bitumen is either hard, as Asphaltus, Pissasphaltus, 



Rosin; Or Liquid, as Naphta, Petroleum,
Amber, Vitriol, Coppras. 

The Pretious Earths , which are not Meltable, nor
indurated into Stones nor Mettals, are Stibium, 
Azure, Auripigmentum or Arsenicke, Sandaracha,
Calx, Playster, Chaulke, Coale, Canole, Marle, O­
ker, Terra-sigillata, or Lemnia, Armenia, Germani­
ca, &c. Tuckers or Fullers Earth, Argilla or clay for
Pots, Gallie and Thacke Tiles, Bricke, Water and
Tabacco Pipes, Purslaine. 



Tillage generally taken may comprehend all maner
of husbandings of grounds, but it is heere limited to
Vertilage and Fertilage. 

Vertilage consists in Deluage and Fictilage. 

Deluage is applyed about preparing, and putrifying 
of the Earth by stirring, tossing and turning of the same,
according to the Poet.



Et cui putre solum, nameq; hoc imitamur arando: viz. Vt
arando solum sit putre: Neq; enim (inquit Columella) ali­
ud est colere quam soluere & fermentare terram.



And this Deluage is distinguishable into Caruage
and Scaphage. 

Caruage comprehends all sorts of plowing of
Grounds, as well ordinarie, viz. for Graine, Hempe,
Line, &c. As Extraordinarie, viz. for Woods, Woade,
Dyers-weede, Rapes, Cole, Saffron, Mill, Millet,
Panick, Amilcorne, Splet-corn, Garences, Dewgrasse,
Iobs-teares, Comin-seede, Annise-seede, Worme-seede,
Cotton-seede, Canarie-seede, &c. 

Scaphage is the digging, deluing, and preparing of 
the Soile with Spades or other handie-tooles for the 
sowing, setting, planting, and propagating of Seedes,
Hearbs, Plants, Trees, &c. and is most conuersant in
Gardens, Hort-yards, Hop-yards, Vine-yards. 
 
Fictilage is the forming & transforming of the Matter in 
form or substance; as in making of Tile (for thack, roofe,
crest, gutter, pauing) Brick, Pots, Tabaccopipes, Tonnel
or Conduit-pipes, Glasse, Purslane, and other Plasma­
ture. 



FErtilage consists in the enriching of the Soyle, and
the Rectifying of the Production. 



Boundage is the compassing and describing of Plots 
with their buttalls, metes, bounds and Coastage. 



PRoportion consists in the generall Modell and parti­
cular Modulets of the Plot, and procreats Mensu­
ration and Content. 

Mensuration is conuersant in extunding the lineall
extentions of longitudes, amplitudes, crassitudes, alti­
tudes, profundities, arches, circumferences,&c.

Lineall dimensions are diuersified according to the 
custome of the Country, as Inches, Palmes, Spannes,
Feete, Cubits, &c. and their composures and graduati­
ons are from Barley Cornes; as three Beere-Cornes in
length make an Inch, three Inches a Palme, three
Palmes a Spanne, one Span and 1/3 or twelue Inches
make a Foote, one Foote 1/2 makes a Cubit, two Cubits 
or three Foote makes a Yard, fiue Feete make a Pace
Geometricall, sixteene Foote 1/2 make a Pearch, Pole or 
Lug, forty Pearches make a furlong, whereof eight
make a Mile, and these are by the Standard measure 
of England, tho some of them in name bee but confir­
med by Custome.

But the Pearch in diuers places is of different ex­
tent, as eighteene foote in some Countries, in others
twenty one, in the County of Stafford twenty foure,
and twenty fiue in the Forest of Sherewood.

And these dimensions are found or performed either
Cominius or Eminus.



The Flie is a Card diuided into eight, sixteene, thir­
ty two equall parts in the Limbe with competent ex­
tention to shew the Meridian and Coastages of the 
Plot. 

Meridians are diuers wayes found-out, but most
speedily and exactly by helpe of a Dyall, or by striking a 
line vpon your Table, or erecting poles vpon your 
Plot in a right line, directing to the Cynosure or Pole­
starre, when it is perpendicular to Alliot the Thil­
horse of Charles-Waine. 



Compartiments are Blankes or Figures bordered
with Anticke Boscage or Crotesko-woorke, wherein
Euidences or other Memorables may be abreuiated.

But before wee come to entreat of the Areas of Fi­
gure, it is not immateriall to enumerate how this Su­
perficiall Content is diuersly distinguished for Land;
as into Pearches, Daies­
woorkes, Roodes, Acres, Oxe­
gangs, Yard-lands, Plow-lands, Hydes.

There be also other quantities of Land taking their de­
nominations from our vsual Coine; as Fardingdeales,
Obolates, Denariates, Solidates, Librates. 



Foure square Pearches make a Daiesworke, 10.
Daie-workes a Roode or Stong, 4. Roodes an Acre. 

The Fardingdeale or Farundell (Quadrantata ter­
ræ) signifies a Roode or 1/4 of an Acre, so that if Obolata
Denariata, Solidata, and Librata, doe arise in proportio­
nable graduation from Quadrantata as the moneyes do
increase in valuable Estimate, then must the Obalat be 1/2
Acre, the Denariat an Acre, the Solidat 12. acres & the Li­
brat 240. vide Crompton Iurisd: and Regist: Origin. 1. But 
we read Viginti libratas terræ vel reditus in Fitzh. 87. and 
Regist. Orig. 49. and 248i. importing (it seemes) so much 
land as yeeldes 20.s. per annum.

So you shall read further 249. Regist. Centum Solida­
tas terrarum tenementorum & redituum.

But for Roodes and Acres , they differ in Content ac­
cording to the power of the extent or lineall Fall of the 
Pearch. Potentia rectæ est quadratum. Et dupla, ratio­
ne quadrupla proportione.

Yet the Surueyor, whether he be imployed in Wood­
land, or Champion, in the Forrest of Sheere-Wood,
where the Acre containes aboue 2 1/4 of Statute Acres,
in Corne-wal where it amounts almost to 140. acres, or
elsewhere, howsoeuer Customes haue accrewed, must
make his Computation by the standard: Notwithstan­
ding that the Lords Demaines (as appeares by aunci­
ent Surueys) haue beene measured by the 20. foote Pole
called Maior Mensura, and the Customary lands by a 
Pole called Mensura Minor viz. 16. 1/2 though some claime
18. foote. So the French Arpent or Acre containing 100.
square Poles is laid-out in th'admeasurement of woodes
by the 22 foot Pole, & this is called the Kings Arpent,
their other lands are computated by the Pole of 20.19 2/3
or 18.foot Poles. 

The Oxe-gang, or Oxengate (according to Skene)
called Bouata terræ containes after the originall repute
13. acres but we find it more or lesse as the custom of the 
place inures, and Bouata is properly vsed of Lands in  



Gainour viz. vsually plowed.

Foure Oxe-gangs of land extend to a Pound land
(Librata terræ,) of old extent.

The Yard-land (Virgata terræ siue quatrona terræ) 
varies from 20, 24, 30 acres. M. Lamberd: and it is not
reputed in Demesne, but in Gainor, as are also fodina,
minera, mercatus.

A Plow-land or Carue of land (Carucata terræ, that 
is, quantum aratum arare potest in nouali tempore:) is said
to containe 4 Yard-land at 30 acres to the Yard-land. 

"Carue of land" not found in OED (evidently found in John Kersey's New English Dictionary [1771]).



A Hide of Land (Hila or Hilda Terræ) is saide to be
such a portion of land, as may be tilled with one teame
(according to the seuerall tilthes and seasons) in a yeere
and a day, and so Crompton and the Author of the new
Tearmes affirme it to be 100 acres by statute, & therby
confound Hida with Carucata, or make them little diffe-
rent. Others say, that euery Hide of land containes
4 Plow land at 120 acres, and 4 Hides a Knights Fee. 

A Knights Fee (Feudum Militare) is so much Inheri­
tance as is sufficient yearely for the maintenance of a 
Knight, and his competent retinewe with conuenient 
reuenewe, which in the time of H. the 3. was 15 pound;
but Sir Sir Thomas Smith (Repub. Anglorum) rateth it at 40
pounds per annum. But for the quantity of land, M.
Camden recordes it to be 680 acres or 800 acres. After 
some computations it containes 5 Hydes of land, each 
Hyde 4 Yard-land at 24 acres.

In the Dutchie of Lancaster a Knights Fee contains
4 Hydes of land, each Hyde 4 Plow­
land, each Plow­
land 4 yard-land at 30 acres amounting to 1920 acres.

Two Knights Fees make a Cantred, 2 Cantreds 1/2
and 1/6 make a Barony, one Barony and 8/2 makes an
Earledome: viz. 38400 acres. 



Allodium is an entire propertie and perpetuall
Right in Possessions without dependance; and this is
proper solely to the King in Right of his Crowne. 



Feudum is that which is held of a superiour by Ser­
uice, Rent or both: Or Feudum or Fee is a Right consi­
sting in the person of the true heire, or of some other that
by iust Title hath purchased or acquired the same: vide
Bracton.





 
