



PHILOSOPHY 
Reformed & Improved 
IN 
Four Profound TRACTATES.

THE 
I. Discovering the Great and Deep 
Mysteries of Nature: 
By that Learned 
Chymist & Physitian 
OSW: CROLLIUS.

THE OTHER 
III. Discovering the Wonderfull 
Mysteries of the Creation, 
BY 
PARACELSUS: 
BEING 
His Philosophy to the ATHENIANS.

Both made English by H. PINNELL, for the 
increase of Learning and true Knowledge.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Lodowick 
Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhill. 1657.





READER,

WHat I have done in the Version 
of these two singularly emi­
nent men, Paracelsus and 
Crollius, hath been rather as 
a Translator than an Interpre­
ter, that the Authors sence more than mine 
might be searched out. Although the tran­
slation be not so elegant and significant as
the originall, yet (if my judgement faile
not) the matter is preserved intire and 
sound. In both Tracts thou wilt meet with
some uncouth and unusuall words which for 
thy better understanding (who art not ac­
quainted with such language) I have here
alphabetically explain'd, as followeth.



A
ADECH, is
our inward and invi­
sible man, which first shapeth
those things in the mind that after­
ward are done with the hands.

"Adech," not in OED but from Paracesus (J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]. )





Arcana, secrets or mysteries. Arca­
num, a secret; or (according
to Parac.) the hidden incorporeall vertue in na­
turall things.

Archaltes, the prop or pillars of the 
earth.

Archeus, the chiefe, exalted, invisi­
ble spirit: the occult virtue, artificer,
Physitian of nature in every one.

Astra, Stars; also the force and vir­
tue of things by preparations.



Bisemutum, the palest or worst sort 
of lead; it is Tin-glasse.

"Bisemutum," a Latinized form of German "bismuth" (see OED, "bismuth," n.) found in
J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal (London, 1749).




C
Cabala, that most secret knowledge, 
which the Hebrew Rabbins say was 
given by God with the Law of Moses.

Caleruth, a note or signe of the desire, 
when a thing tendeth to its first mat­
ter and would returne whence it came.

"Caleruth," not in OED but from Paracesus ("Calaruth," in J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).



Cobaltum, a stone whereof matter is
made behoofull to Medicine. It is a 
Minerall.

"Cobaltum," not in OED but from Paracesus (J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).






D
Derses, a secret vapour of the earth 
whence wood groweth.

"Derses," not in OED but from Paracesus (J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).



Diameæ, spirits living among stones
and rocks.

"Diameae," not in OED but presumably from Paracesus (not found in J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).


Divertallum, the generation that is
from the Elements.

"Divertallum," not in OED but from Paracesus (J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).



Dramæ. 

"Dramae," not in OED or in J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal (London, 1749).



Duelech, a kind of tartar in
mans bo­
dy, a spongy stone very precious.

"Duelech," not in OED but from Paracesus ("dulech," J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).


Durdales, spirits that have bodies
and live among trees.

"Durdales," not in OED but from Paracesus (J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).



E
Enur, the occult vapour of water 
from which stones are bred.

"Enur," not in OED but from Paracesus (J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).



Evestrum, is that perpetuall thing 
of the Firmament in the Elemementa­
ry world; it is taken for a Propheti­
call spirit foretelling things to come 
by precedent signes and tokens: to 
Evestrate is to speak by that spirit.

"Evestrum," not in OED but from Paracesus (J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).




F
Flagæ, spirits that know the secret 
and hidden things of men.

"Flagae," presumably Paracelsus but not in OED or J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal (London, 1749).






G
Gabalum, Gebalum, a thing repair'd, 
restor'd, or curdled.

"Gabalum," not in OED or J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal (London, 1749) but presumably from Paracelsus.



Gabalis homo, such a man.

Gamahæa, is when a living thing is
affected or wrought upon by its figure, 
as when a Pigeon is cast dead from the 
top of the house onely by thrusting a 
pin through the picture of it on paper.

"Gamahaea," not in OED but from Paracesus (cf. "Gamatha":J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal [London, 1749]).



Gnomes, Gnomi, are little men, dwarfs,
or rather spirits with bodies living
under the earth, Pigmies scarce halfe
a foot high.

"Gnomes" antedates earliest OED citation (1714) and is presumably a term from Paracelsus.



Gonetick. 


H
Hilech; astrum medicinæ, or the spi­
rit hid in medicine.


I
Iliaster, the first matter of all things,
consisting of salt, sulphur, and mercury:
generally it is taken for the occult vir­
tue of nature, by which all things in­
crease, grow, multiply and are nourish­ 
ed. Vid. Lex. Chym.




L
Leffa, Leffas, is the juyce of the 
earth newly drawn into the root of the 
vegetables, by which they grow.

Lemores, Lemures, are the spirits of 
the element of water, not the shapes
and ghosts of dead men, as the heathen 
imagined.

Limboan, alias Lymbus, is the first 
matter or seed of the world, or all 
things in it.

Lorind, is the moving of the waters,
with a musicall noyse, and is a signe of 
some change at hand.

Not in OED: J. Barrow, Dictionarium Medicum Universal (London, 1749) also explains the word differently as epilepsy




M
Marcasita, the raw or unripe mat­
ter of mettalls.

Mechili. 

Melosinæ, despairing women, now 
living in a phantasticall bruitish body, 
nourished by the Elements, into which 
at last they shall be changed, unles they 
chance to marry with a man. Vid. Lex.
Chym.

Montans. 




N
Nesder. 

Neuferani, spirits living in the aire.


P
Penates, spirits of heaven and the 
element of fire.

Pyrotechney, the Art of preparing or 
working things by fire.


R
Relollaceus, Relolleum is the vertue
from the complexion; there is a three 
fold Relolleum, of which see Lexicon 
Chymicum.


S
Samies. 

Spagyrick. that separateth the false 
from the true, the impure from the 
pure.

Stannar, is the mother of mettalls, a 
secret fume of which mettals are made.

Sylphs, are pigmies or dwarfs.

Sylvesters, airy men, airy spirits li­
ving in woods and groves.

Syrenes, sea-monsters, bred of the 
Nymphs.




T
Talcum, a bright, clear matter, of 
which oyle of Talk is made, there are 
four sorts of Talck of which see Lex. 
Chym.

Trarames, the actions of the spirits
and ghosts of dead men, heard but not 
seen.

Tronum, cælestiall dew made of the 
aire.

Truphat, the occult vertue of mine­
ralls, preferring every mettall.

Tura. 

Turban, an innumerable multitude 
of Stars in the firmament of heaven; 
also a presage from all things which 
the fourfold inferiour world of the 
elements containeth.


V
Umbratiles, bodies once rotted and 
after made visible againe by the Stars
by a magicall vertue.

Undenæ, airy men and earthly spi­
rits.




W
Woarchadumie. 

See "in the true Cabala, Magick and Woarchadumie, there are laid up far better Treasures" (Crollius, "Admonitory Preface," p. 9). Cf. Johannes Pantheus's Voarchadumia (Venice, 1530).




