



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 2 4 3 2 8 

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )


Of the Termes of Venerie.

I Haue thought meete to write a briefe note or 
abstracte of such termes & proper woordes as I 
haue obserued in Venerie, either by reading or 
by experience: aswell bycause mine Aucthor 
hath done the like, as also bicause I finde it very 
pertinent to the purpose. But bicause I find that 
his termes in the Frenche are in many places much different from 
ours (& yet many holde opinion that we borowed all our termes 
of Hunting, Hawking, and such like out of the Frenche) therfore 
I haue thought my parte to set downe suche as I my selfe haue 
eyther herd pronounced by olde Huntesmen, or founde approued 
in olde Trystrams booke. And if the Reader do finde that in any
parte of the discourses in this booke, I haue termed any of them
otherwise, then let him also consider that in handling of an Arte, 
or in setting downe rules and precepts of any thing, a man
must vse suche woordes as may be most easie, perspicuous and in­
telligible. But here (as neare as I can) I will set them downe 
in suche termes as wee ought by lawe of Venerie to name 
them: as followeth.





The proper termes for the companies of 
all beasts, when they are more than 
one togither.

Companies 
of Beasts. 
TO beginne with the termes that are proper for the compa­
nies of beasts: you shall vnderstand that Huntesmen vse to 
saye, An Heard of Harts and Hindes, Buckes and Does: 
and A Trippe of Gotes and Geates. A Beauie of Rowes. A Sounder of 
Swine. And a Rowte of Wolues. I haue not readde any thing of
the Raynedeare in this respect, and I could not heare any thyng 
bycause in deede they are not in this Realme as farre as euer I 
coulde learne. But in my iudgement it shoulde also be called 
An Heard of Raynedeare. Trystram addeth, A Richesse of Mar­
ternes, and a Slowth of Beares. As for Hares, if they be two togi­
thers, we say, a brase of Hares, and a Lease when there are three: 
as also a brase of Harts or Hindes, Buckes or Does, is very pro­
perly spoken: but more than two or three Hares, you shal seldom
see togither at once. Twoo Conies are called a couple, and three 
are called a couple & a halfe of Conies. If they be many feeding 
out togethers, we say it is a fayre game of Conies. As for Fox, 
Badgerd & other suche vermine, you shall seldome see more than 
one of them at once, vnlesse it be when they engendre: and then 
their encrease is called A lytter. This is asmuche as I thinke 
requisite to say of the termes for the companies of Beastes: Sa­
uing that. xx. is the least number which maketh an Hearde of a­
ny Deare sauing the Rowe: but sixe Rowes make an hearde. 
And of Swyne twelue is the least number, which may be called a 
Sounder: as also the same number serueth for a route of Wolues.



The termes of the Ages of all beasts of Venerie and
Chace: and first of the Harte.

Age.
AN Hart is called the firste yeare a Calfe, the seconde a
Brocket, the thirde a Spayde, the fourth a Staggerd, the
fifth a Stagge, and (as Trystrams booke teacheth) the sixth 
yeare he shuld be called an Hart. But I am rather of opinion that he




is not to be called a Harte vnlesse he be hunted or killed by a 
Prince. A Bucke is called the first yeare a Fawne, the second a 
Pricket, the third a Sorell, the fourth a Sore, the fifth a Bucke 
of the first head, and the sixth a Bucke. Of the Raynedeare I 
haue neyther heard nor redde any termes. The Gote hath no 
difference (that euer I heard) after he passe the firste yeare, and 
then is called a Kidde. The Hare and the Conie, are called in 
their first yeare, Leuerets, and Rabets, and afterwards they haue 
no difference, but to say, A great Hare, and an old Conie. Also 
you shal say by any Deare, A great Deare, & not A fayre Deare, 
vnlesse it be a Rowe. The which is called the first yeare a Kidde, 
the second a Gyrle, the third an Hemuse, the fourth a Rowbucke 
of the first heade, and the fifth yeare a fayre Rowebucke. A Bore is 
the first yeare a Pigge, the second an Hogge, the third a Hogsteare,
the fourth a Bore, and the fifth yeare a Singuler, or (as I would 
thinke more properly spoken) a Sanglier, according to the French 
worde. Foxes are called the first yeare Cubbes, and afterwards
(Foxes) without any other difference than an olde Foxe, or suche 
like. Also the Badgerd is the first yeare a whelpe or a Pigge (for 
I haue herd Huntesmen vse both those termes) and euer after a 
Badgerd great or old, &c. As for Wolfe, Beare, and suche like 
we haue them not here. The Otter is called the firste yeare
a whelpe, and euer afterwardes an Otter, &c.



The termes of a Deares head, and such 
like beastes of Venerie.

Hed.
THe rounde roll of pyrled horne that is next to the head of
an Harte is called the Burre, the mayne horne is called the 
Beame, the lowest Antliere is called The Brow Antliere, or Beas 
antlier, the next Royall, the nexte aboue that Surryall, and then the 
Toppe. In a Bucke we say, Burre, Beame, Branche, Aduauncers, 
Pawlme, and Spelers. A Gotes hornes are not termed by any dif­
ference, sauing that there are certaine wreathes and wrinkles a­
bout them, whereby his age is knowen, as hath bene sayde be­
fore. The Bores teeth are to be called his Tuskes or his gardes




and that is all the proper woordes or termes that euer I heard 
or redde thereof. Note that when you speake of a Harts hornes, 
you must terme them the Head and not the Hornes of a Harte. 
And lykewise of a Bucke: but a Rowes Hornes, and a Gotes 
Hòrnes are tollerable termes in Venerie.



The termes of the treading or footing of all 
beastes of chace and Venerie.

Footing.
THe footyng or printe of an Hartes foote is called the Slot.
Of a Bucke and all other Fallow Deare, it is to be called the 
View. Of a Gote, the Breaking (and that is also a good terme for 
an Hartes footing). Of a Bore, the Tracke, or the Treading. Of an 
Hare diuersly, for when a Hare is in playne fieldes, she Soreth: 
when she casteth aboute to deceyue the houndes, then she Dou­
bleth: and when she beateth a harde highe way, where you may 
yet finde & perceyue hir footing, there she Pricketh: also in time 
of Snowe we say the Trace of an Hare. Of a Foxe and al such 
vermine I neuer heard any other woord but onely the Footing or 
the foote, &c. Of an Otter it is to be called the Markes, or the 
Marches. And we cal it the foyling of a Deare if it be on grasse 
where the print of the foote cannot well be seene.



The termes proper for the ordure and na­
turall excrements of chaces.

Ordure &
Excrements.
IT is a thing highly obserued and not here to be omitted, that
the ordure of euery beaste of chace & Venerie hath his proper 
terme. The reason is, by cause theyr ordure and excrements are 
one principall marke whereby we know the place of their feede, 
and their estate. So that a Huntesman in talke or makyng of 
his reportes shall be often constreyned to rehearse the same. Of 
an Harte therfore, and of all Deare the ordure is called Fewmets 
or Fewmishing: Of a Gote, and of an Hare the Crotising or Crot­
tels: Of a Bore the Lesses: Of a Foxe, and all other vermine, The 
Fyaunts: Of an Otter the Spraynts. And I haue neyther readde




nor heard what it is termed of a Wolfe or a Beare: neyther is 
it greatly materiall.
Predates earliest OED citation for "crotising" (1595)



The termes of the time that these chaces 
seeke eche other to engender.

Rutte.
WHen a Harte or Bucke seeketh to engender with Hynde 
or Doe, we say they go to the Rut: as also the Gote doth. 
A Rowe Deare is sayde to go in his Tourne. A Bore goeth to 
the Brime: An Hare and Conie to the Bucke: a Foxe goeth on
clicketing: a Badgerd as the Bore: A Wolfe seeketh his Make 
or Matche: And an Otter hunteth for his Kinde.



The voyces and noyses that euery of them 
maketh at such times.

Voyce or
Sownde.
AN Harte belloweth: a Bucke groyneth: a Rowe belleth: a
Gote ratteleth: a Bore freameth: a Hare & a conie beateth or 
tappeth: a Fox barketh: a Badgerd shriketh: an Otter whineth: 
& a Wolfe howleth, when they seeke or hunte after their makes.



The seasons of all Chaces.

Season.
THe Harte & Bucke (with the Gote) is in season from Midso­
mer vntill Holyroode day: The Rowe is in season betwene 
Easter & Mighelmas. The Bore from Christmas till shrouetide:
The Hare from Mighèlmas till Midsomer: The Fox and the 
Wolfe from Holy roode day till the Annunciation: & the Otter 
from Shrouetide vntill Midsomer. Conies are al wayes in sea­
son, either yong or old: but their skinnes are in best season from
Alhallontide vnto Shrouetide. The Hynde, Doe, Rowdoe, Geate, 
& Swine, beginneth when the Male of euery one of them ceasseth, 
and lasteth as long as they be fatte or in good plight.



The Fatte of euery one of these beasts.

Fatte.
THe Fatte of all kinde of Deare is called Sewet: and it may
be also very wel sayd, This Deare was an high Deare of Greace, 
or so forth. But the Fatte (of it selfe) is called Sewet, vt supra.




The fatte of a Bore, Foxe, and Badgerd, is called properly 
Greace. An Hare (by old Trystrams opinion) beareth both Greace 
and Tallowe, and the Rowe deares fat (onely of all Deare) is ter­
med Beauie greace.



The flaying, striping, and casing of 
all maner Chaces.

Flaying,
striping,
&c.
THe Harte and all manner of Deare are flayne: and yet
Huntesmen vse more commonly to say, take off that Deares 
skinne. The Hare is stryped, and (as Trystram sayeth) the Bore 
also: the Foxe, Badgerd and all other vermine are cased, that is 
to say, you must beginne at the snowte or nose of the beast, and 
so turne his skinne ouer his eares all alongst the bodie, vntill 
you come at the tayle: and that hangeth out to shew what beast 
it was, this is called casing: and yet a Badgerds skinne is to
be stretched with foure stickes on crosse, to make it drye the bet­
ter, bycause it is great and fatte.



Termes vsed when you bring any Chace to 
his resting place, or rayse him from it.

Resting place.
WE Herbor and Vnherbor a Harte, & he lieth in his layre:
we lodge & rowse a Bucke, & he lieth also in his layre: 
we seeke and finde the Rowe and he beddeth: we forme and 
starte a Hare: we burrowe and bolt a Conie, and both the Hare 
and Conie do sit and squat. We couch & reare a Bore: we ken­
nell and vnkenell a Fox: we earth and digge a Badgerd: we tree 
and baye both Martern and wild catte: we watch and vent 
an Otter. And we trayne and rayse the Wolfe, when we bring 
them to their restyng place and put them from the same to be
hunted. Of the Raynedeare, Bote, or Beare, I haue neither read 
nor herd the termes in this respect.



The sundrie noyses of houndes, and the 
termes proper for the same.

Termes of
Cryes and
Noyses.
AS you heare hounds make sundry different noyses, so do we
terme them by sundry termes: For hounds do cal on, bawle,




bable, crie, yearne, lapyse, plodde, baye, and such lyke other noyA­
ses, First when hounds are firste cast off and finde of some game 
or chace, we say, They call on. If they be to busie before they finde 
the Sent good, we say They Bawle. If they be to busie after they 
finde good Sent, we say They Bable. If they run it endwayes or­
derly and make it good, then when they holde in togethers me­
rily, we say They are in crie. When they are earnest eyther in the 
chace or in the earth, we say They yearne. When they open in the 
string (or a Greyhounde in his course) we say They lapyse. When 
they hang behinde and beate too muche on one Sent or place, we 
say They plodde. And when they haue eyther earthed a vermine, 
or brought a Deare, Bore, or suche lyke, to turne head agaynst 
them, then we say They Baye.



The difference betwene houndes and 
Greyhoundes for termes.

Difference.
WE finde some difference of termes betwene houndes, and
Greyhoundes. As of Greyhoundes two make a Brase,
and of houndes a Couple. Of Greyhoundes three make a Lease, 
and of houndes a Couple and a halfe. We let slippe a Greyhound,
and we caste off a Hounde. The string wherewith wee leade a 
Greyhounde is called a Lease, and for a Hounde a Lyame. The 
Greyhounde hath his Coller, and the Hounde hath his Couples. 
Many other differences there be, but these are most vsuall.



The different names of chaces, when they 
be yong in the neast, or sucking 
the Damme.

Yong.
A Yong red Deare is called a Calfe: a yong fallow Deare, a
Fawne: a yong Rowe or Gote, a Kidde: a yong Bore, a 
Pigge: a yong Hare a Leueret: a yong Conie, a Rabet: a 
yong Foxe is called a Cubbe: a yong Badgerd as the Bores 
yong: a yong Catte, a Kittling: a yong Martern, a Marterne­
cubbe: a yong Otter, a whelpe. And likewise of Beare and




Wolfe as farre as euer I read.



The termes for the tayles of all chases.

THe tayle of Harte, Bucke, Rowe, or any other Deare, 
is to be called the Syngle. The Tayle of a Goate, is plain­
ly called his Tayle. The tayle of a Bore, is to be termed 
his wreath. The tayle of an Hare and Conney, is called their 
Skut. The tayle of a Foxe is called his Bush, or (as some vse to 
say) his hollywater sprinkle. The tayle of a Wolfe is to be called 
his Stearne. Of the rest I haue not read.



Termes to be vsed, when any chace goeth 
to the water by force.

WHen an Hart or any Deare is forced to the water, we
say he goeth to the Soyle. But yet therein also there is
difference. For when a Hart first taketh the water, we saye he
Proffereth. When he goeth quite through a ryuer or water, we
say he breaketh Soyle. And the Slot or viewe which is founde
of such a Deare, on that other side of the water, is to be termed, 
as of a Deare defoulant the Soyle. The Hart, Bucke, Gote, 
and Bore, do also take soyle oftentimes without enforcing. All 
other beastes are none otherwise termed, but playnely to take 
the water, sauing onely the Otter, and he is sayde to beate the 
Streame.
The verb "proffer" or "profer" is not found in this sense in the OED.



Other generall termes of the Hart 
and his properties.

AN Hart when he is past his sixth yeare, is generally to be
called an Hart of tenne, and afterwardes according to 
the increase of his Heade, whether it be Croched, Palmed 
or Crowned. When he breaketh hearde and draweth to the thic­
kets, he is sayde to take his holde. When a huntesman draweth 
after him with his hounde, if he goe into any groue or wood, he




Covreth, and if he come out againe, he Discovreth him selfe. 
When he feedeth in fieldes, closes, or corne, he feedeth: otherwise 
he Browseth. In the heate of the daye he withdraweth him selfe 
for the flyes, and then we say, he goeth to the Steppe. His heade 
when it commeth first out, hath a russet pyll vpon it, the whiche 
is called Veluet, and his heade is called then a veluet heade, the
toppes thereof (as long as they are in bloude) are good meate, 
and are called Tenderlings. When his heade is growne out to 
the full bygnesse, then he rubbeth of that pyll, and that is called 
fraying of his heade. And afterwardes he Burnisheth the same, 
and then his heade is sayde to be full sommed. His stones are 
called his doulcets, and the caule about his paunche is called his
Kell. When he stayeth to looke at any thing, then he standeth at
gaze. When he bounceth by vpon all foure, then he tryppeth, and 
when he runneth verie fast, then he streyneth. When he smelleth 
or venteth anye thing, then we saye he hath (this or that) in the 
winde. When he is hunted and doth first leaue the hearde, we 
say that he is syngled or emprymed. When he is foamy at the 
mouth, we saye that he is embost. And when he holdeth out his 
necke, we say he is spent or done. And when he is deade, we 
saye that he is downe. The rewarde to the houndes, is called a
Rewarde or quarrey.



Termes generall of the huntesman, in 
hunting of any chase.

WHen huntesmen doe beate any Couerte with kennell
houndes for any chase, it is called drawing of the Couert.
When they cast about a groue or wood with their Liamhound,
then they make a ryng. When they finde where a Deare hath
passed, and breake or plashe any boughe downewardes for a
marke, then we saye, they blemishe, or make blemishes. When 
they hang vppe any paper, clout, or other marke, then it is to be 
called Sewelling or setting of Sewels. When they set houndes in a
readynesse whereas they thinke a chase will passe, and cast them 
off before the rest of the kennell come in, it is called a vaunt laye.




When they tarrie till the rest of the kennell come in, and then 
cast off, it is called an Allay. But when they hold vntill the ken­
nell be past them, then it is called a Relay. When a hounde mee­
teth a chase, and goeth away with it farre before the rest, then we 
say he foreloyneth. When a hounde hunteth backwardes the same 
way that the chase is come, then we say he hunteth Counter. And 
if he hunt any other chase than that which he first vndertooke, we
say he hunteth change. When eyther Hare or Deare, or any o­
chase vseth subtleties to deceyue the houndes, we saye they
crosse or double. The rewarde at death of any beast of Venerie, 
is called the quarry or rewarde. But of all other chases, it is to be
called the hallowe. And this is as much as I can presently call to 
remembraunce, eyther by reading or experience, touching the 
termes of Venerie. Wherein I desire all such as are skilfull, 
to beare with my boldnesse: promising that if any thing 
be amysse, it shall (God willing) be amended 
at the nexte impression, if I 
lyue so long.



FINIS.





