



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 4 3 3 5

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )


The eyght bookes of
Caius Iulius Cæsar contey­
ning his martiall exploytes in
the Realme of Gallia and the
Countries bordering vppon 
the same translated oute
of latin into English
by Arthur Gold­
dinge G.

Imprinted at London
by Willyam Seres

Anno. 1565







AN EXPOSITION OF
the old names of the Countries, Ci­
ties, Townes, Hilles, and Riuers mentioned
in this booke, together with a descrip­
tion of certaine Engines of warre
vsed in those dayes by
the Romanes.




ADVATICKES. PEO­
ple of Belgicke betwene Lo­
uan and Aldenburg in Bra­
band nowe called people of 
Bosleduke.



Agendicum. a Towne of the
Senons in Celticke called Sens or Pro­
uince.



Alduasdubis, or, after Ptolome Alduasdusius
a Riuer of Celticke, rising about the mount 
S. Claud and deuidinge Burgundye from
Swicerland, whiche falleth into the ryuer
Soan not far from the Citie Cabillon: it is
now called in Latin Dubius and in French
Doux.



Alexia, a Towne of Celticke in Burgundye
nor far from Langres nowe called Alset, or
Lausoys or Alyse, as Raymund Marlian af­
firmeth in his Annotacions vppon Cesars
Commentaries. But according to thopini­




on of Ioseph Molet in his Commentaries
vpon Ptolomies Geographie it is a town
of Artoys in Belgicke called Arras.



Aliobrogians people of Prouince conteyning
the Countries of Sauoy and Delphinoys.



Alpes the high hilles which deuide Fraunce
and Italy a sunder.



 Ambarrians, people of Celticke supposed of
some to be the people of Burbon: & of some,
the people of Niuers. Jucundus calleth them
the people of Semar and Montar.



Amagetobria a place in Celticke where Ari­
ouistus kinge of the Germanes vanquished
the power of the Galles, not far from the
Rhine, supposed to be called Toaut.



Ambians a people of Picardy about the citye
Amiens: it is in Belgicke.



Ambibarets people also adioyning to the citie
Amiens.



Ambibarians a people of littell Britaine in
Celticke.



Ambiliates the people of Auranches in littell
Britaine.



Ambiuarits, the people of Braband in Belgick



Andians, the people of Aniow in Celticke.



Antuates the people of Vawd in Sauoy.



Aquileia a towne of Italy at the Gulf of Ve­
nice vpon the riuer Natilone.



Armoricke the country of littell Britaine.



Ardeine a forest in Belgicke beginning at the
Rhine and so runninge by the space of more
than fiue hundred miles throughe the terri­
tory of Triers to the entrance of the boundes




of Rhemes.



Arar a riuer of Celticke nowe called Soan
which springeth in the borders of Burgun­
dy and Loreyn not far from the mountayne
Vosegus, and falleth into Rhone at Lions



Arecomikes, or Aremikes, or Artomikes peo­
ple of Arminacke in Prouince.



Atrebatians the people of Artoys in Belgick 



Auaricum the town of Viarron, or Bourges
in Berrey in Celticke.



Auenticum the towne of Auench in the coun­
trye of Vaud, or the towne of Wilburg.



Aulerkes people of Celticke sometime retey­
ners of the Heduanes, now called people of
Auge or of Roane.



Aulerkes Cenomannes, the people of Mayne
in Celticke.



Aulerkes Diabolites or  Diablinthres, the
people Leondull.



Anscians, or Auscitanes people about Aux in
Aquitaine.



Axona the name of twoo riuers thone called
Disne in Guien, and thother in Belgicke in
the countrye of Rhemes called Aesne.



B.

Bacenis a forest in Germanye whyche some
suppose to be part of the forest Hercinia which
runneth through Germany euen to the bor­
ders of the Dacers, and the fenne of Meo­
tis, it is now called Swartswald.



Baleares are two Ilands in the midland sea 
nere vnto Spaine, wherof thone is called




Maiorica and thother Minorica.



Batauians the Hollanders a people of Bel­
gicke.



Bellocassians a people of Celtick about Ba­
yews.



Bellouacanes the people of Beawuoysin in 
Celtik.



Bibract the towne of Beawne in the Duchy
of Burgundy.



Bibrax the town of Bray by the riuer Aesne
in Belgicke.



Biturigians the people of Berrey in Celtick



Bibrokes people of greate Britaine inhabi­
ting the sea coast whose Englyshe name is
yet vnknowen.



Bigerrones the people of Bierne and Bigor
in Aquitaine.



Boians a people somtime of Germany mar­
ching vpon Franconia, thalpes of Italy, the
sowtherne Swoabes, & the riuer Danow,
the which country is nowe called Bauier.
Theis passing the Rhine in the time of Ce­
sar and takinge part with the Heluetians,
against him, being vanquished were placed
by him vnder the iurisdiction of the Hedu­
anes (whych now with the Sequanes are
called Burgonions,) in the country which
now is called Burbon in Celticke.



Brannouians or Brannouikes people of Cel­
ticke called Moriane nere vnto Burgundy.



Bratuspantium a town of Beawuoysin.



C.

Cabillon the towne of Chalons in Burgundy




vpon the riuer Soan.



Cadetes the people of Hipercorentiue or as
some think) of Castlebriant in littel Britain.



Cadurkes the people of Cahors in Celticke.



Cherusciens people of Germanye inhabiting
sometime those countries wheras are nowe
the territories of the Princes of Anholt,
Stolberg, Maunsfield, and Swartzburg.



Ceresians a people of Germany.



Caletanes the people about Calis in Belgick



Cantabrians the people of Biscay in Spain.



Carnutes the people about Charters in Cel­
ticke.



Carcason a city in Prouince called Caracasson



Catuakes people about Doway.



Caturigians theis with the Garoceles and
Centrones are nowe the people of Taran­
tayse vnder the dominion of the Duke of 
Sauoy.



Cauillon bereath the same name still. it is a
citye in Prouince.



Centrones loke Caturigians. the chiefe citye
of thys country is called Munster.



Cimbrians people of Germany whyche helde
somtime al the coast of Megalburg euen vn­
to Cimbrica.



Chersonesus. Theis passing the Rhine before 
Cesars time & leauing certain to kepe their 
stuffe & baggage which they left in Fraunce, 
made a viage into Italye. of them discende 
those that are now thinhabiters of Zeland.



Condrusians the people betwene Vtreight &
Iuliers.






Creta the Ile of Candy.



Curiosolites the people of Cornewal in littell
Britaine.



D.

Diablinters people aboute Londull in littell
Britaine.



Daces a people beyond the Rhine boundinge
vppon the Riuer Danow and the forest of
Hartswald who are supposed to haue some­
time inhabited a piece of Hungary and from
thence remoued to the hither parte of Nor­
wey.



Danow one of the famousest riuers in Europe
which (as Solinus affirmeth) risinge in
the hilles of Germany and receyuing into it
lxx. riuers all able to beare ships, lastlye fal­
leth with seuen mouthes into the sea called
Pontus.



E.

Eburones the people of Liege in Belgicke.



Eburonikes or Eburouikes the people of
Eureux in Celticke



Elauer a riuer of Celticke now called Allyer
runneing by Cleremount in Auverne.



Essuans the people of Retelais beyond Tou­
ray.



F.

Flustates the people of the county of Flusse in
Aquitaine.






G.

Gaballes the people of Lodesue in Celticke.



Garites the people of Agenoys in Guien.



Garumnes people of Aquitaine by the Riuer
Gerond wherof they take their name.



Gerond a riuer that springeth out of the moun­
taines Pyrenes and falleth into the weste
Ocean accordinge to Cesar, it deuideth A­
quitaine from Celticke.



Garocels loke in Caturigians.



Gebenna the mountaines called also Cemenij
nowe named the mountaines of Auverne,
which seperate Celticke from Prouince ac­
cording vnto Cesar.



Genabum the city of Orleance vpon the riuer
Loyre.



Geneua a city of Sauoy standing vpon Rhone
not farre from the Lake Losan, oute of the
which town there is a bridge into Swicer­
land.



Gergobia or Gergouia the Towne of Clere­
mount in Auverne.



Gordunes the people of Gaunt in Flaunders



Grudians people about Louane.



H.

Harutes people inhabiting vppon the further
side of the Rhine about the city Constance.



Heduanes a people of Celticke who together
with the Sequanes are nowe the Burgo­
nions.



Heluetians the Switzers or Swicers and




(and as some holde opinion) the Quades.



Heluians people bordering vpon Auverne now
called Albians.



Hercinia loke Bacenis.



I.

Iura, or Iurassus, a Mountaine in Celticke
which deuideth Burgundye from Swicer­
land. it is nowe called mount S. Claud. of
the Swicers it is called Leuerberg: and of
the men of Sauoy Iarten.



Itius portus the towne of Calis.



Illericke. this and Dalmatia are called both
by the name of Slauony.



L.

Lacobrigians or Latobrigians or Latouikes
the people of Losan. vnder the Duke of Sa­
uoy. or the people of Valoys.



Leman, the Lake of Geneua called also Lake
Losan.



Lemouikes the people of Limosins in Celticke



Lepontians the people of Graundpunter, or
(as Marlian sayth) the people called Swi­
ters inhabiting betwene the heade of the ri­
uer Rhone and the Alpes of Rhetia, among
whome springeth the Riuer Rhine. Giles
Tschude affirmeth they be now called Rhin­
walders.



Leuakes the people of Louane accordinge to
Marlian.



Lewkes the people of the Bishoprick of Tul
or Toll in Celticke.






Lexobians or Lexouians the people of Ly­
siewx in Celticke in the duchie of Normandy



Lingones the people of Langres in the sayde
Bishopricke of Tull in Celticke.



Loyre a riuer which springeth in lowe Bur­
gundy and running through Celticke (ac­
cording to Cesar) falleth into the west O­
cean. but according to Ptolomie it deuideth
Celticke from Aquitaine.



Lutetia the Citye of Paris standinge vppon
Seane accompted vnto Belgick. it is now
the head city of Fraunce.



M.

Menapians the people of Gelderlande and
Cleueland. or as some suppose the people of
Iuliers in Belgicke.



Mandubians a people of Celticke about the
Citie Alexia called now Lausoys.



Marcomannes people of Germanye beyonde
the Rhine which came ouer with Artoui­
stus and afterward inhabited the valey that
bordereth vpon Swicerland which is called
Marecomana next vnto high Burgundy &
the mountaine Iura: with whom M. An­
tonius themperour surnamed the Philoso­
pher had long and perillous warre, vntyl at
length beinge vanquished by the prayers of
the Christians they submitted themselues.



Marne, a riuer rising in the borders of Lan­
gres whiche runneth throughe Shalons in
Campaine and deuiding partlye the Celtes
from the Belgies falleth into Seane a littell




aboue Paris.



Matiscon a city of Celticke by the riuer So­
an in the borders of low Burgundy betwene
the townes of Lions and Cauillon. it is now
called Mascon or Macon.



Maze or meuse a riuer which springeth out of
the mountaine Vogesus in Celticke in the
borders of Langres not far from the heades
of Marne and Soan, and takinge into it
an arme of the Rhine called Walis aboute
fowerscore miles from the sea it maketh an
Iland which is called Holland.



Mediomatrikes the people of Lorein aboute
Mets.



Meldians people of Meaulx.



Melodunum a towne in an Iland of the ri­
uer Seane nere vnto Parris called Me­
lune.



Metiosedum or Iosedum a towne vppon the
riuer Seane called Corbeil.



Morines the people of Tirwin in Belgicke 
or (as Ioseph Molet sayth) the Flemings.



N.

Nannets people of Nauntes in Britaine Bri­
tonant.



Nantuates or Antuates people of Germanie
on thys syde the Rhyne about Constance,
called the people of Vawd.



Narbone the chief Cytie of Prouince wherof
all the Prouynce was called Narbonensis.



Nemets the people about Spire.



Nitiobriges or Nitiobrigians people of Mount




pelyer in Celticke, Vzes.



Neruians the people aboute Tornay in Bel­
gycke.



Noreia the city of Norimberg in Germanye.



Noricum. the country about the sayd city.



Nouiodunum the name of thre cities. wher­
of one is in Belgicke, not far from Paris,
and is called Noyon. thother twoo are in
Celtycke thone in the countrye of Berrey
nere vnto Bourges, and thother in lowe
Burgundy at the ryuer Loyre.



Numidians people of Affrycke.



O.

Ocelum, (whyche also is called Oscellum) a
towne in Piemount by the ryuer Daria.



Octodure the city Martanach in lower Va­
loys.



Orcinia loke Bacenis.



Osissines the people of Landgriguer in Bry­
tayne.



P.

Parthians a people of Asia.



Petrocorians the people of Perrygort in A­
quitaine.



Pictones the people of Poyters in Aquitain.



Pleumosians the Flemynges.



Precianes people of Aquitayne nere vnto
Bierne.



Pirustes people of Dalmatia whych now is
a part of Slauony.



Po, the chyef ryuer of Italy whych ryseth at




the foote of the mountayne Vesulus and af­
terward receyuing xxx. ryuers into him fal­
leth wyth seuen chanelles into the Adria­
ticke sea.



Pyrenes, the Mountaynes whyche deuyde
Fraunce from Spayne they are now called
the mountaynes of Foyes and Rounceual.



R.

Rauracians people of Celticke about Basill.



Rhedones people about Rhenes in Britaine.



Rhegium a towne in Italye on the sea coast o­
uer agaynst the promontary of Sicill called
Pelorus.



Rhemes a towne in Champaine in Belgycke 
and the people of the country therabout.



Rhone a ryuer rysing out of thalpes whyche
deuydeth the Romane Prouynce from the
Swycers, and then turning into the south,
cutteth through the myds of the Prouince,
and lastly falleth into the mydland sea.



Ruthenes a people of the Prouynce called
Rhodes.



S.

Sabis the ryuer Sambre in Belgyck which
runneth into Maze by the Towne of Na­
mures.



Samarobrina the town of Cambray in Bel­
gycke.



Santones the people of Santon in Aquitain.



Scaldis the riuer Skeld in Belgycke it run­
neth through Tornay & falleth into Maze.






Seane a Ryuer rysinge nere the borders of
Langres and lowe Burgundy in the coun­
try of Alcet. It runneth through Paris, &
deuidinge Celticke from Belgicke falleth
into the Britysh Ocean by Newhauen.



Sebusians, Secusians, or Segusians  people
of Celticke nere vnto Sauoy and Burgun­
dy betwene the dyocesses of Lausan and Li­
ons whych by coniecture shoulde be aboute
the Citye Bizance. or the people of Bresse.



Sedunes or Sedusians the people aboute Si­
on in Valoys.



Senons the people of Sens in Celticke.



Sequanes looke Heduans. 



Sycambers the people of Gelderland.



Swessions the people of Soysons in Belgick.



Swevians people on the furthersyde of the
Rhyne nowe called the Swoabes, or (as
Melancthon affirmeth) the Pomeranes.



Soan loke Arar.



T.

Tarbelles the people about Tarb or Bayon
in Guyen.



Tarusats the people about Turse in Guyen.



Tectosages the people of Languedock in Pro­
uince.



Teucthers somtyme a people of Germany be­
yond the Rhyne now thought to be the peo­
ple of Iulyers on thys syde the Rhyne.



Tiguryne the Canton of Zurich in Swicer­
land.



Tolous a citye in Prouynce.






Tolosatians people of the country about the city.



Treuires people of Tryers and the countrye
thereabouts.



Tribokes the people about Strawsbrough



Turones the people about Towres vppon
Loyre in Celticke.



Tulingians the people of Loreyne.



V.

Vangions the people of wormbes and there­
aboutes.



Vatuca, Varuta, or Ratuca as some suppose
was a Castell wheras is now the towne of
Iulyers.



Vacalos an arme of the Rhyne called walis
whych falleth into the ryuer Maze.



Vbians the people about Colon on the other
side of the Rhyne.



Vellaunians the people of Vellay about S.
Flowre in Celticke.



Vellaunodunum Villeneuf in Loreine.



Venets the people of Vannes in Britaine.



Veragrians people of lower Valoys aboute
Martanach.



Veromanduans the people of Vermandoys
in Picardy.



Vesontio the City Besanson in Burgundy.



Vienna the citye of Vien in Delphynoys.



Vuelles the people of Perche.



Vocontians loke in Centrones.



Vogesus or Vosegus a Mountayne in the
marches of Langres, out of the whyche the
Maze spryngeth.






Volces Tectosages are the people of Langue­
docke about Avinion.



Volces Arecomickes loke Arecomikes.



Vxeliodunum the Citie Cadenacke in Quer­
cye in Celticke.




FINIS






Battel
Ram.
OF the battell Ram Vegetius in hys
iiij. booke of cheualry maketh a shorte
dyscription, lykenyng it to the engine
called a Tortoyse, in these words.  Of
tymber and wordes is framed the Tortyse:
whych bycause it shuld not be hurt with fier,
is couered wyth rawe hydes, or wyth hayres
and course cloth. Thys inwardly receyueth a
beame whych is armed before wyth a hooked
piece of yron called a Sythe bycause it boweth
inwarde to pull stones out of the wall wyth.
Or elles is the head thereof clad wyth steele,
and it is called a Ram, eyther bicause it hath a
very hard front, whych pusheth vp the wals,
or els bicause after the manner of Rammes it
goeth backe to thentent to stryke wyth grea­
ter violence. Nowe the Tortoyse hathe hys
name of his lykenesse to the true Tortoyse: bi­
cause that as the Tortoyse sometyme putteth
forth her head & sometyme draweth it into her
shell agayne: so the engyne doth one whyle put
backe the beame and another whyle thruste it
forward agayn to thentent it may stryke with
greater vyolence, theis are the wordes of Ve­




getius. Iosephus in hys booke of the warres
in Iewry descrybeth it in thys wyse. The ma­
ner of the yron Ram sayth he is thus. Fyrste
they take a great long thycke beame: vpon the
forepart wherof they put a great strong heade
made lyke vnto a Rammes head with hornes
all of pryncipal strong yron the weight wher­
of is asmuche as halfe the beame, and couereth
the beame also to the myds. Then fasten they
into the ground against the place that they in­
tend to batter, two great trees lyke mastes of
shyppes, betwene whych they hang the beame
that is called the Ram wyth stronge ropes of
hemp and yron wyer twysted together. At
the hynder part of thys beame from the wall­
warde are rynges of yron fastened wyth lyke
ropes of hemp and iron wier tied to them, that
when thassaulters wil batter the walles, they
pushe forward the beame as though it were a
speare, and fasten hys stronge hornes amonge
the stones of the wal, then hang they weights
at the rynges in the hynder parte, and muche
people a far of take hold of the ropes that come
through the rynges behynd, and hale the hyn­
der part of the beame vpon the ground, by such
meanes that they shake the wall, and wrinch
out the stones, so that afterwarde the walles
fall downe. There be also (as the same author
in the same place affirmeth) other Rammes
that are driuen vpon wheles by force of people
after the same sort and facion. Leonarde Are­
tine in hys first boke of the warres in Italye
agaynst the Gothes describeth it in this wyse.




Fower postes  (sayth he) of lyke heygth equal­
ly distant are set square one agaynste another,
and fastened wyth fower beames aboue and
as many beneath, so that they stand like a prety
square house: the whych is couered ouer wyth
leather to thentent that such as are wythin it
should not be hurt from the walles. Alofte is
layde a beame ouerthwhart, at thend wherof
hangeth downe another beame as it were to
the middel of the pyllars fastened wyth plates
of yron, the which hath a great square head of
steele lyke an Anuield. The whole engyne is
drawen vpon fower wheles fastned in the fete
of the pillers, and when it is remoued, there
are not fewer than fifty souldiers within it to
driue it forward. who after the time they haue
brought it to the wall, do wyth a wynche wey
by the foresayde beame, and when they haue it
aloft let it fall wyth all the sway and violence
it hath. Then the head of the beame beyng let
downe, partly wyth vyolence of the men and
partly wyth weyght of it selfe fallyng vppon
the wall doth batter and breake in pieces all
that euer it lighteth vpon. There are also other
facions of the battell Ram: whych whoso de­
sireth to know, shall finde them playnlye des­
crybed, about the latter end of the tenth booke
of Robert Valtur concernyng Cheualry.



Vines or
Vinets. 
Vines or Vynets are engynes compacted
of smaller tymber eyght foote hygh, seuen fote
brode, and six fote long. the roof wherof is made
both of tymber and boordes, and the sydes are
splenten to defend them that are wythin from




stones and other weapons and artillerye sent
from the walles, and to saue theym from fier,
they be couered with rawe hydes. Manye of
theis were wont to be made and set one by one
on a rowe for menne to goe vnder sauflye to
vndermyne and dygge downe the walles of
Townes.



muscules
Muscules so called of their likenesse to the
Muscles in the sea, were lesser engynes much
of the same makyng that the Vinets are, vnder
whych men of war went sauf to fill vp the di­
ches and to make playne and leuell the waye,
for the mouable towres to come to the wals.



Pluties
Pluties (whych in this boke I haue trans­
lated penthowses and sheddes) were engines
of wycker made lyke a helmet couered ouer
with raw hydes or hayres whych went vpon
three wheles whereof two were before & one
in the middes, and were moueable euery way
at pleasure like a wagon. vnder the defence of
the whiche souldiers didde beat the defendan­
tes from the walles, wyth shotte of arrowes,
crossebowes, slinges. &c. that their fellowes
myght the easier come to scaling. They were
also Penthowses ioyned to the moueable tow­
res to beare of the violence of artillerye from
them that fought within at the loopeholes and
windowes.



Legion.
Cohort.
Euery Legion (as sayeth Vegetius) consi­
sted of ten Cohortes. Wherof the first Cohort
had in it a thousand a hundred and fyue foote­
men, and a hundred and two and thyrty hors­
men. The seconde Cohort had in it fyue hun­




dreth fifty and fiue fotemen, and threscore and
six horsmen, and so had lykewyse all the other
eyght so that a ful Legion consisted of six thou­
sand and a hundred fotemen and seuen hundred
xxvi. horsemen.



Trubune
Of Tribunes (which we call Marshalles)
there were two in euery Legion. The hygh or
Chyefmarshall was alwayes admytted and
assigned by the letters patentes of the Empe­
ror, and before there were Emperors, by the
Lieuetenant generall of the field. The vnder
marshall was promoted thereto for hys good
seruice. The Tribune or Marshall hadde al­
ways the leadyng of the fyrst Cohort. and his
duty was to see al the whole Legion wel fur­
nished, decked, garnyshed, practysed, and exer­
cysed, and therfore it behoued hym to be a man
of great knowledge and experience,



Centurion
There were in euery Legion. 155. Centu­
rions. of whom the chief who was called Cen­
nturio principili (or Captayn of the chief band)
had the charge of 400. souldyers.



Lieuete­
nant.
The Liuetenant accordynge to hys name
supplyed the roume of the Generall when he
was absent.





FINIS.






