



The Muses Expositor:
OR,
A Poeticall Dictionary,
For Information of the meer
English Reader.


A.

Ajax. 
AJax sirnamed Telemon, who (vanquished
by Ulysses invincible Oratory, who in
despight of him obtained Achilles's Celestiall
Armes) slew himselfe, out of whose blood
sprang a Flower with these letters on the
leaves, A. J. which are the first letters of his
name, signifying griefe, and dolour: Ajax in
Greek signifying Ahlasse.



Achilles 
The Son of Peleus and Thetis, the greatest and
most excellent Warriour among the Grecians;
the Poets will have him to be Invulnerable, only
his heel might be pierced; which (say they)
was proved by Paris, who wounded him with
an envenomed Dart (in the Temple of Apollo)
in that very place, whereof he died.


B.

Bellerophon, 
As some will have it, the Son of Neptune, as
others of Glaucus King of Epire, an all-accom­
plisht young Prince; he residing in the Court
of Petreus King of Argos, the Kings Wife
(Acthia) became passionately in love with him,
insomuch that (forgetting of what Sex she
was) she offered him her body, but being re­
jected by this frigid Hypolitus, and diffident of
his secresie, with her heire dishelved, and on her
knees she besought the King her Husband, to
wipe off her stain with spunges made of his
heart who had ravisht her: Petreus, though
highly incensed, would not immediatly destroy
him, nor permit his stinghter in his Palace, but
contrived his ruine thus, He wrote Letters to
his Father-in-law, Jobaras King of Lycra; ma­
king Bellerophon the Messenger, intimating that
upon receipt of those he should immediatly



kill him (Bellerophon) as his deepest enemy, the
Prince thus dispatched with the message of his
own murther, repaired to Lycia, and was mag­
nificently treated by the King for the space of
twelve dayes: which expired, Jobaras inquired
the welfare of his Son and Daughter, with the
present estate of Epire, demanding if he had
no Letters that might hint his desired solution.
Bellerophon presently pull'd forth his Packet,
which the King receiving and reading, became
much astonished; but dissembling his displea­
sure, he began to cogitate how he might deliver
over Bellerophon to death by some wilie strata­
gem, and therefore using him with all honour
for some few dayes, he began at length to ex­
presse more intimacy, often discoursing with
him of Prodigies, Monsters and Serpents, a­
mongst the rest he mentioned the Chymera, a
most hydeous monster, informing him, that
whosoever should destroy that beast should
have Temples erected to his honour. Bellero­
phon, whose magnanimity was sufficient to ani­
mate him to any adventure, (though never so
dreadfull) readily undertook the incounter,
vanquishing this more than monster thanks to
his plumed palfray; for which deliverance,
Jobaras not onely altered his sanguine resolve,
but gave him one of his Daughters, called Cas­
sandra in marriage, with part of his Territories.




C.

Cassandra, 
A Prophetesse, Daughter to Priam King of
Troy: Antiquity relates that Apollo was much
enamoured on this Sybill, who for a long time
remained deafe to his demands, to the great
grief of that God, as is sweetly hinted by the
famous French Poet Ronsard in one of his most
excellent Sonets (translated, and almost fitted
for the Presse) to his Mistresse, whom he sha­
dows under the name of Cassandra, Son. 22.

So sacred Phœbus up and down did rove
On Zenchus banks (by Illion swiftly running)
While rivers, woods, and flowry-meads did move,
Wailing (with him) Cassandra's cruell cunning:
In vain the pensive God his Harp did plie,
(Mingling his briny tears with Zanthus stream)
In vain he taxt his Ladies cruelty,
Wasting his vitals in an amorous Dream.
As thou great God of Science, and of Light,
Gold-hayr'd Hyperion were't once perplexed;
So am I stabb'd with dolours day and night,
With griping care, and sullen sorrow vexed, &c.

Yet at last this love-sick Deity got a grant of
his wishes, on this condition that Phœbus should
furnish her with such Prescience, that she should



be able to foretell the Fates of Men, Nations,
and Cities for Ages to come. Phoebus granted
her desire, but claiming her promise, she gave a
scornfull negation: At which Apollo being in­
censed (since it was impossible to seize what he
had already conferred for the Gods (say the
Poets) cannot revoke their promise) added this,
That though she prophefied never so truly no man
should believe her, the reason that though she
foretold the calamities that must inevitably
follow if Helen were not restor'd, yet none
hearkned to her advice.

Calais, 
The Brother of Zetes, both Sonnes to Boreas;
the two Brothers being imbarqued with Jason,
and the other Argonauts, for the conquest of
the Golden Fleece, hapned to cast Anchor in a
Haven of Bythinia, then under the Scepter of
Phineas King of Bythinia and Paphlagonea, (a
man most skilful in predicting future accidents)
who, for divulging the secrets of the Gods, ha­
ving been honoured with their councels, was
not onely struck blinde by Jupiter, but most
strangely tormented by Harpies, i. e. monstrous
Birds, having faces like Virgins, their hands
mis-shapen and wondrous large, furnished with
great bellies and insatiate appetites, these so
soon as Phineas was set down to meat



were constant Intruders, either devouring all,
or in case any dish escaped their rapacity, they
defiled it with loathsome excrements. Phineas
having foreseen the approach of those noble
Adventurers who were now landed in his Do­
minions, furnishing himself with a Guide, re­
sorted to their Harbour; relating his misfor­
tune, and imploring their assistance, adding,
That he was neer allyed to them in blood, ha­
ving married one of their Sisters calld Cleopatra,
also that he had a long time expected their
approach, as appointed by heaven for his deli­
verance. The Sons of Boreas (whose shoulders
were adorned with wings like Birds) and their
fellow-Adventurers being moved with com­
passion, associated him to his Court, where at
the houre of Dinner they were sumptuously
feasted, but scarce had they tasted the Vyands,
when behold the Harpies (with hideous noyse)
invaded the meat, filling the room with a noy­
some stench: then the Sons of Boreas presently
taking wing, fell upon the Harpies with such
courage that they forced them to flie, when a
voice was heard from heaven, forbidding their
further pursuit, and assuring that the Harpies
should no more infest Phineas, Appollonius,
Valerius Flaccus.



Castor, 
The Brother of Pollux, the two Sons of Læda,
the first by Tyndarus, the second by Jupiter;
they were born in Æbalia, called also Laconia;
Castor being slaine by Meleager his Brother,
Pollux, (who challenged the right of Immor­
tality, as the Son of Jove) so infinitely loved
him that he prevailed with his Father Jupiter
that his Immortality might equally be shared
betwixt them; which being granted, they live
and are in heaven by turns.


D.

Delphes, 
Where Apollo's Temple once stood, on the Hill
of Parnassus, a Rock every where hanging over
it, where stood a City not defended by Walls
but by Precipices; the middle of the Rock did
open it self into the form of a Theater, by rea­
son whereof the clamour of men and the clan­
gor of Trumpets when they were sounded,
was heard more multiplied by the Reverbera­
tion; which strook the men of that Age (be­
ing ignorant of the naturall cause) with great
terrour, adding a reverend amazement to their
admiration: here this Devil of Delphos a long
time gave Oracles, much about this hollow of
the Rock, on the middle of the height of the



Hill, there was a little Plane, and in it a deep
Hole, out of which the Oracle proceeded, which
being a cold breath driven up (as it were) by a
winde, did possesse the mindes of the Priests
with a madnesse, who being filled with the
God (or rather the Devil) he did inforce them
to give Answers to those that demanded them.


E.

Empedocles 
The renowned Scicilian Philosopher, he consti­
tuted two principles of all things, viz: Vacancy
and Repletion, and was of opinion that of those
Attoms congregated in one bulk; all this great
ALL took beeing, that he might be thought a
God, he leapt into Ætna, as was confirmed by
the ejection of his brazen shooes.


F.

Faunus, 
One of the Wood Gods, sometimes taken for
Robin Good-Fellow; one of that name King of
the Latines, who first erected Temples, was
worshipped with Divine Honours, of whom all
Temples were called Fanes.




G.

Gorgons. 
Phorcus the Son of Neptune had six Daughters,
three whereof were called the Aged, because
they were born with white hayres covering
their bodies like a garment; the other three
were named Gorgons for their horrible shapes.
Gorgon in Greek signifying terrible: they feign
thee these three had but one Eye to see with,
and one Tooth to eat with, which they mutu­
ally injoyed by turns. Medusa being mortall,
but the other immortall: they had their heads
periwigg'd with scales of Dragons, their teeth
long as those of a wilde Boare, having wings
wherewith they flew; moreover qualified with
this excellent property, that whoever looked
upon them were immediately converted to
stone, for so the Poets and Grammarians (as
well Greeks as Latines will have it) but to
speak truth, and with Authentick Authority
for warrant they were indued with such excel­
lent beauty that all that gazed upon them were
surprized with amazement: thence came the
Fiction, that they were converted into stone,
Nat. Comes Mithol, lib. 6.




H.

Hymen 
The God of Marriage, he was born in Athens.
It hapned that the chief Virgins of the City
sporting themselves in an Evening by the Sea­
shore were surprized by Pyrates, and with the
rest, Hymen (who to enjoy the company of his
Beloved had put himself into the habit of a
Woman) was brought on boord, but at mid­
night this masculine Mayd cut the throats of
all the Pyrates while they were soundly sleep­
ing; and running to the City, demanded of the
Citizens what they would give to him that
should restore their Daughters? They being
surprized with joy, promised him all they were
masters of. He onely requested the immediate
possession of his Mistresse; which being con­
firmed unto him by oath, he immediately gave
every man his Gyrle, and receiving his dearest
Dear to his imbraces, that marriage proved so
fortunate, that after his decease it was the con­
stant custome of the Greeks to Invoke Hymen
at every Nuptial Feast; and from them the
Latines received that Ceremony, long time in
use amongst them.




I.

Iô, 
The Daughter of Inachus, transformed into a
Cow, and Bull'd by Jupiter; at which, Juno be­
ing angry, created a Flie called the Aestrum,
which so stung poor Iô that she became mad,
and afterwards brought forth a Son to Jupiter,
called Epaphus Æschylus.


L.

Laomedon, 
Father to Priam, he intending to build the City
of Troy, Neptune and Apollo (degraded of their
Rule) indented with him for an Annual Salary
to afford their utmost ayde: This proffer was
cheerfully imbraced by Laomedon, but his work
finished, he not onely denyed to make good his
agreement, but threatned in case they departed
not his Territories to cut off their eares and
banish them into some barren Island: this brace
of Deities thus injuriously dealt with were ex­
tremely incensed, and resolving to castigate this
perfidious Prince, Apollo shot his Arrows (hea­
ded with pestilence) into the Town, while
Neptune thundred his rage in impetuous Tor­
rents that passed over the walls, threatning an
utter devastation by water, Laomedon being
thus plagued with fire within, and water with­



out, resorted to the Oracle, inquiring the cause
and cure of these evils: Answer was given, That
the inraged Powers could not be appeased but with
the yearly Tribute of an immaculate Virgin made
choice on by Lot, and bound to a Rock adjoyning to
the Sea-shore there to be devoured by the Mon­
sters of the Sea. Laomedon returning to Troy,
summoned the Grands of the City, to whom he
related the harsh Doom of the Oracle: they
(of two evils, willing to chuse the least) give
their consent, but with this caution, that the
Sortilege should impartially passe: the Lots
were immediately cast, and (by the appoint­
ment of Fate) fell upon Hesione the Kings
Daughter, who was immediately taken, and
her silken limbs fastned to a Rock with iron­
chains; as this naked Princesse was bemoaning
her captivity, every minute in expectation to be
buried in the bowells of a monstrous Orke. The
great Hercules passing that way, being moved
with compassion to hear her laments, gave her
deliverance, by slaying the monster. Laomedon
falling at the feet of Hercules, manifested his
joy, proffering him thirty Horses lately given
him by Iupiter. Hercules gave him thanks, but
refused the gratuity (being now on his journey
for the atchievement of the Golden Fleece) till
his return, which was in a few dayes after: but
demanding his Horses, Laomedon denyed that



he ever made such a Proposall: at which mon­
strous ingratitude Hercules being justly inraged,
sacked the City of Troy. Valerius Flaccus Ap­
pollonius, lib. 3.


M.

Medea, 
The Wife of Jason, for whose sake she betrayed
her Countrey, slew her Brother, and lastly, her
 own Children.


N.

Nereides. 
Nymphs of the Ocean, waiting upon Thetis:
they are said to be fifty in number.


O.

Orpheus, 
The Son of Apollo and Caliope: or, as others
say, of Oxger a Mountaine in Thrace and Po­
lymnia. He is said by the sweetnesse of his me­
lody to attract the affections of Trees and
Stones to calm the Windes, and stop the cour­
ses of Rivers; his Wife Euridice dying, he took
his journey to Hell, where he obtained such fa­
vour of Pluto, (for it seems the very Devils de­
light in musick) that his Wife had leave to re­
turn with him to the Earth; but in case he
lookt back till his arrivall there, the favour
should be frustrate. He (who doated upon his
Wives countenance) forgetting the Injunction



of the Acherontick God, must needs look over
his shoulder, and so in a moment lost his dear
& long attempted purchase; therefore return­
ing to the earth he spent his dayes in the seve­
rest solitude, and yet his mourning occasioned
mirth, for,

1.
while Orpheus sweetly did complain,
Upon his Lute with heavy strain,
How his Eiudice was slain;
     The Trees to hear
     Obtain'd an ear,
And after left it off again.

2.
At every stroke and every stay,
The boughs kept time, and nodding lay,
And listned, bending all one way;
     The Aspen-Tree
     As fast as he,
Began to shake, and learn'd to play.

---being finally (after a tedious languishment,
become a Woman-eater) he was slain by Thra­
cian Women as the very enemy of their sex.




P.

Philomel, 
Or the Nightingale, the Daughter of Pandion
King of Thrace, who to be revenged on her
Husband Tereus (who had deflowred her Sister,
and cut out her tongue to prevent discovery)
slew her own Son Itis, and feasted his Father
with his limbs, and was transformed into a Bird
called a Nightingale. Strada has an excellent
copy of Verses, containing a contention between
this mellifluous Chorister and a skilfull Lutinist,
which for the Readers delight (as they were
lately translated) shall be here inserted.

Now the declining Sun 'gan downwar'd bend
From higher heaven, and from his locks did send
A milder flame, when neer to Tybers flow
A Lutinist allay'd his carefull woe
With sounding charms, and in a greeny seat
Oth' shady Oake took sheltier from the heat.
A Nightingale oreheard him, that did use
To sojourn in the neighbour-Grove, the Muse
That fill'd the place, the Syrene of the wood,
Poor harmlesse Syren stealing neer, she stood
Close lurking in the leaves, attentively
Recording that unwonted melody.
She conn'd it to her self, and every strain
His fingers play'd, her throat return'd again.



The Lutinist perceiv'd an answer sent
From th' imitating Bird, and was content
To shew her play; more fully, then, in hast
He tries his Lute, and giving her a tast
Of the insuing quarrel, nimbly beats
On all his strings---
                                   ---As nimbly she repeats,
And mildly ranging ore a thousand Keyes
Sounds a shrill warning of her after Layes.
With rolling hand the Lutinist then plies
The trembling threds, sometimes in scornfull wise
He brushes down the strings, and kems them all
With one even stroak, then takes them severall,
And culls them ore again; his sparkling joynts
With busie descant, mincing on the points,
Reacht back with nimble touch, that done he stayes.
The Bird replies, and Art with Art repayes,
Sometimes as one inexpert, or in doubt
How she might weild her voyce she draweth out
Her Tone at large, and doth at first prepare
A solemn strain, not weav'd with winding ayre,
But with an equall pitch and constant throat
Makes clear the passage for her gliding note,
Then crosse division diversly she playes,
And loudly chaunting out her quickest Layes,
Poyses the sound, and with a quivering voyce
Falls back again.---
                                ---He wondring how so choice.
So various harmony could issue out



From such a little throat does go about
Some harder lessons, and with wondrous art
Changing the strings, doth up the Treble dart.
And downward smite the Base, with painfull stroke
He beats; and as the Trumpet doth provoke
Sluggards to fight, even so his wanton skill
With mingled discord joynes the hoarse and shrill.
The Bird this also tunes, and while he cuts
Sharps, notes with melting voyce and mingled puts
Measures of middle sound, then suddenly
She thunders deep and juggs it inwardly
With gentle murmurs, clear and dull she sings
By course as when the Martiall warning rings.
Beleive't the Minstrell blusht, with angry mood
Inflam'd quoth he, thou Chauntresse of the wood,
Either from thee Ile bear the prize away,
Or vanquisht break my Lute, without delay
Inimitable accents then he strains,
His hand flies ore the strings in one he chains
Farre different numbers, chasing here and there,
And all the strings belabours every where.
But she when practise long her throat had whet,
Induring not to yeild at once doth set
Her spirits all at work, and all in vain,
For while she labours to expresse again
With Natures simple voyce such divers Keyes,
With slender pipes such lofty notes as those,
Orematcht with high designes, orematcht with woe,
Just at the last incounter of her foe.



She faints, she dyes, falls on his Instrument
That conquer'd her, a fitting Monument.


R.

Rhea, 
Called also Cybelle, the Mother of the Gods,
Wife of Saturn, the Father of Jupiter.


S.

Salmacis, 
A Nymph in love with a Sullen Youth, whom
she one day found bathing in a christaline River,
and stripping her self, accosted him naked; but
he still refusing her love, she clasped him about
the middle, and invoking the heavenly powers
that they might never part, they were incorpo­
rated.


T.

Telephus, 
The Sonne of Hercules King of Mysia, being
wounded by Achilles with an Axe (when land­
ing with his forces on his Continent, they were
opposed by the Mysians, being now on their
journey for Troy) could not be cured in eight
years after: resorting to the Oracle to inquire
what were best to be done. He received answer,
That he who gave the wound, alone could cure
it. He therefore coming to Achilles was by him
stricken again with that very Axe in the same



place as before, and was immediately cured;
a cure both swift and strange.


V.

Venus. 
Or the Sea-born Goddesse, her story is thus:
Saturn, the Son of Heaven and Earth, by the
perswasion of his Mother, cut off his Fathers
Testicles, throwing them into the Sea, from the
sapour whereof Venus had beeing, whence she
is called by Lycophron,

---[Lover of the Privities.]---

The first place where she landed was Cythera,
from thence she set sayle for Cyprus, whence
she is called Cytherea and Cyprides. The An­
tients printed her (as newly arising from the
Ocean) naked, sayling in a shell. Alexander
the Great commanding Apelles to give her
Effigie, afforded him his own Paramour (all
naked) as his pattern; but the Painter having
finished his piece, was as much surprized with
this living, as Alexander with that dead Venus,
and by Alexanders license, received her as the
reward of his Industry. On this subject the Poet
Baif has an Ode, which (because it was never
yet Englished) I will here insert:



Behold her hayre, yet moyst with brine,
Platting her locks with artfull care,
The Sea-born Venus (all Divine)
To Cyprus Island doth repair.
A Shell's her Ship, no sooner born
But Incense does her Shrine adorn.



The End of the Muses Expositor






A playster for Priscians pate.
AN
APPENDIX
TO
The Academy of Pleasure.

Containing
An Alphabeticall Explanation
of Hard Words,
For Instruction of the Weaker sort
of Capacities.



A.

ADulate]  flatter, or cogge"adulate" antedates earliest OED citation (1777).
Abreviate]  make short
Anihilate]  make void
Abandon]  forsake,
Acherontica]  relating to Hell
Adulterated]  corrupted, altered from
its genuine purity



Abdicated]  thrown downe 
Absolved]  forgiven
Abhominate]  hate deadly
Alienated]  estranged, or lost to former
knowledge
Anagram]  a Divination by names, cal­
led by the Antients Onomantia; the
Greeks referre this Invention to Ly­
cophron, who was one of those they
called the Seven Starres, or Pleiades;
afterwards (as witnesses Eustachius)
there were divers Greek Wits that
disported, themselves herein, as he
which turned Atlas for his heavy
burthen in supporting Heaven into
Talas, that is, wretched. Some will
maintain, that each mans Fortune is
written in his Name, which they call
Anagramatism, or Metagramatism:
Poeticall liberty will not blush to use
E for Æ, V for W, S for Z. That
amarous Youth did very queintly sure,
resolving a mysterious expression of
his Love to Rose Hill, when in the
border of a painted cloath he caused
to be painted as rudely as he had de­
vised grosly a Rose, a Hill, an Eye, a
Leaf, and a Well, that is if you spell
it, I Love Rose Hill.



Accost]  salute 
Accrew]  gain by industry
Apocriphal]  doubtfull
Assume]  take to himselfe
Alacrity]  chearfulnesse
Allusion]  relating to another matter
Amiable]  fair or lovely
Amicable]  friendly
Arbitrate]  decide, or end a controversie
Alternate]  constantly in motion
Agile]  nimble
Abstersive]  See the description of Byr­
tha's bed in Gondibert, Commenced
on by E. R. Canto 2.

The Posts were of Abstersive Ebony,
Though no Abstersivenesse in Posts we finde.
In Powder tane (the Learned not deny)
It cleanses Choler, and in Pills Breaks winde.


B.

Beatificall] blessed
Barbarity] cruelty
Bi-fronted] double-faced
Boysterously] rudely
Bestiall] unmanly
Burse] Exchange
Borean] blustring



Barter]  traffick one commodity for an­
other 
Brutish]  swinish
Brittle]  apt to be broken
Bleak]  cold
Blythe]  merry or sportive
Baneful]  destructive
Blissfull]  happy
Barathrum]  Hell
Bromeus]  a name of  Bacchus
Bumpkinly]  clownish"bumpkinly" antedates earliest OED citation (1697).
Bordering]  neer adjoyning


C

Capacious]  witty or apprehensive
Candid]  of a clear temper
Captious]  tetchy or quarrelsome
Contemptuous],  undervaluing, or despi­
sing
Concis]  brief
Contemporary]  equall in time
Conspicuous]  visible
Commemorate]  call to minde a thing
past, or party deceased
Consanguineous]  allyde by blood
Confligrate]  set on fire
Castigate]  chastise, or correct



Consummate]  finish 
Co-adjutor]  fellow Ayder
Cataracts]  fallings of the River Nyle
in Ægypt
Coroborate]  increase in power by a con­
stant addition of strength
Contemplate]  serious thinking
Completion]  finishing
Combustible]  apt to take fire
Commence]  take a degree
Chalybers]  tamers of steel
Connexion]  joyning together


D

Delusive]  deceitfull
Devastate]  lay wast
Depopulate]  destroy a people
Delineate]  make evident at large
Denude]  strip bare
Dethronize]  thrust a lawfull King out
of his Throne
Decapitate]  behead him
Donour]  a Giver
Donation]  by gift
Diabolicall]  Hellish, devilish, or damn­
able
Decollation]  beheading



Dissimulate]  hide an intent 
Dislocate]  disjoyn, or take in pieces
Debilitated]  weakned
Deride]  scoffe at
Disconsolate]  melancholy, sad, or joy­
lesse
Despicable]  worthlesse, not worth mind­
ing


E.

Ebriety]  Drunkennesse
Epicedium]  a Funerall Song
Encomion]  gratulary Verses
Epithalamium]  a Marriage Song
Epigram]  a short, but pithy kinde of
Poesie, very delectable. The best that
ever wrote in that kinde were, Mar­
tiall, Ausonius, Owen, Harrington
and our famous Ben
Elegant]  neatly phras'd
Elaborate]  accomplished style


F.

Fallacious]  deceitfull
Frontiniack]  a kinde of Wine very plea­
sant to the tast



Fraternity]  Brotherhood 
Facetious]  smooth, polite
Fidelious]  trusty


G.

Garulous]  talkative
Gygantick]  big of stature
Gerion]  a Monster with three heads
Ganymed] Jove Cup-bearer
Garbage]  raffe, or refuse
Glaciate]  congeale to Ice


H.

Hyems]  Winter
Hymen]  said to be the God of Mar­
riage
Harrassed  weakened with tedious toyle
Harpocrates]  pourtrayed with his finger
on his mouth; sayd to be the God of
silence
Hyacinth]  a Boy beloved of Phœbus, by
him unfortunately stain and turned in­
to a Flower




I.

Insaniate]  mad out of ones wits
Infranchise]  release
Invulnerable]  not to be wounded
Implacable]  not to be pleased, rude of
soule
Insinuate]  flatter himselfe into friend­
ship
Infernall]  belonging to Abysse
Irradiate]  beautifie
Incorporated]  made one
Indulgent]  loving more ardently than
wisely
Indocible]  not to be taught


K.

Kalendar]  an Almanack


L.

Lascivious]  given to Women
Loquatious]  talkative"loquacious" antedates earliest OED citation (1667).
Landgarth]  the name of an Amazon
Laudable]  praise-worthy
Litigious]  vain, idle
Lurk]  lie hid



Laura]  the name of a Woman immor­
talized by the pen of the famous Pe­
trarch 
Lapidary]  one that has skill in the ver­
tues of Stones
Lynceus]  said to be so quick sighted that
he could pierce through the Globe of
the Moon
Lunacious]  Moonish"lunacious" not found in the OED.
Lycanthropia]  a Disease causing those
that are infected therewith to imagine
themselves to be transformed into
Wolves


M.

Morosity]  sowrenesse, sullennesse
Maternall]  motherly
Morpheus]  said to be the God of Sleep
Menstruous]  putrid, defiled
Mitigate]  lessen the matter





Entries for the Letter-headings N, O, P. Q, R. and S are from the Huntington edition (Wing A160).


N.

Nauseate] upbraid
Neuter] one of neither side
Nonsensical] blockish, empty, idle discourse
Necessitated] compelled by need
Narrate] declare
Novel] new
Naturalized] of another Countrey by birth, but
made an English, &c. by a National assent.


O.

Oppulent] rich, wealthy, abounding in treasure
Orpheus] a famous Musician, and Poet, who made
the Trees and Stones to follow him, ut aiunt
Obliterated] wiped out
Odious] hateful
Odoriferous] sweet of scent





The page-break here is an estimate.


P.

Placable] easie to be intreated
Plunder] rob, or steal cum privilegio
Pan] the God of Shepherds
Parricide] murthering of the Male Parent
Parcimonious] thrifty


Q.

Querie] a proposal as requiring the solution of
some doubts
Quiddities] niceties


R.

Regicide] King-killing
Robust] strong of body
Rational] sensible
Rural] belonging to the Countrey


S.

Sanitate] heal"sanitate" antedates earliest OED citation (1882).
Subiugate]  bring under
Substitute] appoint another
Support] uphold
Stuprate] defile, or ravish
Stupid] dull, lumpish



Entries for the Letter-headings N, O, P. Q, R. and S are from the Huntington edition (Wing A160).




T.

Tantalize] to view the thing desired,
but not being able to attain it
Tartarus] Hell
Tarnish] Eclipse or dim a lustre


V.

Venereous] sensuall, wantonly inclin'd
Vituperate] maligne, slander, &c.
Vivacious] lively, lusty, &c.
Varnish] wash over rottennesse with
pleasant colours
Virago] a masculine woman




Warlike] addicted to Armes, desirous of
Military imployment



FINIS.


